                                                                               85004

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
included in this work. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do
not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the
governments they represent.

The material in this publication is copyrighted.




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM

POLAND
CREDIT UNION SECTOR: REGULATORY AND
SUPERVISORY FRAMEWORK IN TRANSITION

TECHNICAL NOTE
JANUARY 2014




                        THE WORLD BANK
                        FINANCIAL AND PRIVATE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT VICE PRESIDENCY
                        EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA REGIONAL VICE PRESIDENCY
                                                                      CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................... 4
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................................... 5
I.         CURRENT FINANCIAL SITUATION OF SKOKS ................................................................................. 8
II.        OCTOBER 2012 LAW ON CREDIT UNIONS ..................................................................................... 12
III.       CURRENT SKOK REGULATORY FRAMEWORK ............................................................................. 15
           3.1 Licensing and Start-Up Capital............................................................................................... 17
           3.2 Capital Adequacy.................................................................................................................... 18
           3.3 Delinquency and Loss Provisions ........................................................................................... 19
           3.4 Liquidity and Asset Liability Management ............................................................................ 19
           3.5 Investments ............................................................................................................................. 20
           3.6 Savings and Shares ................................................................................................................. 21
           3.7 Credit ...................................................................................................................................... 22
           3.8 Accounting and Auditing ........................................................................................................ 22
           3.9 Supervision ............................................................................................................................. 23
IV.        SKOK SUPERVISION ..................................................................................................................... 23
           4.1 SKOK Supervision Scheme .................................................................................................... 24
           4.2 Stabilization Fund Supervision ............................................................................................... 26
V.         DRAFT CREDIT UNION LAW UNDER DISCUSSION DURING FSAP MISSION.................................. 27
VI.        CONCLUSIONS ............................................................................................................................... 28




                                                                                                                                                             2
                                  ABBREVIATIONS

ALM     Asset Liability Management

BFG     Bank Guarantee Fund

CU      Credit Union

KNF     Komisja Nadzoru Finansowego (Polish Financial Services Authority)

IT      Information Technology

MOF     Ministry of Finance

NASCU   National Association of Savings and Credit Unions

NBP     National Bank of Poland

SKOK    Spoldzielcze Kasy Oszczednosciowo Kredytowe (credit union)

WOCCU   World Council of Credit Unions




                                                                            3
                                               INTRODUCTION

A World Bank - IMF mission visited Warsaw February 19 – March 5, 2013, to undertake an update of
the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) conducted in 2006. The team was led by Luc Everaert
(IMF) and Brett Coleman (World Bank) and included Karl Driessen, Nancy Rawlings, Yinqiu Lu, Jorge
Chan-Lau, Rishi Ramchand (all IMF), Katia D’Hulster, Heinz Rudolph, Andrey Milyutin, John Pollner,
Ignacio Tirado (all World Bank), as well as external experts David Walker (Canadian Deposit Insurance
Corporation), Monnie Biety (independent consultant), and Fernando Montes-Negret (former World
Bank and IMF). This Note is prepared by Monnie Biety.

The primary focus of this Note is on the legal, regulatory, and supervisory framework of Poland’s credit
unions (SKOKs) at a time when the authorities are transitioning them to a stronger, more stable footing.
The Note reviews the law, regulations, and supervision regime in force at the time of the FSAP mission
and suggests ways to help strengthen the SKOKs in a phased manner that gives viable SKOKs the
necessary time and support to meet the new requirements. While the draft law was not reviewed during
the FSAP as it was anticipated that there were to be many changes to the draft, key aspects of the draft
law were analyzed using information and reports gathered that discussed the contents of the law. The
Note concludes with a discussion of these elements of the draft law.1 Numeric data used in this report
were provided by NASCU during the FSAP mission, with some corrections provided by KNF post
mission.




1
 Subsequent to finalizing this Note, the mission learned that a new credit union law was passed by parliament in
April and signed into law in May 2013. A review of the final law was, therefore, not possible in the context of the
FSAP.

                                                                                                                 4
                                        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1. Savings and credit unions (SKOKs) in Poland represent only 0.8 percent of total financial
   sector assets, but serve 2.6 million depositors and are experiencing robust growth. The sector
   continues to consolidate as the number of SKOKs has fallen from 61 in 2010 to 55 today. The sector
   is increasingly dominated by the largest SKOK with assets of PLN 6.8 billion, and the five largest
   SKOKs hold two-thirds of sector assets. Although SKOKs represent a small portion of the financial
   sector, their number and outreach could pose systemic risks if the consolidation process that is
   inevitable under stricter regulation and supervision is not managed prudently.

2. The financial condition of the SKOKs is weak. Since 2009, the financial trends have been
   negative due to rising delinquency and operating expenses, falling interest income, and
   implementation of the accounting regulation requiring additional provisions for delinquent loans.
   SKOKs have not been required to use accounting standards specifically for financial institutions,
   which has masked their true financial condition. For the five largest SKOKs the average key ratios
   in 2011 were particularly disturbing, with low institutional capital, delinquent loans far exceeding
   the international standard of 5 percent or less, and net income too low to allow institutional capital to
   outpace asset growth. The results for 2012 showed a further decline in the institutional capital to
   total assets ratio and delinquent loans were more than 22 percent of total loans.

3. The authorities have responded by bringing SKOKs under Polish Financial Services Authority
   (KNF) supervision. SKOKs came under the purview of KNF when the Act on Cooperative Savings
   and Credit Unions (amended October 2012) came into effect (hereinafter known as the October
   2012 law). KNF has since started to collect financial information from the SKOKs through off-site
   reports. On-site inspections started in February 2013. The Ministry of Finance (MOF) has issued
   four regulations that affect accounting, reporting, inspections, and acceptable risks. These
   supervisory and regulatory changes are significant for the SKOKs. KNF and MOF must be
   cognizant to the size and risk of the sector and ensure that their supervisory and regulatory
   requirements and actions are proportional.

4. KNF has established 3 objectives for SKOK supervision: (i) returning to a more traditional
   interpretation of “common bond”; (ii) making relevant changes so that accounting information and
   financial statements are reliable; and (iii) working on capital rehabilitation plans with short and
   long-term goals for SKOKs with low capital and weak financial conditions.

5. The October 2012 Law is ambiguous in many parts and lacks clarity, leaving significant room
   for confusion and personal interpretation. Under the October 2012 Law the SKOKs are subject to
   supervision by two entities, KNF and National Association of Savings and Credit Unions (NASCU)
   who are working independently of each other. This requires the SKOKs to provide off-site reports to
   both entities and subjects them to at least three on-site inspections (one regular inspection performed
   by KNF and two by NASCU, a regular inspection and a cooperative audit). This is both time-
   consuming and costly for the SKOKs. There has been a lot of confusion in the sector as SKOK
   management is accustomed to reporting to NASCU and continues to report to them first and to KNF
   second, causing problems among all the entities. A new draft law on credit unions (hereinafter
   known as the draft law) is now under discussion, but substantial strengthening is needed in this draft
   law to gradually bring SKOKs onto a sound financial footing.

6. SKOKs should soon have access to the national deposit insurance scheme under the draft Law,
   which is a positive development. SKOK member deposits are currently insured to EUR 100,000 by
   a mutual insurance company, TUW, a part of NASCU. The amount of TUW’s resources is limited
   compared to the banks’ deposit insurance scheme managed by BFG. Moreover, while the banks’
   deposit insurance system has backstop funding from the government if needed, the SKOKs’ current
   scheme does not.
7. The October 2012 Law’s minimum solvency ratio of 5% is too low. This ratio is considerably
   below international standards which prescribes a minimum 8% institutional capital ratio. SKOKs
   should be encouraged to increase capital to at least 8% of total assets to enhance their individual and
                                                                                                          5
    systemic stability, but SKOKs should be given adequate time to build capital as it is a long-term
    process. SKOK’s only sources of capital are net income, donations, and member shares that should
    only be included if share withdrawals are restricted based on attainment of the required capital ratio.
8. The Law has yet to be supported by a detailed, inclusive set of regulations establishing
   prudential and non-prudential standards. Secondary regulations are needed to regulate specific
   technical issues not addressed by the Law.

9. It is important that KNF and MOF consult key stakeholders when proposing regulation and
   implementing change to gain the support of the sector. New regulations developed by MOF and
   KNF have been put out for comments to NASCU. However, the comment period was not sufficient
   for NASCU to circulate the proposed regulation among the SKOKs for their comments. Sufficient
   transition times should be given to SKOKs to prepare for the changes. NASCU and SKOK
   management reported that the transition periods have been unrealistically short.

10. This report provides information on the Polish SKOK experience, analyzes the regulatory and
    supervisory framework, and provides recommendations. The financial information presented
    below was provided by NASCU. The ratios and numbers were provided in groups according to
    SKOK asset sizes. The financial ratios are unweighted and the ratios cited below are arithmetic
    averages for the groups. All pertinent documents for the SKOKs were reviewed, and relevant
    information has been provided for credit union2 sectors in other countries to support comments,
    observations, and recommendations.




2 Throughout this report, the term “credit unions (CUs)” refers generically to credit unions in any country, and
“savings and credit unions (SKOKs)” refers specifically to savings and credit unions in Poland.

                                                                                                              6
                                          Box 1. Recommendations

1. The Law should be amended or regulations drafted to address the following.

            Eliminate the confusion inherent in the current situation whereby NASCU “controls”
             (Article 66 in the October 2012 Law) the SKOKs and KNF “supervises” them (Article 67 in
             the October 2012 Law) and makes “recommendations,” which has KNF and NASCU
             functioning as two independent co-supervisors and requires the SKOKs to report to each
             entity separately and undergo at least three on-site inspections during the inspection cycle;3

            Mandate a solvency ratio requirement of 8 percent4 in line with international standards, and
             provide a reasonable transition period of 5 years for compliance (replacing the 2014
             deadline to meet a 5 percent solvency ratio);5

            Include member shares as institutional capital only if they are nonwithdrawable or
             withdrawable only if the SKOK meets the required solvency ratio and the shares are
             available to absorb losses;

            Clarify the powers of KNF and NASCU as they relate to the stabilization fund; and

            Include a section on definitions.

2. MOF should further develop, in consultation with KNF, NASCU, and the SKOKs, detailed
   regulations addressing: minimum licensing standards, liquidity, asset and liability management,
   investment, capital adequacy, borrowing, savings and shares, credit, delinquency, audits,
   supervision, consumer protection, and realistic transitional provisions to ease the way forward for
   compliance.

3. SKOKs should use the chart of accounts, accounting principles, and reporting formats required for
   financial institutions. SKOKs report under a general accounting system that is inadequate for a
   financial institution. However, SKOK operations are generally simpler than a bank, so the
   requirements should be modified accordingly. An adequate transition period of 1-2 years should be
   given for training and making the changes needed to IT and accounting systems.

4. KNF and MOF should promote communication with sector stakeholders to gain their support for
   implementation of changes. New regulations developed by MOF and KNF should be put out for
   comments to NASCU. The comment period should be sufficient so that NASCU can circulate the
   proposed regulation among the SKOKs for their comments and provide a response to KNF and
   MOF. Comments received should be considered and revisions made as appropriate. Sufficient
   transition times should be given to prepare for the changes. To further communication, KNF and
   MOF should develop and share with the sector a long-term plan for implementing regulatory and
   supervisory changes. Training should be provided to SKOKs on the new regulations, forms, and
   requirements.

5. KNF should develop a SKOK risk rating system such as CAMEL or KAPER to assign a risk score
   and assist with risk management. Such a system will allow KNF to objectively assess risks in a
   SKOK and the sector, make comparisons of SKOKs, and prioritize their inspections.


3
  The three on-site inspections are the KNF on-site inspection, NASCU control audit and the NASCU cooperative
audit.
4
  The ratio of 8% was arrived at by considering capital standards around the world, not just the WOCCU standard.
5
  If the 2014 deadline is not eliminated, then the Law should lay out the actions that KNF can take against a SKOK
in noncompliance. Ideally, the Law should grant KNF discretion to continue to work with a SKOK that is building
capital.

                                                                                                                 7
                      I.         CURRENT FINANCIAL SITUATION OF SKOKS6

11. As in most countries, credit unions (SKOKs) represent only a small percentage of total
    financial sector assets. In Poland, SKOKs have 0.8% of the financial sector’s assets, and the
    percentage of total assets to GDP is small but has increased from about 0.5% in 2005 to almost 1%
    of GDP in 2011. Poland’s SKOKs serve a large number of small depositors – estimated at almost
    2.6 million as of end-2012 – from a country population of 38.4 million. The first SKOK started in
    Poland in 1992, and the sector has experienced remarkable growth, in fact so fast that it has
    negatively impacted the sector’s financial strength. In 20127, growth in the SKOKs was robust.
    Assets and membership continued to grow, 8.4% and 11.9% respectively.
12. The SKOK sector’s remarkable growth is due, in large part, to the leadership and
    organizational efforts of NASCU. Prior to the October 2012 Law, NASCU was responsible for all
    sector activities including the regulation and supervision of all SKOKs. Under the October 2012
    Law, NASCU now performs control activities of the SKOKs in place of supervision activities.
    NASCU will continue to provide cooperative auditing services, and financial stabilization,
    investment, and central finance/settlement services. SKOKs maintain reserves at NASCU in the
    form of liquid reserves, stabilization funds, capital reserves and deposit resources that are not being
    used. NASCU also continues as a link between the SKOKs and banking systems and pursues: i)
    financial activities, ii)_accumulation of SKOK deposits, iii) granting SKOK credits, iv) investing
    free resources and v) organizing financial settlements.
13. The SKOK sector continues to consolidate; there are now 55 SKOKs down from 61 in mid-
    year 2010. The industry consolidation has been facilitated by NASCU, largely so that SKOKs and
    their members can take advantage of efficiencies enjoyed by larger SKOKs. A few mergers have
    occurred because of financial problems that could not be overcome. As compared to other countries
    (see Table 1), the number of members per SKOK is very high. 8 The members are served through a
    network of 1987 branches. The sector is increasing dominated by the largest SKOK, SKOK
    Stefczyka with assets of approximately PLN 6.8 billion. The next largest SKOK has approximately
    PLN 2 billion in assets. The five largest SKOKs, all with assets that exceed PLN 500 million, now
    hold two thirds of sector assets.
14. The current open SKOK membership model has worked well as evidenced by the remarkably
    high membership growth rate, including members among the poorest households, and
    providing members a sophisticated range of services. In the Polish SKOK system, there are no
    geographical, professional, or other restrictions on SKOK membership. This is similar to many
    SKOK systems in the world, which have undergone an evolution from a closed to relatively open
    membership. Open membership helps distribute risks better owing to a wider geographical and
    sectoral range of membership and thus increases the stability of the SKOK system. However, an
    open membership model has a disadvantage that often there are no natural barriers to growth in
    membership, which often leads to the weakening of the SKOK’s links with local commun ities, one
    of the primary objectives of credit unions, and increasing competition with commercial banks. This
    seems to be the case now in Poland, where the largest SKOKs are increasingly competing with
    commercial banks in terms of geographical reach and clients’ profile.




6
  The ratio information provided by NASCU in this section are unweighted averages for the SKOKs in each group.
The ratios were not provided for each SKOK, but instead for five groups according to asset size. The groups are as
follows:
     - Group 1 includes the 5 largest SKOKs all with assets of 500 million zlotys or more;
     - Group 2 has 19 SKOKs between 100 and 499 million zlotys;
     - Group 3 has 11 SKOKS between 50 and 99 million zlotys;
     - Group 4 includes 14 SKOKs between 10 and 49 million zlotys; and
     - Group 5 includes 6 SKOKs between 1 and 10 million zlotys.
7
  2012 financial data was unaudited as of the mission, but has since been verified by KNF.
8
  SKOK Stefcyzka has 850,000 members or 33% of the total members.

                                                                                                                8
Figure 1: SKOK Assets




Data Source – NASCU (2008-11) and KNF (2012)
15. SKOKs continue to grow, but the growth has slowed over 2012 (see Figure1). However, asset
    growth is still high at 8.2% in 2012. The past focus on growth by SKOKs has to change in order to
    build capital and improve the financial soundness of the sector. Institutional capital growth must
    substantially outpace asset growth if the SKOKs are to meet the solvency ratio any time soon.
    Savings growth has slowed to 7% in 2012 but remains above loan growth of .3%. SKOKs for the
    most part are able to use savings deposits to fund loan demand. Loans are 65% of savings deposits
    and this ratio is comparable to that of other countries (see Table 1). Any funds in excess of loan
    demand will have to be invested. Investment yields are generally lower than loan interest rates, thus
    reducing the interest income earned.

Table 1: Selected SKOK data by Country for 2011
Country     Credit  Members      Assets- in            Savings &         Loans- in         Savings/Loans
            Unions               thousands (USD)       Shares- in        thousands
                                                       thousands         (USD)
                                                       (USD)
Poland      59      2,315,324      4,614,548           4,242,520         3,187,151         69.5%

Ireland     494     3,070,000      17,378,917          15,009,065        6,941,207         46%

Great       405     983,982        1,372,090           1,128,203         919,962           81%
Britain

Korea       954     5,862,969      42,712,783          39,199,768        26,572,780        68%

Brazil      765     4,398,141      29,594,411          19,104,265        16,918,117        89%

Mexico      63      3,756,251      4,059,103           3,551,983         2,989,510         84%

Canada      813     10,605,815     270,925,045         122,109,864       222,218,736       182%

Australia   106     4,504,000      84,427,981          67,786,939        68,642,257        101%

Data Source – WOCCU 2011 Statistical Report

16. The institutional capital to total assets ratio, the most important ratio in determining financial
    soundness, fell dramatically for all SKOKs in 2012 (see Figure 2). For the five SKOKs that hold
    two thirds of the sector’s asset, this ratio decreased from 2011 to 2012 but at a much slower rate than

                                                                                                           9
     the ratio for the sector. The ratio for the sector remains well below the international standard. The
     decline in the ratio is due to total assets growing faster than institutional capital. Institutional capital
     is made up of member shares, reserves and prior and current year’s net income. SKOKs must focus
     on increasing this ratio to an acceptable level. Building capital does not happen quickly as SKOKs
     have few options aside from grants, additional membership shares, and net income.
Figure 2: Institutional Capital to Total Assets


              Institutional Capital/Total Assets Ratio
    4.00

    3.50

    3.00

    2.50

    2.00                                                                    5 Largest SKOKs
                                                                            All SKOKS
    1.50

    1.00

    0.50

    0.00
             2008        2009        2010         2011        2012

Data Source - Central Statistics Office (2008-10) and KNF (2011-12).
17. The rate of capital growth has been unable to keep pace with asset growth largely because of
    declining net incomes that are due to rising delinquency. According to SKOK management and
    NASCU, the increase in delinquency is largely due to worsening economic conditions for the
    members. The level of delinquency is alarming in the largest SKOKs and in the sector overall as the
    international standard is 5% or less for loans 30 days or more delinquent. The KAPER 9 standard is
    10% or less. In 2012, the ratio was 22.47% for the largest five SKOKs and 23.58% for all SKOKs.
    In 2012 the SKOKs sold delinquent loans at a discount and received commercial paper. The loans
    were sold to a new company, ASK LLC based in Luxembourg with substantial experience in
    Poland. Per the contract between the company and SKOKs, if the company is unable to collect all
    the loans purchased, the SKOKs will share in the future loss, and any losses may be written off by
    the SKOKs over 10 years. Selling loans is a highly unusual tactic for credit unions to decrease
    delinquent loans. Delinquent loans usually decrease for three reasons: the loan has been paid current,
    written off, or the terms have been changed through extension, refinance, or manipulation. This is a
    good example that demonstrates the importance for SKOKs to follow financial institution
    accounting rules. If the commercial paper is not worth the face value of the loans, it should be
    written down and the write down disclosed on the financial statements.
18. Delinquent loans have negatively impacted net income. Interest income decreased because loan
    interest was not collected as anticipated, and the SKOKs had to increase their provisions for loan
    loss expense to account for the potential loan write-off. This situation also directly impacts
    institutional capital. Income as compared to assets for the SKOKs is unacceptably low for financial
    institutions that need to increase capital. The ratio for the largest SKOKs was 1.15% in 2011 and for
    all SKOKs it was -0.351% (see Figure 3). The KAPER standard for this ratio is greater or equal to
    0.8%, and the international norm is 1% or more. In 2012 net income was severely affected as

9
  KAPER is a set of financial ratios facilitating management and supervision of SKOKs. The system was
developed using a previously existing CAMEL supervisory system and the PEARLS system of monitoring and
financial standing recommended by WOCCU. Since the 2010 World Bank report, the KAPER system has been
expanded to include numerical ratings to assist in assessing risk. The KAPER ratios have no status such as
prudential standards under the Law; however, today it is the only inclusive set of financial norms for SKOKs.

                                                                                                              10
    SKOKs were required to provision 35% for loans delinquent 3-12 months and 100% for loans > 12
    months delinquent. Previously SKOKs were not obligated to provision for delinquent loans. The
    provisions as recommended by NASCU were 20% for loans 4-6 months delinquent and 100% for
    loans > 6 months delinquent. Due to the severity of the impact on net income, few SKOKs were
    provisioning at the NASCU-recommended rates, and NASCU was lax in their enforcement of their
    own recommendation.
Figure 3: Net Income to Total Assets

                            Net Income to Asset Ratio
                4

                3

                2

                1
   Percentage




                0                                                     5 Largest Cus
                     2008    2009   2010       2011    2012
                -1                                                    All CUs

                -2

                -3

                -4

                -5

Data Source – NASCU (2008-11) and KNF (2012 data)
19. An upward trend in operating expenses has also had a negative impact on net income and
    institutional capital in the largest SKOKs. For the largest 5 SKOKs, the ratio of expenses to assets
    increased from 11% in 2011 to 12.8% in 2012 (see Figure 4). For all SKOKs expenses/assets ended
    2012 at 12%. The KAPER goal ratio is 7% and the international norm for this ratio is less than 10%.
    Generally the larger the financial institution, the lower the ratio should be as there are economies of
    scale.
Figure 4: Operating Expenses to Total Assets




Data Source - NASCU



                                                                                                        11
20. Liquidity in the SKOKs appears to be adequate based on the KAPER ratios. The ratio of liquid
    reserves (maturities < 3 months) to deposits declined somewhat in the largest SKOKs to 12.1% in
    2011 and then ticked up to 12.6% for 2012 (see Figure 5). The ratios remain above the KAPER
    standard of 10%; however they are below the international standard of 15% of deposits. The ratio of
    loans as compared to deposits in the largest SKOKs was 75.4% of deposits in 2011 and fell further
    in 2012 to 65%. The KAPER goal ratio range is from 60-80%. The decline in loans as compared to
    deposits will probably have a negative impact on net income and institutional capital. If the deposits
    cannot be used to fund loans, then the funds will have to be invested. Interest rates on investments
    are generally lower than loan interest rates.

Figure 5: Liquidity Ratio and Loans to Deposits

                      Liquidity Ratio and Loans/Deposits Ratio
                 90

                 80

                 70
                                                               Liquidity Ratio-5 Largest
                 60                                            SKOKs
    Percentage




                 50                                            Liquidity Ratio-All SKOKs

                 40
                                                               Loans/Deposits-5 Largest
                 30                                            SKOKs

                 20                                            Loans/Deposits-All SKOKs

                 10

                  0
                       2008   2009   2010   2011   2012


Data Source - NASCU

                              II.       OCTOBER 2012 LAW ON CREDIT UNIONS

21. The Law on Credit Unions dated November 5, 2009, and amended as of October 25, 2012,
    assigns supervision of all SKOKs and NASCU to KNF, the body that regulates other financial
    institutions in Poland. Prior to the 2009 law, SKOKs were regulated under the Credit Union Act of
    December 14, 1995, and NASCU had the responsibility to regulate and supervise the SKOKs.

22. In the October 2012 Law, KNF’s sanction authority is not comprehensive and the trigger
    event is not well defined. Sanctions will be implemented by the KNF off-site supervision
    department. If SKOKs do not follow “recommendations” then KNF may remove or suspend a
    member of the management board, order the SKOK to limit its scope of operations, order the SKOK
    to stop carrying out a specific activity, impose fines, or place the SKOK under administration.
    Currently, KNF has no authority to merge, liquidate, or revoke a license. It is anticipated that in the
    draft law, KNF will have these essential supervisory powers.

23. The October 2012 Law lacked clarity and there was considerable room for interpretation. The
    law included general provisions discussing: the objective of a SKOK, the process to obtain a permit
    to form a SKOK, and reasons KNF can refuse to grant a permit for establishment. The law covered:
    i) the rights and duties of SKOK members, ii) SKOK governance bodies, iii) SKOK financial
    management and a few prudential standards, iv) NASCU objectives, responsibilities, permissible
    activities, governance, and management of the stabilization funds, v) SKOK supervision purpose
    and authority, supervision responsibilities of NASCU and KNF, actions that KNF can take against a
    SKOK, and supervision of NASCU by KNF, and vii) amendments to the laws in force along with
    transitional and final provision. However, there are certain articles of the October 2012 Law that
    need further clarification and discussion by the authorities to make improvements to the law. The
    following comments are made on the articles or areas that need additional clarification.
                                                                                                        12
24. There is no section discussing definitions of words and phrases used in the Law. A section of
    definitions would alleviate some of the confusion and ambiguity of this Law and should be a part of
    the draft law.

25. The law is silent on several essential issues, such as permissible activities for SKOKs, conflicts
    of interest, and the requirement for “arm’s length” transactions. These issues may be addressed
    in the cooperative law, but usually that is not adequate for CUs as most other types of cooperatives
    are not stewards of their member’s money. The Credit Union Law shoul d be specific as to the
    activities that SKOKs are allowed to pursue. Without this set out in Law, SKOKs may get involved
    in activities in which they lack expertise and put their members’ money at risk. Much like
    permissible investments are included in the Law so should be permissible activities. As is the case in
    many other countries too, many SKOKs and NASCU are controlled by a small number of influential
    people. For this reason, it is important that the Law addresses conflicts of interest, codes of conduct,
    and arm’s length transactions.
26. Article 7 addressing the creation of SKOKs, needs to be clarified and limited in the Law or
    through further regulation. Additional direction is needed to address issues on: i)minimum
    amount of start-up capital (membership shares); ii) minimum number of members as the current
    requirement of 10 members (set by the Cooperative Act of 1982) is too low;10 iii) requirement for a
    business plan demonstrating that the proposed SKOK is viable; and iv) requirement to submit the
    names and resumes of the proposed officials in order to determine if these individuals are qualified
    to hold the positions.
27. Art. 21 states that the president of the management board of a SKOK shall be appointed with
    the consent of KNF. Within 9 months of the enactment of the October 2012 law, all presidents of
    SKOK management boards must be approved by KNF. There is no deadline given as to when KNF
    must complete this approval process. A reasonable deadline should be established such as approval
    for each president of the management board within 60 days of starting the approval process in each
    SKOK. Without a deadline, the process potentially could be very long and may be disruptive to
    SKOK operations. KNF may review their decision a total of two times and if the applicant is not in
    agreement with KNF’s final decision, then the decision may be appealed to the court. During the
    entire process, the applicant may remain in their position.

28. Articles 24 and 54 provide for the inclusion of the share fund as part of the institutional
    capital. Usually, only funds to which no party other than the SKOK has legal rights should be
    included as institutional capital. Shares are withdrawable upon termination of membership, but only
    at the end of the year after it is determined that net income is sufficient. In order to use these funds
    as institutional capital, a threshold should be established (such as the required solvency ratio). With
    the threshold, the SKOK is not the legal owner of the funds but has control over the funds. This
    should be the only way that membership shares may be considered part of institutional capital (see
    Box 2).

Box 2: Treatment of Shares as Capital for Selected Countries
 In Canada membership shares are included in common equity if the CU has the irrefutable right to refuse
 redemption, or when redemption would be automatically prohibited if withdrawal would cause or exacerbate a
 capital deficit.

 UK Building Societies allow cooperative common equity which absorbs losses, does not guarantee or indicate
 a distribution, and can only be redeemed upon approval from the regulator if the mutuals have the irrefutable
 right to refuse redemption. Redemption would be prohibited if withdrawal would cause or exacerbate a capital
 deficit.

 Brazil and India consider membership shares as capital.
Source: Dave Grace and Associates – Basel III Jurisdictional Comparison

10
  WOCCU recommends a minimum of 100 members. But in a developed economy such as Poland, if the CU is
going to be viable, WOCCU recommends a much higher number, more like a minimum of 1000 members, and
USD 1 million in assets.

                                                                                                                 13
29. Article 38 establishes a liquid reserve ratio of at least 10% of the savings and loan fund. This
    ratio is low as compared to international standards. For example, WOCCU promotes a ratio of 15%
    liquid assets to deposits and short-term (<30days) liabilities. See Box 3 for international examples.
Box 3: Liquidity Requirements for Selected Countries
 United Kingdom - a CU must at all times hold liquid assets of a value equal to at least 10% of its total
 relevant liabilities. For the purpose of the regulation, liquid assets are those that can be converted into cash at
 short notice (within at most eight days).

 Canada - Class 1 CUs (CU assets < $50 million) must hold 7% of deposits and borrowings as liquid assets.
 Class 2 CUs (CU assets > $50 million or a CU that grants at least one commercial loan) must maintain
 liquidity levels and forms of liquidity that are sufficient for cash flow.

 Ireland - the CUs must maintain a liquidity ratio (liquid assets/total deposits) of 20%. If loans with maturities
 > 5 years are more than 29% of loans, then the liquidity ratio must be 30%.

 Australia – CUs must maintain a liquidity ratio (liquid assets/modified liabilities) of 12% of deposits. In
 practice, CUs hold about 18% of deposits in liquid funds.
Source: United Kingdom Financial Services Authority, Canadian Cooperative Association, and WOCCU.
30. The list of activities performed by NASCU in Article 66 is similar to the list of activities
    performed by KNF in Article 67. The lack of clarity and distinction has caused problems between
    the KNF and NASCU and confusion in the SKOKs as this form of double supervision does not
    assign ultimate authority to either entity. Article 68.2 then states that “KNF shall have the right to
    control the methods and rules of control activities performed by NASCU for their efficiency and
    adequacy” yet the next part of the article does not go far enough as KNF may only recommend to
    NASCU to make changes in the rules and methods of control carried out in SKOKs. Article 60
    already confers upon KNF the authority to supervise SKOKs and perform off and on-site inspection.
    There is no need for NASCU to also perform an independent “control” function that has the same
    objective and scope as KNF inspections.
31. Article 48 (2) states that each member of NASCU shall have one vote at the General Meeting
    regardless of the number of shares held. This is contrary to procedures globally as recommended
    by the International Cooperative Alliance and WOCCU, which advise that governance structures
    should be proportional to the size of the CU member-owners. Moreover, Guiding Principle 4 of the
    International Credit Union Regulators’ Network states that supervisory authorities should recognize
    that some second-tier organizations have proportional voting for members. It is not appropriate for
    an individual or group of individuals to be in a position to exercise control from a minority position.
32. Article 70 (1) implies that NASCU will report irregularities found during control activities to
    KNF and make recommendations to the SKOKs. Item (2) of this article implies that NASCU
    would be responsible for the follow-up on recommendations made to the SKOK and would report
    any non-compliance to KNF. This means that the SKOKs would receive recommendations from
    KNF and NASCU after their inspections. Which of the two entities’ recommendations should the
    SKOK follow? This will most likely cause confusion amongst the SKOKs and conflict between
    KNF and NASCU. Providing recommendations, time frames to implement the recommendations,
    and assigning a responsible party to see through the implementation of the recommendations is one
    of the most important functions of the inspection. If this responsibility is assigned to one entity, it
    should be KNF not NASCU as KNF is ultimately responsible for supervision and ensuring that the
    SKOKs are sound financial institutions.
33. Article 83 of the October 2012 Law refers to the possibility of the NBP granting a loan to
    NASCU in case of a threat to a SKOK’s liquidity. This would allow supporting the stabilization
    fund managed by NASCU on the condition of providing adequate security. The article does not
    state, however, if NBP can require NASCU to submit any requested reports. The draft law should
    include a provision that NBP may require NASCU to submit reports that support the need for a
    liquidity loan.




                                                                                                                       14
                    III.         CURRENT SKOK REGULATORY FRAMEWORK

34. With the change in supervisor from NASCU to KNF, higher regulatory standards are
     anticipated. These standards may strengthen overall performance of the SKOK sector, but higher
     standards will also increase the regulatory burden for smaller SKOKs. It is likely that increased
     regulatory compliance will contribute to mergers and additional consolidation of the sector. The
     effects of the regulatory change have already been felt with the increased loan loss provisioning
     requirement. Additionally all SKOKs are now required to have an annual audit, and the small
     SKOKs will find meeting the reporting requirements of NASCU and KNF costly and burdensome.
35. MOF develops SKOK prudential standards and detailed rules and methods for performing
    control activities per the October 2012 Law . MOF has the authority to draft binding regulation,
    while KNF can only issue recommendations, none of which are binding. This approach appears to
    limit KNF’s authority. This is also how it is done in the banking sector. Even though KNF issues
    only “recommendations” the banks reportedly have a good history of following the
    recommendations. To date MOF has issued the following regulations: Reporting Information for
    SKOKs and NASCU, Accounting Principles for SKOKs, Inspection Activities in SKOKs and
    NASCU, and Norms of Acceptable Risk. MOF plans to issue one more regulation on the division of
    the supervision fee between KNF and NASCU. KNF is charged with implementing these rules and
    regulations. All previous SKOK regulations and prudential standards developed by NASCU are no
    longer valid except for the institutional capital and solvency ratio calculations11 which are in force
    until MOF publishes their ratio calculation in April 2013. Under the October 2012 Law, NASCU
    has developed 3 new regulations. They are: Administration of Stabilization Fund, Methodology of
    Examination for SKOKs, and Instruction for Cooperative Examination. The latter regulation
    designates NASCU as the cooperative auditor for SKOKs and authorizes full control over all areas
    of SKOK activity.
36. There is a prudential standard in the October 2012 Law for solvency, but the ratio calculation
    has not been defined by MOF. This Law establishes a 5% minimum solvency ratio. The
    requirement of 5% in the October 2012 Law and the actual ratios are considerably below
    international standards which prescribe a minimum 8% capital ratio (see Box 4). That being said,
    SKOK’s should be encouraged to increase capital to more than 5% of total assets to enhance their
    individual and systemic stability. Capital should be plentiful enough to cover operational risks such
    as credit, interest rate, and internal control risks and it is currently so low that it is not adequate to
    cover these risks. It must also be sufficient to:
     withstand unexpected economic shocks caused by cyclical economic conditions;
     protect depositors (and other creditors) from loss;
        fund future growth; and
        protect the system if the SKOK is large or complex.

37. Estimations of future capital needs reveal that capital must increase substantially to meet
    stricter regulatory requirements (see Table 2). Using the average annual asset growth for 2012
    and reducing it slightly in subsequent years due to stricter supervisory requirements, capital would
    have to increase to PLN 2.4 billion by 2018 to reach an 8% capital ratio, implying an average annual
    growth rate of almost 37%. As of end 2012, capital was PLN 747 million or 4.4% of total assets.
    With a capital ratio requirement of 5%, the required capital in 2018 is estimated at PLN 1.5 billion,
    implying a 16.7% annual growth rate in capital.




11
   NASCU uses 2 ratios (included in the KAPER ratios) to evaluate capital – institutional capital/total assets ratio
(K5) and solvency ratio. Institutional capital includes retained earnings, member shares, and net income. This ratio
should be no less than 4%. Solvency includes all of the aforementioned, revaluation reserve and stabilization funds
if applicable. This ratio should be not less than 5% and the goal is 8%.

                                                                                                                 15
Box 4: Capital Adequacy for Selected Countries
 Lithuania
 Like Poland, Lithuanian CUs are exempt from CRD IV. CUs in both countries offer credit and debit card
 products, are fast growing, have an integrated model of development, and have access to central liquidity.
 The Bank of Lithuania treats CUs as credit institutions and requires an 8% capital adequacy ratio.
 United Kingdom
 The Financial Services Authority requires a minimum capital to assets ratio of 3%. This ratio is a minimum
 as the regulation states that the Version 1 CU should transfer 20% of their profits to reserves until reserves
 are equal to 10% of total assets. Version 2 CUs are required to have a risk adjusted capital to total assets ratio
 of 8%. These capital requirements were announced in mid- 2010, and the CUs have until 30 September 2013
 to satisfy the requirements.
 Kenya
 CUs must meet two capital adequacy ratios. The minimum core capital (which includes shares, reserves,
 undivided earnings, donations, grants less equity investments) to assets ratio is 10%, and the minimum
 institutional capital (excludes shares) to total assets ratio is 8%. CUs were given a 5-year transition period to
 meet these standards. The five year period is over as of June 2013. Many CUs have been unable to meet the
 capital adequacy standard. The regulator plans on giving the CUs additional time to meet the standards.
 Ireland
 Since 2009 all CUs are required to have a regulatory reserve ratio of not less than 10%. Reserves available to
 a CU for the purposes of the Regulatory Reserve must be realized, unrestricted and non-distributable. A
 minimum of 8% of total assets must be held in the Statutory Reserve. The remaining 2% of total assets
 required to meet the overall ratio may be held in Statutory Reserve or in a reserve account called the
 “Additional Regulatory Reserve” which must be clearly identified as non -distributable. The regulation
 emphasizes that this is the minimum requirement and CUs are expected to operate with levels above the
 minimum requirement.
 When a CU does not have adequate reserves to meet the Regulatory Reserve ratio, the board of directors of
 the CU must provide the Registrar with a plan for achieving compliance. Such CUs must achieve the ratio
 within the shortest time possible. If the ratio falls below 10%, payment of a share dividend must be approved
 by the Registrar, and the CU board must provide a plan on how to increase the ratio within short-term time
 frames.
 Brazil
 A modified Basel II approach is used. The base requirement is an 8% tier-1 capital-to-risk-weighted-assets
 ratio, and a 2.5% buffer is added for single affiliated CUs. The requirement is 11.5% for central CUs and
 15.5% for CUs not affiliated with a central CU.
 Australia
 CUs are required to have Common Equity Tier-1 capital of 4.5% and additional Tier-1 capital of 6% by
 2013.
 Canada
 CUs are required to meet the same standards as Australian CUs; however, they have until 2015 to meet the
 standards.
     Source: WOCCU, Dave Grace and Associates, Canadian Cooperative Association, and other regulators .

Table 2: Capital Growth needed to Meet Regulatory Requirement
Year      Assets (thousands Asset          Institutional     Institutional                     Institutional Capital-
          PLN)                Growth       Capital           Capital-5%                        8% (thousands)
                                           (thousands)       (thousands)
2012       16,907,884             11%             747,000               845,394                1,352,631
2013       18,598,672             10%                                   929,934                1,487,894
2014       20,458,539             10%                                   1,022,927              1,636,683
2015       22,504,393             10%                                   1,125,220              1,800,351
2016       24,754,832             10%                                   1,237,742              1,980,386
2017       27,230,315             10%                                   1,361,516              2,178,425
2018       29,953,347             10%                                   1,497,667              2,396,268
    Source: World Bank staff calculations

38. The regulation transition periods have been unrealistically short. The SKOKs have until
    January 2014 to meet the solvency ratio of 5%. Many SKOKs will have a very difficult time
                                                                                                                      16
     meeting the new solvency requirement by January 2014 as their capital is so low. Building
     institutional capital is a long-term process, and SKOKs should be given adequate time to reach the
     required solvency ratio12. The accounting regulation includes a provision for loan loss requirement
     of 35% for loans delinquent between 90 days and 12 months and 100% for loans delinquent more
     than 12 months. These percentages were based on the World Council of Credit Unions (WOCCU)
     model. The regulation became effective as of January 2012 and applied as of the first financial
     statement prepared in 2012. No transition period was given, and the impact of this regulation was
     negative on net income as the loan loss expense increased dramatically and in many SKOKs caused
     institutional capital to be negative.

39. KNF and MOF should engage with key stakeholders as they begin regulation and supervision
    of SKOKs to gain the sector’s support to implement the changes. Direct communication should
    be established among the SKOKs and KNF; it already exists between the SKOKs and NASCU.
    Open communication channels should also be present between KNF, MOF and NASCU, as NASCU
    would represent the SKOKs and their concerns to the government authorities. New regulations
    developed by MOF and KNF should be put out for comments not only to KNF, BFG, NBP, NASCU
    and the National Auditor’s Association but to the SKOKs as well. Comments received should be
    considered and revisions made as appropriate. Sufficient transition times should be provided so that
    the SKOKs can prepare for the changes. For example, there was little notice given for the off-site
    reporting regulation. The SKOKs received a letter on 11 January 2013 that required the SKOKs to
    submit 30 November 2012 data by 14 January 2013. This data had to be input manually into the
    forms and there was no ability to save data or correct errors. There were no instructions provided on
    how to complete the forms. Training should be provided to the SKOKs on the new regulations,
    forms, and requirements; and training in the form of a webinar or power point presentation should
    be provided to SKOKs on how to complete the off-site forms. On average the forms had to be
    returned by KNF three times to the SKOKs to get the requested information. In the future, KNF
    should provide training on the new regulations, licensing and on-site inspection. To further
    communication, KNF and MOF should develop a long-term plan for implementing regulation and
    supervision and provide this plan to the SKOK sector so that participants can prepare for the
    upcoming changes.
40. Additional provisions on a number of issues not addressed by the October 2012 Law or
    regulation need to be further developed to enhance the regulatory and supervisory
    framework. The following sections analyze and summarize technical measures that need to be
    further developed in the regulations to promote a sound SKOK system in Poland.

3.1 Licensing and Start-Up Capital
41. Initial capital requirements and a minimum number of members need to be established to
    obtain a license. These requirements are important for various reasons: to limit the number of
    SKOKs that KNF has to supervise; to ensure that the SKOKs are economically viable and can offer
    their members the services and products they want; and to allow the SKOKs to take advantage of
    economies of scale in their operations. Evidence of the initial capital should be included with the
    application for licensing. In addition, it would be important to include provisions so that individuals
    intending to establish a SKOK need to demonstrate a common bond. Initial capital concentration
    limits should be established per member and related parties. No member and his/her related parties
    should own more than 10% of the initial capital. Fidelity bond insurance should be purchased for all
    officials and employees.
42. All applicants should be required to submit a 3-year business plan. This plan should include the
    mission statement, market analysis, proposed organizational structure, the written assumptions used
    to develop the plan, and the pro-forma financial statements. In addition, specific information should
    be provided on the planned location of the SKOK’s business, the management information system to
    be used, and minutes of the General Meeting. In order to ease regulation and supervision and

12
   When the government of Mexico introduced financial reforms for credit unions, it initially allowed for a 3-year
transition period for CUs to meet new capitalization levels. It has since extended the timeframe an additional 5
years.

                                                                                                               17
    enhance governance, the use of standard by-laws is recommended. This will contribute to
    standardize important aspects for the management and operation of the SKOK.
43. The process and procedures to follow to obtain a license should be clear in the regulation.
    These should include: (i) the deadline that the SKOK must start operations upon receiving KNF
    approval; (ii) the process to be followed by KNF when a license is denied; (iii) the type of
    correspondence that the KNF will use to inform the applicant; and (iv) any method of recourse that
    applicants may have in case they disagree with the denial decision along with any deadlines that
    may apply.
44. Officials and proposed management should meet all fit and proper tests. In order to determine if
    the officials have the personal integrity, educational background and professional experience to be
    an official or manager, a thorough background check should be conducted. This check should
    include a review of the candidates’ CVs, personal and business references, and a credit check.
45. KNF should be able to conduct an on-site visit if deemed necessary to ascertain if the proposed
    SKOK is viable. This visit can be used to determine: (i) if the SKOK will be operated responsibly
    by individuals considered fit and proper; (ii) the nature and sufficiency of the financial resources of
    the applicants; (iii) the soundness and financial sustainability of the business plans, and (iv) whether
    the public interest will be served by licensing the SKOK.

3.2 Capital Adequacy
46. The new solvency ratio to be drafted by MOF should be based on Basel standards. The October
    2012 Law defines capital as member shares, reserves, and net income (or loss) in the prior year,
    current year, and in process of approval. When members join a SKOK, they are required to purchase
    a minimum amount of shares as defined in the statute. These shares are known as member shares
    and are withdrawable only after the annual general meeting approves the financial statement and
    after covering any losses. Under Basel, these shares do not represent high-quality capital. Quality
    capital is considered to be undivided earnings, reserve funds that have not been designated for a
    specific use, cash donations, and grants. None of these funds should be spent except upon
    liquidation. Net income from the current year should be included only if loss provisioning is
    adequate, accrued accounting is used, and net income cannot be reduced by membership share
    dividends at year-end. Shares should be included as capital only if they are non-redeemable or if
    there is a minimum fixed amount established in the regulation below which capital cannot fall. If the
    SKOKs do not consider shares as institutional capital, then the actual solvency ratios are even lower
    than stated above. No institutional capital account should be used by a SKOK as collateral on
    external borrowing.

47. Based on international standards, the minimum net profit to average assets ratio should be
    1% in order for SKOKs to build their capital. KNF should require a SKOK to have a higher
    minimum capital ratio than the one established in the regulation when a particular circumstance
    suggests it as appropriate. No SKOK should be able transfer from the reserve fund if the institutional
    capital ratio is below the minimum required. SKOKs should be required to build their
    institutional capital by retaining a percentage of gross income. The fastest way to build the
    capital ratio is to reduce assets; this however, is probably not realistic and could be
    counterproductive given the ongoing demand for services offered by SKOKs. In the UK, CUs are
    required to transfer 20% of their profits after taxes – but before dividends – to reserves each year
    until reserves reach 10% of total assets. In the US, CUs are required to transfer 10% of gross
    income (before operating expenses and financial costs) if their statutory reserves are less than 4%
    of assets. Once that level is achieved, they are required to transfer 5% of gross income until statutory
    reserves are more than 6% of assets. After the 6% ratio is obtained, no further transfers are required.
    In the US, gross income is used to ensure that capital reaches the required minimum even if the CU
    is operating at a loss. If the net result were used instead of gross income, there would always be the
    chance that there would be a net loss instead of net income and no transfer would be made.
48. Regulation should stipulate the power that KNF has over a SKOK if it does not comply with
    the requirements on capital adequacy. Nowhere in the October 2012 Law or current regulation
    does it state what will happen to a SKOK if it does not meet the required solvency ratio or falls
    below the required ratio. The supervisor frequently has the ability to: (i) suspend CU lending and
                                                                                                         18
    investment; (ii) prohibit the CU from acquiring, through purchase or lease any additional land or
    buildings; (iii) prohibit the CU from accepting further deposits or other lines of credit; or (iv) any
    other action deemed appropriate by the supervisor.

3.3 Delinquency and Loss Provisions
49. SKOKs should be required to have a written collection policy that is reviewed by the
    Supervisory Board no less than annually. The policy should establish: (i) when the credit control
    procedure is activated in respect to delinquent loans; (ii) a description of the various stages of the
    credit control procedure from first contact with members in arrears to the legal recovery process
    and/or enforcement of security; (iii) the criteria and procedure, including approval procedure and
    authorization required for rescheduling loans and for transferring members’ deposits against loan
    arrears; and (iv) the criteria and procedure including approval procedure and authorization required
    for writing off bad loans.
50. Regulation should require that loans be reported as delinquent when a full payment has not
    been received. The day on which the loan should be reported delinquent depends on the loan
    repayment schedule. Any loan in which the payment is less than a full payment according to the loan
    contract should be considered in arrears and should be classified delinquent depending on the
    number of days since the last payment was received.
51. Regulation should require that when disclosing delinquency the entire outstanding loan
    balance should be reported as delinquent, not just the amount of the delinquent payments. The
    prudential standard for delinquent loans as compared to total loans should be disclosed. This ratio
    should be calculated by taking the sum of all reportable delinquent loans divided by total loans.
    Normally this ratio is 5% or less.
52. In some cases, regulation may also consider provisions for the performing loans portfolio. In
    some countries CUs are required to have a provision for performing loans on the order of 1-2%. This
    provision is established in anticipation of loan losses that are present in the loan portfolio but have
    not appeared as of the provision date. Based on the rising delinquency trend in SKOKs over the past
    few years and the negative impact on earnings of the 35 and 100 percent provision requirements, a
    more forward looking provision is strongly recommended.
53. All current loans that have been restructured or have been adjusted in their original terms
    should be provisioned at no less than the lowest provision percentage for problem loans . In
    addition, if a loan is restructured more than one time it should be provisioned at 100%. Restructured
    loans should be reported separately on the balance sheet and reported no less than quarterly to KNF.
54. KNF should establish stricter measures in special circumstances. KNF should require more
    severe classifications of specific loans or additional provisions in the following cases: (i) general
    deterioration in the loan portfolio; (ii) a change or absence of adequate SKOK lending procedures;
    (iii) abnormal losses within a particular loan type; (iv) weak delinquent loan collections; (v) a
    concentration of large or risky loans; (vi) negative trends and conditions in sectors or industries the
    SKOK serves; and/or (vii) natural disasters that affect the borrower’s ability to repay.
55. Provision accounts should be established for each asset class. Provisions should be required not
    only for loans, but for all asset types for which a loss is likely, or when the recoverable amount of
    the asset is less than its carrying value.
56. Standardization of loan write-off procedures is needed as it appears the SKOKs do not
    routinely write off uncollectible loans. Generally CUs should write loans off if: (i) they are more
    than 365 days delinquent; (ii) the CU has lost contractual rights over the loans, such as when a
    borrower is declared bankrupt; (iii) the loans are deemed uncollectible, such as when a court has
    ruled against the CU, all collateral has been repossessed, valued and sold, and the proceeds failed to
    cover the entire amount due; (iv) a CU is unable to collect or there is no collateral; or (v) efforts to
    collect the debt have been abandoned.

3.4 Liquidity and Asset Liability Management
57. The SKOK Supervisory Board should have a written Liquidity and Asset Liability
    Management (ALM) policy. The board should be responsible for annually reviewing and adjusting
                                                                                                         19
     the policy to identify: (i) who is responsible for liquidity management; (ii) who may access or
     establish a line of credit for liquidity purposes; (iii) how liquidity will be monitored; (iv) types of
     liquid assets the SKOK may hold; (v) minimum and maximum levels for total cash assets and for
     amounts kept on-site at the SKOK; (vi) liquidity related ratios; (vii) the process that will be used to
     monitor ALM; and (viii) how often the ALM analysis will be performed.


58. In addition to the liquidity reserve requirement of 10% stated in the October 2012 Law,
    SKOKs should have 15% of savings and deposits in liquid assets to provide for savings
    withdrawals, loan demand and operating expenses.13 SKOKs should establish a line of credit for
    liquidity purposes with NASCU or a different source. Each SKOK should analyze liquidity needs no
    less than monthly. This means that management should look at the liquidity needs over the past
    month and ensure that liquidity is adequate to meet the liquidity needs for the next month. Special
    consideration should be given to seasonality or any special circumstance that might affect liquidity.
59. External borrowing should be limited to a percentage of assets and be short-term in nature.
    According to WOCCU standards, external borrowing should be limited between 5% and 15% of
    total assets depending on the level of institutional capital. External borrowing should be no more
    than 5% of total assets for CUs with institutional capital of 8% or more, 10% of total assets for CUs
    with institutional capital of 10% or more, and 15% of total assets for CUs with institutional capital
    of 12% or more. Borrowing should generally be limited in CUs as their basis is savings and shares,
    not external credit. A CU’s ability to borrow depends on its financial condition, adequacy of its
    capital base, and presence of highly liquid collateral. External credit frequently has a destabilizing
    effect on CUs and therefore should be minimized. An exception could be made for newly
    established CUs. The maximum level of borrowing may be higher for start-up CUs and those that
    have been in existence less than 3 years.
60. SKOK management should take appropriate steps to manage interest rate risk by reviewing
    and managing the balance sheet structure. This process should include: (i) determining rate-
    sensitive assets and liabilities; (ii) matching the maturities for rate-sensitive assets (such as loans and
    investments) with rate-sensitive liabilities with similar terms (such as loans from external sources
    and member deposits); (iii) matching fixed assets with institutional capital; and (iv) matching
    liabilities and member deposits with no maturity with short-term (maturity < 30 days) assets. This
    analysis of the SKOK’s balance sheet should be documented. 14 The regulation should include
    precise definitions for liquid assets, rate-sensitive assets and liabilities, and interest rate risk.
61. KNF should impose restrictions on the operation of a SKOK if it fails to comply with the
    regulation. These measures should include: (i) suspension of lending and investing; (ii) suspension
    of taking new deposits; (iii) prohibition on acquisition of additional assets; (iv) prohibition on
    declaring dividends; and/or (v) prohibition or suspension of activities that KNF perceives to be
    contributing to the liquidity problem.

3.5 Investments
62. The SKOK Supervisory Board should be responsible for formulating, reviewing and
    amending an investment policy that is consistent with the Law and any related regulation. The
    policy should address: (i) purpose and objectives of investment activities; (ii) types of investments
    that can be made; (iii) investment characteristics such as issuer, investment quality, maturity, and
    interest rate; (iv) who has authority to make investments and the extent of this authority; (v) the need
    for adequate investment diversification and concentration risk management across investment type
    and/or entity; (vi) limitation with regards to specific type, quantity, and maturity of investments; and
    (vii) any necessary mechanism of internal control. SKOK management should provide an
    investment report to the SKOK Supervisory Board no less than monthly with the following

13
   This ratio is calculated: Liquid Assets (those with no maturity or a maturity of 30 days or less) – Liabilities due
in 30 days or less / Average Savings Deposits over last 3 months.
14
   There is no foreign exchange risk involved as the Polish SKOKs are not legally allowed to take deposits or
extend loans in foreign currency.

                                                                                                                   20
    information: (i) all investments held by the SKOK; (ii) interest rates, maturity dates, and other
    applicable terms; (iii) investment activity for the month such as buying and selling, principal
    repayment, and interest repayment; (iv) comparison of the book value to the current market value
    where possible; and (v) adequacy of provisions established for investment loss.
63. Investments should be made with the intention of “holding to maturity”. Maximum investment
    maturities for each of the permissible types of investments should be defined. At no time should the
    portfolio be used to trade securities for profit, placing the SKOK’s capital at risk.
64. A clear definition of fixed assets should be provided in the law. If a SKOK wants to invest in
    fixed assets in excess of the limit established in the Law, it should first receive a waiver from KNF.
    The request for a waiver shall include a detailed investment appraisal showing the cost and
    justification for the investment, including how it will improve members’ services, and an analysis of
    expected impact on the profitability, liquidity, and capital adequacy requirements. When a SKOK
    acquires property for future expansion, at least partial utilization of the property –as related to
    SKOK operations – should be accomplished within two years from the date of purchase, unless KNF
    authorizes otherwise.
65. Property that is repossessed from a delinquent borrower should be transferred to the SKOK’s
    books at the lower value of the outstanding loan balance or its current market value . The
    current market value should be established by an appraisal. The appraisal should be performed by a
    qualified employee or official, provided that appropriate steps have been taken to ensure
    independence of the designated individual. Any losses due to loan balance being greater than the
    market value of the property should be charged to the provision for loan loss when the asset is
    transferred to the SKOK’s books. Any decline in property value while on the SKOK’s books should
    be charged to an account established to recognize such decline in value on the SKOK’s balance
    sheet. Charges for such declines in value should not be made to provisions for loan loss as the asset
    is no longer considered a loan.
66. Disposition of the repossessed asset should take place within three years by sale or write off.
    The property should be advertised publicly for sale once the asset is on the SKOK’s books. If a
    SKOK is unable to sell the property in a year, the SKOK should reduce the value of the asset by
    50% each year for two years until the value is zero. The reduction in the asset should be made
    through a contra asset account designated for the write down. After the third year, the asset should
    be written off the accounting records. Any direct costs and expenses associated with the acquisition
    of the title to the property and its maintenance should be considered a SKOK expense.

3.6 Savings and Shares
67. Member savings generally represent the largest liability on the SKOK’s balance sheet.
    Regulation should address the types of accounts that may be offered, any specific terms, conditions,
    and disclosures for the savings and share accounts, and how dividends and interest are to be
    calculated, accounted for, and paid. Interest on savings accounts may be fixed or variable in nature,
    paid at various rates, and the interest payments may occur at different frequencies depending on the
    type of deposit and its terms. Interest on savings and term deposits should be accrued no less than on
    a monthly basis, unless the interest is paid out monthly.
68. KNF should establish a maximum amount of shares and deposits that a member and his/her
    related parties may own in order to limit concentration risk. Usually a member and related
    parties may own no more than 10% of shares and deposits.
69. Share withdrawals should be allowed only if the SKOK has met all capital adequacy and
    liquidity requirements. No member should be allowed to pledge shares as collateral or security for
    a loan. A member should be allowed to transfer shares to other members – if allowable at the SKOK
    – upon leaving membership if the SKOK would not refund the shares. Shares dividends should not
    be guaranteed. Dividends should be paid from net income for the current year only after: (i)
    adequate provision for losses have been made, (ii) required transfers to reserves have been made,
    and (iii) capital adequacy requirements have been met.



                                                                                                       21
3.7 Credit
70. The SKOK Supervisory Board should be responsible for formulating and approving a lending
    policy and revising the policy, as needed, no less than annually. The policy should include: (i)
    eligibility requirements for receiving a loan; (ii) permissible loan purposes; (iii) acceptable types of
    collateral; (iv) loan portfolio diversification with regards to collateral and loan types; (v) loan types
    granted along with the interest rates, terms, frequency of payments, and conditions; (vi) maximum
    loan size per product type; (vii) maximum loan amounts as a percentage of the collater al’s value;
    (viii) factors used to evaluate the borrower’s ability to repay the loan; (ix) borrower and related
    borrower loan limit concentrations; (x) restrictions on loans to employees and officials; (xi) loan
    approval authority and limitations for individuals with credit granting authority; (xii) reporting
    requirements to the Supervisory Board and report content of individuals with loan approval
    authorization; (xiii) required loan documentation; and (xiv) requirements for co-signers and
    guarantors.
71. Each SKOK should be required to have written procedures that address how to determine a
    borrower’s ability to repay a loan and the value and condition of any collateral. These
    procedures should include: (i) an interview with the borrower; (ii) collection of adequate financial
    information; (iii) how financial information presented, including income and expense, is verified and
    analyzed; (iv) calculation of appropriate financial ratios; (v) a physical examination and valuation of
    collateral; (vi) mechanisms to prevent conflicts of interest; and (vii) controls to assure segregation of
    duties between the approval and payment of loans.
72. Regulation should include the maximum amount of the savings and loan fund that may be
    lent. The established maximum amount should not only be related to one member, but to a member
    and their related parties. A member should be allowed to repay a loan prior to maturity in whole or
    in part on any business day without being penalized. When a loan application is denied, the SKOK
    should communicate to the applicant in writing the reason(s) within 14 days.
73. No legal or regulatory restrictions should exist that prohibit a SKOK from charging either
    fixed or variable interest rates on loans. The effective loan interest rate (including all interest, fees
    and costs) to be paid by the borrower should be disclosed in writing prior to granting the loans. A
    SKOK should be allowed to assess penalties for late loan payments.
74. All collateral used as security for a loan should be adequately insured. Every guarantor should
    be adequately informed in writing of the nature of the liability prior to signing an agreement creating
    guarantor liability. All collateral should be located within a reasonable geographic proximity of the
    SKOK’s office and never outside of the country. If the owner of the collateral is not the borrower,
    the borrower should have written permission to use the collateral to secure the loan and proof that it
    is adequately insured to cover the loan balance. The SKOK should have the legal right to place a
    lien on the collateral.
75. SKOKs should be required to report to the credit bureau. In an effort to provide financial
       institutions with the best information for making a loan decision, SKOKs should be required to
       report member loan payments to the credit bureau. SKOKs make many small loans, so it might
       make sense to establish a threshold in which they have to report loans that exceed the threshold
       amount.15

3.8 Accounting and Auditing
76. SKOKs should use the chart of accounts, accounting principles, and reporting formats
    required for other financial institutions. SKOKs continue to report under a general accounting
    system required for a wide array of non-financial businesses such as retail stores. This type of
    reporting is inadequate for a financial institution; it does not require provisions for bad loans or write
    downs on investments.
77. Regular reporting of financial statements should be required. SKOKs should produce an income
    statement and balance sheet no less than monthly that details all transactions for the month.

15
     In 2012, the average loan size was PLN 8,882 for the 5 largest SKOKs and PLN 4,224 for all SKOKs.


                                                                                                           22
     Transparency and disclosure of financial information should be encouraged. Upon request, SKOKs
     should be required to provide their members a copy of their annual financial statements and external
     auditor report. Internal audits should be reported directly to the Supervisory Board. The internal
     auditor should not report to the head of the management board, as there is a potential for conflict of
     interest in this reporting scenario. An audit plan covering all aspects of the SKOK’s business should
     be developed. The plan should identify the scope and frequency of work to be carried out in each
     area. Areas identified with higher risk should be covered more frequently. However, all areas should
     be covered over a one-year period.16
78. The internal or external auditor should perform a random sampling verification of member
    loan, savings, and share account balances annually. Under no circumstances should the
    verification be performed by a SKOK employee or official. Account statements should be sent to the
    members, and the statement should instruct the members to contact the auditor if any of the account
    balances are different than what is in their records. The members’ verified balances should then be
    compared to the amount in the SKOK’s records to ensure they match.

3.9 Supervision
79. The October 2012 Law gives KNF supervision authority and powers over SKOKs and NASCU
    and establishes the supervision activities and objectives. Article 71 states that KNF can
    recommend certain actions when there are financial, operational, or managerial problems. These
    actions include taking measures needed to: (i) restore liquidity; (ii) meet and maintain the standards
    mentioned in the Law; (iii) correct irregularities; (iv) increase the ownership funds; and (v)
    discontinue specified types of advertising. Article 71 further states that KNF may also ask the
    SKOK supervisory board to: (i) remove management board members; (ii) suspend members of the
    management board; (iii) order the SKOK to limit the scope of its operation; and (iv) order the
    SKOK to stop carrying out a specific activity. These powers do not make up a full complement of
    supervisory tools. Usually the supervisor can issue administrative actions such as Memorandums of
    Understanding, Cease and Desist Orders, and Prohibition Orders that prohibit the SKOK from doing
    business with individuals or entities and prohibit the SKOK from taking certain operational
    decisions such as declaring dividends, expanding activities, or purchasing fixed assets above the
    limit. These powers should be elaborated in a regulation. Additional regulations are also needed to
    support the new powers included in the draft Law that give KNF the right to take over, merge and
    liquidate SKOKs.

                                   IV.          SKOK SUPERVISION

80. KNF, the supervisor of all financial institutions in Poland, is now responsible for performing
    off and on-site supervision of the SKOK sector. KNF has to be mindful that their approach cannot
    be a “one size fits all”. The approach must also be proportional keeping in mind the size and risk of
    the sector as compared to the overall financial sector (see Box 5).




16
   The internal audit work plan should include: verification of cash without prior notification; bank account
reconcilement; checking loan files for compliance; verification of the SKOK’s assets and investments; ensuring all
provision for loss accounts are adequate; checking for compliance with policies and procedures; checking for
compliance with the Law, legislation and regulation; checking minutes and reports of the committee of
management and other committees for compliance and assessing regularity and completeness; evaluation of the
reliability of the information produced by the SKOK accounting and computer systems; determining that reports
and information submitted to the KNF are accurate and provided timely; determining accounting procedures and
controls are adequate; verification that management has implemented and maintains appropriate internal controls
throughout the SKOK; assistance with the selection of the external auditor; and ensuring that all internal and
external audit findings and recommendations are implemented as agreed upon.

                                                                                                               23
Box 5: Supervision of Credit Unions: General Guidelines
 Credit Union supervision includes objectives, principles and methods similar to those of banking
 supervision. As addressed by the Basel Committee in the “Core Principles of Effective Banking
 Supervision”, supervision should have clear objectives and responsibilities. The supervisor should
 be independent, apply transparent processes, have sound governance, adequate resources and be
 accountable for their actions and discharge of their duties. The International Credit Union’s
 Regulators’ Network has established 21 principles for effective supervision that should be in place
 to achieve successful supervision in a credit union sector. A summary of the principles is as
 follows.
     The licensing authority must have the power to set criteria and reject applications for CUs that
      do not meet the standards.
     The supervisor must ensure that all CUs comply with cooperative principles, recognizing that
      some second-tier organizations have proportional voting for members.
     Permissible activities of CUs must be clearly defined.
     Minimum capital adequacy requirements have to reflect the risks that CUs undertake and the
      components of capital have to be defined in terms of its ability to absorb losses.
     Supervisors need to certify that CUs have a comprehensive risk management process
      (including Board and senior management oversight) to identify, evaluate, monitor and control,
      or mitigate all material risks.
     Supervisors must be satisfied with CU’s policies, procedures and processes to assess, identify,
      measure, monitor and control credit, liquidity, operational and interest rate risks.
     Supervisors must require CUs to maintain adequate reserves.
     Supervisors must be satisfied with CUs processes to manage concentrations within portfolios
      and prudential measures to limit exposure to single members or related parties.
     Supervisors must have the power that permits intervention when there are conflicts of interest
      in CUs and related party exposure.
     CU internal controls must: (i) be adequate for the size and complexity of the business; (ii)
      include clear arrangements for delegating authority and responsibility; (iii) address separation
      of the functions that involve committing the CU and paying away its funds; (iv) have reliable
      accounting for assets and liabilities; (v) safeguard the CU’s assets; and (vi) include
      appropriate internal audit and compliance functions to test adherence to applicable laws and
      regulations.
     Adequate accounting records must be kept in accordance with widely accepted accounting
      policies and practices and an acceptable level of disclosure should be provided.
     Supervision should consist of a group of examiners designated specifically to CU supervision
      with the means to collect, review, and analyze prudential reports, and with the capacity to
      verify these reports.
     Supervisors must have complete access to all documents, information and staff members.
     The supervisor must have a range of enforcement tools to facilitate timely corrective action.
      These include the authority to issue appropriate legal orders, revoke licenses (or recommend
      revocation), impose restrictions on the activities and operations that CUs conduct, and
      approve all mergers, liquidations, or changes in organizational.
    Source: International Credit Union Regulators Network.

4.1 SKOK Supervision Scheme
81. The October 2012 Law does not do away with NASCU in a supervisory capacity but has
    established a confusing scenario for KNF and NASCU to act as co-supervisors. NASCU is
    responsible for controlling activities of SKOKs. KNF has the right to control the principles and
    methodology of examination activities carried out by NASCU with respect to effectiveness and
    adequacy of these activities. KNF oversees and controls SKOK and NASCU activities. As the
    supervisor, KNF can issue recommendations, order preparation of recovery plans or appoint
    administrators in case of SKOK insolvency. KNF may recommend to NASCU to make changes in
    methodology and principles defining the manner and scope of carried out control activities. General
    terms such as “controlling activities” by NASCU and “recommendations” to be made by KNF are
    not defined in the October 2012 Law; thus allowing ample room for interpretation.

                                                                                                         24
82. Thus, SKOKs are subject to a form of “double supervision” from KNF and NASCU as
    supervision is performed by KNF, but NASCU has to control SKOKs. This means for off-site
    reporting, as of 11 January 2013, (effective date of MOF regulation on off-site reporting) SKOKs
    now are obliged to complete two different sets of forms on a monthly and quarterly basis for
    NASCU and KNF. The KNF off-site report is 32 pages. The entire report is completed quarterly
    while about half of the report is required monthly. The NASCU report is about 8 pages, all of which
    is completed monthly by the SKOKs. The SKOKs will also be subject to on-site supervision by
    KNF and NASCU. KNF will perform on-site inspection every 3 years or more regularly as needed.
    NASCU will also perform on-site inspections of 2 kinds per the October 2012 Law. Article 44.3
    states NASCU shall perform the Cooperative Audit (known as inspection) per the Cooperative Law,
    and Articles 63 and 66 state that NASCU shall “control SKOKs for conformity of their operations
    with the Law” and NASCU will do so by performing an audit as described in their “Methodology of
    SKOK Control”. This current dual supervision system is overly burdensome on the SKOKs both
    with regards to time and cost. Per comments made by NASCU and KNF, SKOKs are confused as to
    which entity they should answer to first and with whose recommendations they should comply.
    SKOKs are accustomed to working and complying with NASCU; most in the near term will
    continue to meet NASCU’s requests and recommendations before answering KNF. This does not
    provide for a good working relationship between the parties involved.

83. Supervision and regulation of the SKOKs has been divided up amongst four KNF
    departments – off-site, on-site, licensing, and regulation. Supervision costs will be covered by an
    assessment of .024% of total assets set out in the October 2012 law. This fee is currently allocated
    between KNF (90%) and NASCU (10%). In the draft Law, KNF will receive all of the fee to cover
    its costs. The off-site department is the only department with dedicated SKOK supervision staff.
    There are ten analysts. To date the off-site department has received data for October-December
    2012. The KNF off-site reporting was difficult for the SKOKs as they did not receive any training
    on how to use and complete the forms, and the forms could only be completed on-line, were
    populated manually, and the users were unable to save the data.

84. KNF has prioritized its supervision objectives. First, KNF believes that the SKOKs should have
     close common bonds and not the open type of bond that has allowed the SKOKs to grow very
     quickly. KNF plans on moving the SKOKs back to the more limited common bonds through stricter
     licensing requirements and does not plan on licensing SKOKs in the future with more than 10
     employee groups. Second, KNF is in the process of gathering information on the SKOKs. Per
     Article 87 of the October 2012 Law, all SKOKs had to be audited within three months of the
     effective date of the Law. This was a one-time audit with an effective date of 30 September 2012,
     and the results were due to KNF as of 25 January 2013. The terms of reference for the audit were
     developed by the KNF off-site department and were broader in scope than an annual audit. The
     SKOKs chose the auditors and paid for the audit. The results of this audit will be provided to KNF,
     NASCU, NBP, MOF, and the National Cooperative Council. Annual audits are required for all
     SKOKs as of 31 December 2012. NASCU also submitted to KNF on-site SKOK examination
     reports performed between October and December 2012. Third, many SKOKs have low capital;
     KNF plans on dedicating significant time to developing and monitoring SKOK capital rehabilitation
     plans in cooperation with NASCU.

85. These capital rehabilitation plans should have short and long-term goals that allow the
     SKOKs to meet the solvency ratio in five years or less. SKOKs that show good trends and meet
     their capital goals should not be subject to supervisory penalties or administrative actions, even if
     they have not met the required 5 percent solvency ratio17 by January 2014.18 This ratio will be
     difficult to achieve since building capital is a slow process for SKOKs, which have few sources for
     increasing capital.

17
   This ratio will be defined by MOF by April 2013. The most similar ratio currently in use is the KAPER
Institutional Capital/ Total Assets ratio.
18
   The Law is silent on the actions to be taken if a SKOK does not meet the ratio, and KNF should exercise
discretion to the extent possible in applying this aspect of the law.

                                                                                                       25
86. On-site SKOK inspections by KNF started in February 2013. The inspections of NASCU and
    ten SKOKs are planned for 2013. The final on-site inspection report will be received by four entities
    – SKOK Management and Supervisory Boards, KNF, and NASCU. Full on-site inspections by KNF
    will be conducted every three years, and follow-up inspections will be conducted as needed for
    SKOKs and NASCU. Currently KNF does not have a SKOK risk rating system such as CAMEL or
    KAPER to assign a score and assist with risk management.

87. Future SKOK supervision should do away with the two entities working independently. KNF
    should perform all off and on-site supervision. NASCU should focus on assisting the SKOKs in
    addressing KNF supervisory concerns and providing operational, managerial, and financial
    solutions for SKOKs. Additionally, NASCU could participate in the (i) licensing process by giving
    an opinion on candidates for the position of president of the management board and on proposals for
    changes to statutes and (ii) regulating process by giving opinions on issued regulations that effect
    SKOKs. KNF should use the resources of NASCU as appropriate, as NASCU has more experience
    working with SKOKs than any other entity in the country, is well known internationally, and has a
    full staff that is trained and versed in SKOK issues.

88. Additionally, NASCU could function more as an apex organization and continue to provide a
    link between the SKOKs, KNF, and the financial system. Just as in the past, NASCU could: (i)
    represent SKOK interests within the country and internationally; (ii) undertake activities for
    development of the sector by expressing opinions on laws and regulations; (iii) participate in the
    preparation of legislation and a Code of Ethics for member SKOKs; and (iv) develop training as
    needed. NASCU could pursue financial activities, accumulate SKOK deposits, grant SKOK credits,
    invest free resources, and organize financial settlements. SKOKs could maintain reserves at NASCU
    in the form of liquid reserves, stabilization funds, capital reserves, and deposits that were not being
    used. NASCU could raise additional funds for liquidity maintenance and for granting credits to
    SKOKs by means of cooperation with banks, which would include transaction of credits and issuing
    commercial term investment bills (KWIT). NASCU could also provide settlement services to
    SKOKs (involving the use of payment cards and ATM cards).
89. NASCU has an experienced and developed monitoring department. There are six persons in off-
    site monitoring responsible for analyzing monthly, quarterly, and annual off-site reports and for
    developing recommendations that are shared with the on-site department and SKOK management.
    As a result of this information, they produce a comprehensive report for each SKOK and the SKOK
    system as a whole based on the KAPER ratio system. The report focuses on the key areas of capital,
    profitability, liquidity, overdue loans, and reserves. Each SKOK receives an overall KAPER rating.
    The rating is based on points, and the ratings range from A to E, with an A rating being the best.
    This system is used to evaluate the risk associated with each SKOK and to prioritize supervision.
    There are fourteen persons in the on-site department, and they perform on-site monitoring in the
    SKOKs generally every two years and more frequently if needed (every three years is required in the
    Cooperative Act). The department plans to perform a number of audits as the “controller” of
    SKOKs, including a comprehensive audit covering all the activities of the SKOK, an issue audit that
    reviews selected aspects of the activities of the audited entity, a follow-up audit intended to verify
    the implementation of the recommendations from the previous audits, a planned audit carried out in
    accordance with the annual (periodic) audit plan, and an ad hoc audit carried out independently of
    the annual (periodic) audit plan and applying simplified procedures as indicated. If serious
    irregularities are found during any audits, NASCU plans to provide recommendations to the SKOK
    to address the irregularities within a prescribed period and notify KNF.

4.2 Stabilization Fund Supervision
90. In the October 2012 Law it is unclear as to the entity that has ultimate control and decision-
    making authority over the stabilization fund. KNF has supervisory powers over SKOKs yet
    has no power or decision-making authority over the SKOK stabilization fund administered by
    NASCU. The stabilization fund, which is constituted by at least 1% and no more than 3% of
    SKOKs’ assets, remains at NASCU. The Law provides for an arrangement where KNF decides
    about rehabilitation programs and NASCU decides about the use of stabilization funds, while in the
    draft law the resources of the stabilization fund would be transferred, if necessary, by NASCU to the
                                                                                                        26
       BFG credit union’s sub-fund and used for payout of guaranteed deposits. This scheme is ripe for
       conflict as the powers of other entities as they relate to the fund are not entirely clear. Specifically,
       NASCU gives an opinion on the recovery plans prepared by SKOKs, regardless if aid from the
       stabilization fund is to be used. NASCU’s opinion is not binding on KNF; that is, KNF can accept a
       recovery plan regardless of NASCU’s opinion. If the recovery plan includes use of the stabilization
       fund, rules and conditions will be included in the assumptions of the plan addressing use of the fund.
       KNF can also, on its own initiative, order revision or increase the amount of the stabilization fund
       resources in a plan, as well as undertake other supervisory measures. Nowhere is it stated in law or
       regulation that KNF has the power to influence NASCU’s decisi ons regarding disposal of the
       stabilization fund. Nevertheless, evaluation of the usage of the stabilization fund will be one of the
       main KNF criteria in supervising NASCU.

91. Currently SKOKs have a two-tier protection scheme for member deposits. The first
    level of protection is the stabilization fund. The fund is used to assist SKOKs with problems if they
    can be rehabilitated. In the past, the fund has proven adequate. Rehabilitation loans have a maximum
    5-year term with a 0% interest rate. The future of the fund and its adequacy will be tested due to the
    provision for loan loss requirement of 35% of loans delinquent more than 3 months and 100% of
    delinquent loans more than 12 months. This requirement became effective as of January 2012. This
    change resulted in negative net earnings for many SKOKs. There are currently 7 SKOKs with
    stabilization fund loans, and NASCU anticipates that the number could grow substantially (see
    Table 3). NASCU may have to prioritize stabilization loans based on need, something they have
    never done in the past. Moreover, NASCU representatives inferred that most of the resources of the
    fund would be used in capital rehabilitation plans for SKOKs with negative or very low capital . The
    second level of protection is the mutual insurance company fund – TUW. The fund insures SKOK
    member deposits up to EUR 100,000 in cases when the stabilization fund cannot provide adequate
    coverage19.
Table 3: Structure of the Stabilization Fund in PLN (December 2012)
     Retained Earnings - NASCU                                            237,947,305

     Shares from SKOKs                                                    173,431,003

Total                                                                     411,378,308

     Number of SKOKs with stabilization fund loans                        7

     Amount of Stabilization Fund Loans                                   31,152,785

     Balance of Stabilization Fund Loans                                  28,283,447
Source: NASCU.

        V.           DRAFT CREDIT UNION LAW UNDER DISCUSSION DURING FSAP MISSION

92. At the time of the FSAP mission, a draft credit union law was under discussion in Parliament.
    The most critical issues under discussion were: (i) enhanced KNF supervision tools; (ii) clarification
    of the scope of information to be provided by SKOKs to KNF; (iii) BFG guarantee for SKOK
    member deposits up to EUR 100,000; (iv) more comprehensive regulation of the SKOKs’ liquidity
    reserve; and (v) modifications of the existing framework for the reorganization, restructure, winding
    up and insolvency of SKOKs making it easier for KNF to divide, merge, takeover, or liquidate
    SKOKs.

93. In the draft law, SKOKs would have access to the mandatory deposit guarantee system(BFG).
    This would be a very positive change for SKOKs. There are no requirements or exclusions for BFG
    insurance; insurance will be granted to all licensed SKOKs. It is also anticipated that SKOKs would
    be able to access BFG financial and restructuring assistance. Regarding coverage of guaranteed

19
     TUW terminated the insurance agreements effective 1 May 2013. Thus, this level is no longer in place.

                                                                                                             27
       deposits, SKOKs would have 6 months from the effective date of the amendment for deposit
       insurance (this waiting period is due to IT and data requirements).
94. In the draft law, BFG financial support and restructuring measures would have a two-tier
    structure for SKOKs that require assistance. The first tier would be early intervention. The
    trigger for this intervention would be, generally, of a qualitative nature. Trigger events would
    include: i) the SKOK has incurred, or is likely, to incur losses; ii) solvency of the SKOK is under
    threat, a solvency ratio of less than 1% is considered solvency under threat; or iii) the liquidity of the
    SKOK is under threat and it is likely the SKOK will be unable to pay its debts. The SKOK would go
    to NASCU first, and if NASCU could not meet its needs then the SKOK would apply to BFG for
    assistance. The source of the assistance funds would be the SKOK Sub-fund. BFG assistance would
    be available only to SKOKs that were subject to reorganization proceedings conducted according to
    KNF requirements, with a positive decision by KNF, and in which the BFG claim were fully
    collateralized. BFG could offer a guarantee, warranty, or loan. The second tier of assistance would
    occur when the net worth/total assets ratio reached the legal trigger of 1%. NASCU would have the
    option to assist the SKOK, if financially possible. If NASCU declined, then KNF could merge the
    SKOK with another SKOK or Bank,20 do a Purchase and Assumption (P&A) transferring the rights
    and liabilities of the SKOK at risk to an acquirer, with financial support given to the acquirer as
    needed, or liquidate the SKOK. In case the liabilities were greater than the assets, KNF could
    suspend the SKOK’s operations, thus triggering the guaranteed deposit payout process. The first
    source for pay-out would be the SKOK Fund that would start with a balance of zero and would be
    capitalized by SKOK annual fee contributions of up to 0.3% of total assets and off-balance sheet
    liabilities. The fee percentage would be determined annually by BFG’s Council and the fee could be
    increased to 0.6% by MOF. The second source for payout would be the NASCU Stabilization Fund.
    All or part of the Stabilization Fund would have to be transferred to BFG, if necessary by NASCU.
    The amount transferred to BFG would be equal to the amount of the deficit needed for pay-out.
    NASCU would still have decision-making authority over the Stabilization Fund amount that
    remained with NASCU. The third source is BFG Other Funds known as the assistance, statutory and
    reserve funds. These funds are well established and are available for use by other financial
    institutions, not just SKOKs. The final source is extraordinary sources and includes a loan or grant
    from NASCU, the state budget, or a short term loan from NBP.

                                         VI.          CONCLUSIONS

95. SKOKs represent a small portion of the financial sector, but provide a variety of products and
    services to over 2.6 million depositors largely of low to moderate income. Around the world,
    lower income people are frequently not well served by banks, so they look for other financial
    alternatives such as CUs. Similarly, Polish SKOKs have effectively filled this gap and this is evident
    by the asset growth over the past two decades. SKOKs offer a wide variety of savings and loans and
    other sophisticated electronic products. The development of the sector is largely due to innovative
    leaders and a strong national association, NASCU. The sector has now reached a point where the
    largest SKOK has assets large enough to put the SKOK in the top twenty banks (by asset size) in the
    country, and the larger SKOKs are competing with banks and are nationally recognized. With these
    large SKOKs, comes the need for public supervision and regulation by an entity such as KNF.
    Government authorities recognized this and transferred SKOK supervision and regulation to KNF at
    the end of October 2012.

96. KNF must prudently manage their new supervision and regulation responsibility . This means
    the SKOKs must have adequate time and support to transition their operations to meet the new
    stricter regulation and supervision. International experience has shown that a considerable amount of
    effort has to be made by the supervisory agency to: i) develop reasonable timelines for reforms, ii)
    provide clear and realistic transition rules, iii) clearly communicate the new framework to the sector,
    iv) establish deadlines for SKOKs to implement changes as directed by KNF, and v) allow for

20
     There is no law or precedent on how to merge a SKOK with a bank, so this may prove difficult.


                                                                                                           28
    adequate follow-up to ensure the changes have been made. Without this process in place, the
    implementation may well be flawed and the supervisory and regulatory changes could negatively
    impact the sector and pose systemic risk. The largest SKOK holds 40% of the sector’s assets and has
    850,000 members.

97. KNF should move ahead with its off- and on-site supervision plans as provided for in
    the draft Law. Future SKOK supervision should do away with KNF and NASCU working
    independently of each other. The law or regulation should allow for KNF to delegate as they
    see fit certain activities to NASCU to assist them in their supervisory role.

98. KNF should work closely with MOF to develop regulations that support the draft law and
    regulate specific technical issues. The development of additional regulations should be done in
    consultation with key stakeholders to gain the support of the sector, and the comment periods should
    be sufficient for NASCU to circulate the proposed regulation among the SKOKs for their comments.
    Comments received and presented by NASCU should be considered and revisions made as
    appropriate.

99. The SKOK sector is clearly at a turning point. If the CU management and members support the
    process of rehabilitation and regulatory and supervisory changes are handled well, the sector will
    continue to grow, provide a safe place for members to save their money, and do what it does best –
    provide affordable financial products and services to low and moderate income members. If the CU
    management and members do not support the process of rehabilitation and supervision changes are not
    handled well, then one of the more developed CU sectors in the world could be negatively impacted,
    as well as the millions of SKOK members that have come to rely on their SKOK for dependable and
    affordable financial services.




                                                                                                     29
