                                                            85773


        H N P        D i   s   c u s    s   i   o n   P a   p e   R




REPRIORITIZING GOVERNMENT SPENDING ON
HEALTH:
Pushing an Elephant Up the Stairs?

Ajay Tandon, Lisa Fleisher, Rong Li and Wei Aun Yap




January 2014
REPRIORITIZING GOVERNMENT SPENDING ON
                HEALTH:




       Pushing an Elephant Up the Stairs?




Ajay Tandon, Lisa Fleisher, Rong Li, and Wei Aun Yap




                   January 2014
        Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Family of the
World Bank's Human Development Network (HDN). The papers in this series aim to
provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the
World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive
Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this
series should take into account this provisional character.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact Martin Lutalo
at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                             ii
       Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
                  Reprioritizing Government Spending on Health:
                       Pushing an Elephant Up the Stairs?

                  Ajay Tandon,a Lisa Fleisher,b Rong Li,c Wei Aun Yapd
a
   East Asia and Pacific Human Development Department, the World Bank Group,
Washington, DC.
b
   Consultant, the Health and Economy Program, Health, Nutrition, and Population Unit,
the World Bank Group, Washington, DC.
c, d
     Consultants, East Asia and Pacific Human Development Department, the World Bank
Group, Washington, DC.

    This paper was prepared for the Health and Economy Program, Health, Nutrition, and
         Population Unit, the World Bank Group, Washington, DC; November 2013.
              This work was funded by the Rockefeller Foundation Trust Fund

Abstract: Countries vary widely with respect to the share of government spending on
health, a metric that can serve as a proxy for the extent to which health is prioritized by
governments. WHO data estimate that, in 2011, health’s share of aggregate government
expenditure in the 170 countries for which data were available averaged 12 percent.
However, country differences were striking: ranging from a low of 1 percent in Myanmar
to a high of 28 percent in Costa Rica. Some of the observed differences in health’s share
of government spending across countries are unsurprisingly related to differences in
national income. However, significant variations exist in health’s share of government
spending even after controlling for national income. This paper provides a global
overview of health’s share of government spending and summarizes key theoretical and
empirical perspectives on allocation of public resources to health vis-à-vis other sectors
from the perspective of reprioritization, one of the modalities for realizing fiscal space for
health. Theory and cross-country empirical analyses do not provide clear-cut
explanations for the observed variations in government prioritization of health. Standard
economic theory arguments that are often used to justify public financing for health are
equally applicable to many other sectors including defense, education, and infrastructure.
To date, empirical work on prioritization has been sparse: available cross-country
econometric analyses suggests that factors such as democratization, lower levels of
corruption, ethnolinguistic homogeneity, and more women in public office are correlated
with higher shares of public spending on health; however, these findings are not robust
and are sensitive to model specification. Evidence from case studies suggests that
country-specific political economy considerations are key, and that results-focused
reform efforts — in particular efforts to explicitly expand the breadth and depth of health
coverage as opposed to efforts focused only on government budgetary targets — are
more likely to result in sustained and politically-feasible prioritization of health from a
fiscal space perspective.

Keywords: Fiscal space, government health expenditure, prioritization, political
economy.


                                             iii
Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in the paper are
entirely those of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its
Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.

Correspondence Details: Ajay Tandon, World Bank, 1818 H St., NW, Washington,
DC 20433, USA; telephone: 202-473-6338; e-mail: atandon@worldbank.org; website:
www.worldbank.org/hnp.




                                         iv
                                                   Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .......................................................................................................... vii

I. INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................................1

II. REPRIORITIZING HEALTH FOR FISCAL SPACE ........................................................2

III. HEALTH SECTOR SHARE OF GOVERNMENT SPENDING .......................................6

IV. REPRIORITIZING HEALTH: THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES..............................10

     NORMATIVE ECONOMIC THEORY..............................................................................................10
     POSITIVISTIC THEORIES ON GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES .......................................................11

V. REPRIORITIZING HEALTH: CROSS-COUNTRY AND CASE STUDY
   EVIDENCE ............................................................................................................................13

     CROSS-COUNTRY EVIDENCE.....................................................................................................13
     COUNTRY-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCES WITH REPRIORITIZATION ....................................................14

VI. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS ....................................................................................21

REFERENCES .............................................................................................................................24




                                                                    v
vi
                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This report was prepared by Ajay Tandon, Lisa Fleisher, Rong Li, and Wei Aun Yap as part of the
Human Development Network Health Economy Program, led by Rafael Cortez (Task Team
Leader, Senior Economist, HDNHE). The program work was conducted under the overall
supervision of Nicole Klingen (Sector Manager, HDNHE) and Timothy Evans (Sector Director,
HDNHE).

The authors are grateful for comments and inputs on an earlier version of the paper from Ece
Ozcelik, David Evans, William Savedoff, Toomas Palu, George Schieber, and Jack
Langenbrunner.

The authors are also grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP Discussion
Paper.




                                              vii
viii
                                  I.      INTRODUCTION
Countries vary widely with respect to the share of government spending on health, a metric that
can serve as a proxy for the extent to which health is prioritized by governments. WHO data
estimate that, in 2011, health’s share of aggregate government expenditure in the 170 countries
for which data were available averaged 12 percent. However, country differences were striking,
ranging from a low of 1 percent in Myanmar to a high of 28 percent in Costa Rica.

Some of the observed differences in health’s share of government spending across countries are
not surprisingly related to differences in national income: cross-country comparisons show that
higher-income countries generally spend a larger share of aggregate government expenditure on
health than those at the lower end. Health care costs tend to be higher in richer countries, driven
by relative price differences as well as the availability of higher-technology care, among other
factors. Richer countries also tend to have more educated and ageing populations with a
preference structure that expects higher levels of public financing for social protection programs.
Higher costs of and more demand for publicly financed health care — combined with a greater
fiscal and institutional ability to do so — are some reasons governments tend to spend a greater
share of expenditure on health as countries become richer. However, significant variations exist
in health’s share of government spending even after controlling for national income.

This paper provides a global overview of health’s share of government spending and summarizes
some of the key theoretical and empirical perspectives on why some governments spend more
(or less) of public resources on health than others from the perspective of reprioritization, one of
the modalities for realizing fiscal space for health. There are a variety of reasons why a focus on
reprioritizing health’s share of government spending is important and merited from a fiscal space
perspective. Foremost among these are indications that the sector is under resourced and that
additional public financing for health is key for many low- and middle-income countries wanting
to improve the levels and distribution of population health outcomes [including the achievement
of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)], reduce out-of-pocket (OOP) spending for health,
and attain and sustain universal health coverage (UHC) for their citizens. In addition, ageing
populations and the rising incidence of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) are impending
challenges that will imply higher levels of health expenditure across developing countries. In
many countries, lack of government prioritization for health is a major constraint to increasing
public financing for health.

Theory and cross-country empirical analyses do not provide clear-cut explanations for the
observed variations in government prioritization of health. Standard economic theory arguments
often used to justify public financing for health are equally applicable to many other sectors
including defense, education, and infrastructure. To date, empirical work on prioritization has
been sparse: available cross-country econometric analyses suggests that factors such as
democratization, lower levels of corruption, ethnolinguistic homogeneity, and more women in
public office are correlated with higher shares of public spending on health; however, these
findings are not robust and are sensitive to model specification. Evidence from case studies
suggests that country-specific political economy considerations are key, and that results-focused
reform efforts — in particular efforts to explicitly expand the breadth and depth of health
coverage as opposed to efforts focused only on government budgetary targets — are more likely
to result in sustained and politically feasible prioritization of health from a fiscal space
perspective.

Some caveats must be noted in assessing the share of health in aggregate government
expenditure. First, a higher share of government expenditure does not imply a higher level of
government health spending: countries with higher health shares may have lower government
expenditure per capita (and vice versa). 1 In looking at shares of government expenditure, the
focus is really on the issue of prioritization and not on comparing levels of government health
expenditure across countries. In addition, efficient allocations of government health expenditure
within the overall envelope are also important as is the extent to which public financing for
health is pro-poor in its outlays. 2 Leaving aside that health has multisectoral determinants — and
that governments may choose to improve health by investing in other sectors such as sanitation,
education, infrastructure, or in economic growth more generally — what matters is where and
how the government spends on health, not just how much. Therefore, any assessments and
analyses of the share of public spending on health must be made within the broader context that
prioritization is only one aspect of a bigger picture on how governments can attain population
health objectives.

Section II of this paper explores the issue of reprioritization within the context of fiscal space.
Section III provides some facts and issues regarding health’s share of government expenditures.
Section IV presents theories on government allocations to health vis-à-vis other sectors. Section
V describes findings from cross-country and country-specific case studies of efforts to
reprioritize health. Section VI summarizes the paper and discusses some key implications.


               II.       REPRIORITIZING HEALTH FOR FISCAL SPACE
Fiscal space for health refers to the ability of a country to increase public spending for health
without jeopardizing the government’s long-term financial sustainability. 3 Assessing fiscal space
for health basically entails an evaluation of the different sources of financing that might be
available for increasing government health spending, assuming a clear case has been made that
such an increase is merited and that the net societal benefits of increasing government health
spending are positive. A conducive macrofiscal environment, higher revenues, increased
borrowing, seigniorage (inflationary finance), and higher levels of foreign aid are all potential
sources of fiscal space (not just for health, but for any sector). Each option brings its own costs
and benefits. While increasing revenues may ease fiscal constraints, the way they are raised is
crucial: regressive, inefficient, and excessive taxes can do more harm than good to the overall
economy. Similarly, borrowing to finance current spending may seem like a good idea in the
short run, but could become unsustainable over time (as the recent debt crisis in some European
countries demonstrates). Aid may ease budget shortfalls in countries that lack the domestic
finances to cover the costs of high disease burdens, but it can bring its own set of negative

1. A companion paper entitled “An Assessment of Sociopolitical Determinants, International Aid and Government Health
Expenditure: A Cross-Country Analysis over 1995–2010,” coauthored by Lilin Liang and Andrew Mirelman, examines the
relationship between levels of public health expenditure and macroeconomic factors. Specifically, the authors attempt to answer
whether larger governments have higher per capita public health spending, whether public debt limits the government’s capacity
to expand public health spending and whether different polities affect the level of government health expenditure.
2. Tandon 2007.
3. Heller 2006.
                                                              2
externalities and inefficiencies. Seigniorage is rarely, if ever, a serious option to consider. Given
clearly defined needs, the issue in any fiscal space assessment is one of identifying and assessing
feasible, low-cost means of financing additional spending that minimize potential unintended
adverse consequences, assuming multiple options have been identified and are available.

From a sector-specific perspective, reprioritization — the focus of this policy note — is an
additional option for realizing fiscal space and implies that a government would decide to
increase a sector’s share of total government spending, preferably at the expense of spending on
relatively less meritorious activities. Prioritization is a key intermediating link between the
overall macrofiscal context of a country and how much a government chooses to spend on health
(see box 1.1).

 Box 1.1 The Mathematics of Reprioritization and Fiscal Space

 Prioritization is a key intermediating link between the overall macrofiscal context of a country and the
 share of government expenditure on health. This can best be understood using a simplified version of the
 algebra behind a government’s intertemporal budget constraint:

                                                Gt + rtBt-1 = Tt + Bt + At + Ot,

 Where Gt is government non-interest expenditure in time t; rBt-1 is nondiscretionary debt interest
 payments; Tt is taxes, fees, and other government revenues, including those from seigniorage
 (inflationary finance); Bt is total government borrowing (domestic and foreign net of use of deposits); At
 is grants; and Ot is other sources of funds, such as the sale of assets. The right-hand side represents the
 government’s aggregate sources of revenue, and the left-hand side represents total spending. Fiscal
 space for health depends not only on overall government budget constraints, but also on the priority
 assigned to health. Government health spending, Ht, is a proportion kt of the overall government budget,
 or, in equation form:

                                                             Ht = kt Gt.

 Whether the priority for health (kt) is a constant or variable parameter is a key policy question.

 The discussion above suggests that, based on the importance accorded the health sector and discounting
 other sources of financing Ot, public financing for health ought to be closely related to a country’s (a)
 overall fiscal capacity and effort (both in terms of general taxes as well as earmarked ones, such as under
 social insurance); (b) its ability to borrow to finance current spending, sustainably (in general and for
 health); and (c) its ability to attract — as well as its preferences for — grants, including foreign aid (in
 general and for health). The focus from this perspective would be to analyze increases in G and derive
 the implications for H. Also, a focus on reprioritization implies finding ways to increase k. 4
 Improvements in a country’s macrofiscal context could increase G with only a marginal effect on H, if k
 remained constant, stressing the importance of reprioritization if the share of health spending needs to be
 increased.
Source: Authors


4. Fiscal space can also be realized through efficiency gains. Assuming Y represents some measure of government health system
outputs (e.g., effective coverage of key interventions), then getting the most Y out of H is creating effective fiscal space.
Interventions aimed at improving the technical and allocative efficiency of health spending by, for example, using cost-
effectiveness criteria to inform resource allocations, reducing leakages in interfiscal transfers, or addressing absenteeism of health
workers are examples of policies that could increase efficiency.
                                                                  3
There are a variety of reasons for increased policy attention in recent years to the issue of fiscal
space for health, especially from the perspective of reprioritization. Foremost among these are
indications that the sector is underresourced and that additional public financing for health is key
for many low- and middle-income countries seeking to improve the levels and distribution of
population health outcomes (including MDGs), reduce OOP spending for health, and attain and
sustain UHC for their citizens. In addition, ageing populations and the rising incidence of NCDs
are looming challenges that will necessitate higher levels of health expenditures across
developing countries.

Despite recent progress, several low-income countries — especially in sub-Saharan Africa and
South Asia — are far from attaining health-related MDGs by 2015. 5 This lack of progress in
health outcomes appears even more egregious when one considers the fact that a large proportion
of child and maternal mortality are easily preventable via well-known cost-effective
interventions. One key constraint to the attainment of health outcomes in low-income countries is
the lack of adequate financial resources for health, recent increases in development assistance for
health notwithstanding. 6 And the MDGs themselves are explicit in acknowledging additional
resource needs: included among the targets is a call for developed countries to commit at least
0.7 percent of their gross national income (GNI) toward overseas development assistance.

WHO’s Report of the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health estimates that a minimum of
US$34 — or about US$40 in 2007 prices — in per capita health expenditures would be needed
in low-income countries to provide a basic package of essential health services. 7 A more recent
estimate by the Taskforce on Innovative Health Financing places the number at US$54 per
capita. 8 However, very few low-income countries spent even these minimal amounts on health in
2011 (Figure 1.1).

      Figure 1.1 Total and Government Health Expenditures Per Capita in Low-Income Countries, 2011

                                                           Health expenditure in low-income countries, 2011
                                             Eritrea                    Total                   US$54
                                            Ethiopia
                           Central African Republic                        Government
                                       Madagascar
                                Congo, Dem. Rep.
                                               Niger
                                          Myanmar
                                            Burundi
                                       Gambia, The
                                             Guinea
                                             Malawi
                                               Chad
                                       Mozambique
                                              Kenya
                                              Benin
                                    Guinea-Bissau
                                      Burkina Faso
                                          Tanzania
                                            Uganda
                                           Comoros
                                                Mali
                                               Togo
                                         Cambodia
                                          Tajikistan
                                             Liberia
                                        Afghanistan
                                                Haiti
                                            Rwanda
                                       Sierra Leone
                                   Kyrgyz Republic


                                                    0                 20             40              60       80
                                                                      Health expenditure per capita (US$)
                                                        Source: WHO




5. United Nations 2012.
6. Gottret and Schieber 2006.
7. Sachs 2001.
8. Taskforce on Innovative Health Financing for Health Systems 2009.
                                                                            4
UHC — the objective of providing everyone access to quality health care when needed, without
creating financial hardship as a result — is now an explicit and prominent policy objective in
many middle-income countries. For example, countries such as China and Thailand now provide
near-universal coverage; others such as Indonesia, Philippines, and Vietnam cover 40 to 60
percent of the population. Coverage rates are lower in some lower-income countries, but even
they have made progress in removing financial barriers for certain subgroups such as the poor
and for services such as those related to maternal and child health.

UHC is also a likely post-MDG international development target. However, while strong policy
commitments are evident, the design, organization, and delivery systems for attaining UHC vary
considerably, and remain a challenge. In particular, financing UHC programs is a key constraint
given the high levels of informality in labor markets, which make it difficult to collect premiums.
At present, in many countries the poor are covered by general revenues, and the formal sector is
financed by contributions, leaving uncovered a large middle section of the population, consisting
mainly of the nonpoor who work in the informal sector. Across many countries, the extent of
UHC remains relatively shallow while OOP spending is generally high, even among those with
coverage. The fiscal implications of expanding UHC to those still without coverage will largely
depend on the extent to which costs are subsidized by governments. Also, governments are likely
to face higher costs for supply-side expenditures to improve access to and the quality of care to
meet growing demand, as well as to improve services to those already covered. Given the size of
the informal sector and supply-side deficiencies, it is estimated that added fiscal resources of 1 to
2 percent of GDP will be needed to attain UHC targets in many low- and middle-income
countries. 9

Ageing and NCDs are added challenges to health expenditures as both imply significantly higher
health-related utilization rates and resource outlays. The share of the elderly population is
increasing rapidly in many developing countries, as are NCDs in the overall disease burden.
Recent estimates indicate that NCDs have already overtaken communicable diseases as the
dominant share in most middle-income countries.

In summary, trends and policy commitments — attaining the unfinished MDG agenda,
increasing and improving UHC, ageing, the rise of NCDs — are increasing fiscal pressures for
health spending across developing countries. Some argue that reprioritization (combined with
donor financing in low-income countries) is necessary to address the fiscal space for health
challenge, and that fiscal space contributions from other modalities including general revenue
increases, additional borrowing, and inflationary financing are likely to be minimal at best. 10 For
example, Haacker (2010) highlights some simple calculations to demonstrate that the fiscal
benefits from reprioritization efforts far outstrip those that might be realized from expansionary
fiscal or monetary policy efforts, given realistic magnitudes of the expected impact on
government spending and of the need to allocate across sectors. 11

Reprioritization is a key challenge for health ministries when dealing with ministries of finance
and planning, especially as health is often perceived to be an unproductive and inefficient sector.
If reprioritization is to help realize at least some fiscal space for health, what can we glean from a

9. Guerard, et al. 2011.
10. Sachs 2012.
11. Haacker 2010.
                                                  5
theoretical and empirical review of the landscape to better inform policy debates related to this
issue? Prior to delving into this question, the next section provides some key background
information and stylized facts related to health’s share of government spending across countries,
regions, and over time.


      III.   HEALTH SECTOR SHARE OF GOVERNMENT SPENDING
As noted earlier, WHO data estimate that in 2011, health’s share of government spending in 170
countries where data were available averaged about 12 percent. However, the shares varied
greatly across countries (see Figure 1.2). Country differences were striking: ranging from a low
of 1 percent in Myanmar to a high of 28 percent in Costa Rica. Costa Rica, Rwanda, Bhutan,
Jordan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the Solomon Islands had the highest share compared to
other countries in their regions.

                                                              Figure 1.2 Health Share of Government Expenditure, 2011

                                                                                 Health share of government expenditure, 2011
                                                             30




                                                                                                                                                  Costa Rica

                                                                                                                                            Solomon Islands
                     Percent of government expenditure (%)




                                                                                                                                                  Rwanda
                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                Jordan
                                                                                                                               Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                                             10




                                                                                                    Nepal




                                                                    Myanmar
                                                             0




                                                                  Source: WHO
                                                                  Note: Countries with population less than 250,000 excluded



Health’s share of government spending has increased slowly over the past few decades: the
average share across countries was 10.2 percent in 1995, 10.7 percent in 2000, and 11.5 percent
in 2005; and from 1995–2011, it increased by an average 2.5 percent a year. Not all countries
saw an increase in health’s share over time: 29 countries (about 16 percent of the sample) saw a
declining share of health in the government expenditure (see table 1.1 for the five with the
highest and lowest annual growth rates). Most countries with the largest changes (negative and
positive) were in sub-Saharan Africa; in addition, some of the countries seeing the biggest
changes have been those that recently faced conflict, civil strife, or natural disaster, implying that
the changes in health’s share of government expenditure in these countries were likely not a
result of intrinsic changes in the prioritization of health but due more to exogenous factors.




                                                                                                             6
           Table 1.1 Annual Change in Health's Share of Government Expenditure, 1995–2011
                                                                                                    (as percent)
                                                                                                               Average annual change in
                                                                 Country
                                                                                                                health share of budget
                                                                                                                        Positive
                                                                 Democratic Republic of Congo                            28.2
                                                                 Afghanistan                                             27.6
                                                                 Tuvalu                                                  17.2
                                                                 Liberia                                                 15.1
                                                                 Guinea-Bissau                                           14.9
                                                                                                                       Negative
                                                         Chad                                                            -9.1
                                                         San Marino                                                      -5.6
                                                         Haiti                                                           -4.7
                                                         Mongolia                                                        -3.9
                                                         Mozambique                                                      -2.1
                                                      Source: WHO.
                                                      Note: Countries with population less than 250,000 excluded.

In 2011, countries in Latin American and the Caribbean (LAC) spent the greatest share of
government expenditure on health (almost 14 percent) compared to those in South Asia (SAS),
which allocated the lowest share (an average of 7 percent), while other regions allocated 9 to 11
percent. It should be noted that in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) the average share increased steadily
from 1995 to 2011 (Figure 1.3).

             Figure 1.3 Health Share of Government Expenditure across Regions, 1995–2011

                                                                Health share of government expenditure across regions, 1995-2011
                                                         16
                   Percent of government expenditure (%)




                                                                                                                              LAC
                                        12      14




                                                                                    EAP                                                   SSA
                                                                ECA
                                 10




                                                                                                                     MNA
                        8




                                                                                                                                    SAS
                                        6




                                                              1995                        2000                         2005                2010
                                                                                                           Year
                                                               Source: WHO
                                                               Note: Countries with population less than 250,000 excluded




In general, health is given a lower priority than education, but a higher priority relative to
military spending. On average, from 2006 to 2011, health’s share of government expenditure
across countries was 11.4 percent, while education was 15.6 percent, and military spending 8.8
percent (Table 1.2). The SAS and MNA (Middle East and North Africa) regions are notable
exceptions, where the share of military spending in government expenditure was greater than
health spending.

                                                                                                         7
Table 1.2 Health, Education, and Military Share of Government Spending, 2006–11 (as percent)
                                               Region                                             Share of government expenditure (%)
                                                                                                   Health      Education    Military
                                            Latin America & Caribbean                               13.7         16.5          7.0
                                            East Asia & Pacific                                      9.5         17.3          7.8
                                            Sub-Saharan Africa                                      10.6         17.8         10.5
                                            Europe & Central Asia                                   10.3         14.4          9.4
                                            Middle East & North Africa                               8.6         17.1         11.7
                                            South Asia                                               7.6         13.4         13.9
                                            Global                                                  11.4         15.6          8.8
                                            Source: WHO.
                                            Note: Unweighted country averages; countries with population less than 250,000 excluded.



Public spending for health tends to increase as countries become richer: governments not only
spend more on health, but also allocate a higher share of their resources to health (and to social
sectors, in general). 12 For example, in 2011, in low-income countries, health represented only
around 10.5 percent of government spending while in higher-middle, and high-income countries,
it was progressively higher (see figure 1.4). The average health share among high-income
countries was close to 13 percent.

                Figure 1.4 Health Share of Government Spending by Income Classification, 2011

                                                                    Health share of govt budget by income classification, 2011
                                           15
                          Percent of total govt budget (%)
                               5           0    10




                                                                Lower middle             Low income            Higher middle   High income
                                                             Source: WHO
                                                             Note: Countries with population less than 250,000 excluded




There are several reasons health’s share of government expenditure increases with income. The
reasons for this are grounded, in part, on the macrofiscal environment within which a
government operates, as well as the relaxation of budgetary constraints with rising income. As
economies grow and the population becomes richer, the nature of the disease burden,
demographics, and the preference structure for the demand for public financing for health also
tend to evolve. The provision of health services — a relatively labor-intensive process — tends
also to be more expensive in richer countries, driving up public (and private) spending on health.
Health care costs tend to be higher in richer countries, driven by relative price differences as well
as availability of higher-technology care, among other factors. Richer countries also tend to have

12. Also see Fleisher, Leive, and Schieber 2013.
                                                                                                       8
more educated and older, ageing populations with a preference structure that generally
emphasizes greater levels of social protection. Higher costs and more demand for publicly
financed health care — combined with a greater fiscal and institutional ability to address these
issues — are some reasons governments spend more as a share of expenditure on health, on
average, as countries become richer.

The rise in public financing for health is part of a general increase in the relative size of the
public versus private sector: this phenomenon is known as Wagner’s Law (based on the work of
a 19th century German political economist, Adolf Wagner). He noted two main reasons for
government prominence with rising national income, similar to those for the rise in public
financing for health mentioned above: (a) richer countries have more complex economies,
requiring greater public regulations and administration; and (b) education, culture, and health are
luxury goods, and public demand for governments to provide them grows as countries become
richer. 13

Another notable characteristic of the global landscape is international demand for benchmarking
shares of health in government expenditure or in GDP, partly in response to a perceived lack of
prioritization of health in developing countries, noted earlier in the paper. 14 One of the earliest
examples of these benchmarks is the oft-quoted WHO recommendation that countries spend at
least 5 percent of their GDP on health. As clarified in Savedoff (2007), there actually never was
a formal WHO recommendation to this effect. 15 Rather there was a suggestion in some WHO
documents beginning in the early 1980s that countries should use this 5 percent number to
monitor health financing flows; even then it seems the recommendation was to monitor the
magnitude of total health spending, not just public spending on health. More recently, however,
WHO’s Western Pacific and South-East Asia Regional Offices (WPRO-SEARO) have made
more explicit recommendations to this effect: WHO’s Health Financing Strategy for the Asia-
Pacific Region (2010–2015), which covers 48 countries recommends that total health
expenditure for health be 4 to 5 percent of GDP, and that the OOP share of total health
expenditure not exceed 30 to 40 percent. 16 The number is derived from empirical evidence
indicating that it will likely be difficult for countries to attain universal coverage and
concomitant reductions in OOP spending and catastrophic payments if public financing for
health is less than at least 4 to 5 percent of GDP. WHO’s Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office
(EMRO) has similarly proposed that governments allocate 8 percent of their budgets to health.17
Several sub-Saharan governments that are signatories of the Abuja Declaration made a
commitment in 2001 to earmark at least 15 percent of government budgets for health. 18

As discussed later in the paper, it is also notable that most international calls for benchmarking
health’s share of a government’s or a country’s resources have been largely aspirational and
nonbinding. 19 By 2011, less than half of the EMRO countries had reached 8 percent of the

13. Shelton 2007.
14. The proliferation of earmarking attempts has not been limited to the health sector. In 2000, at the World Education Forum,
164 governments pledged to the Dakar Framework to commit at least 7 percent of GDP to education by 2005 and 9 percent by
2010. In 2003, the Assembly of the African Union agreed to the Maputo Declaration, which called for governments to commit at
least 10 percent to agricultural and rural development by 2008.
15. Savedoff 2007.
16. WHO 2009.
17. WHO 2010c.
18. African Union 2001.
19. Benchmarking is not always in response to international calls.
                                                              9
government budget on health. In the same year, only about six sub-Saharan countries were close
to or had exceeded the 15 percent earmark target. Importantly, those countries that achieved the
Abuja target or were close to doing so were also countries that received high levels of budget
support, blurring the lines between allocations for health from “pure” own-sourced domestic
revenues versus from donor funding. 20 More than half of WPRO-SEARO countries spend far
less than 5 percent of GDP, and some — including Malaysia and Thailand — have reached or
are close to UHC with levels of public spending that are lower than the 5 percent of GDP
benchmark.


     IV.      REPRIORITIZING HEALTH: THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
There are several theoretical perspectives — in economics, in political science, as well as in
other related disciplines — that address the role of government in the economy and in society.
There are two strands of distinct theoretical perspectives in this regard: a normative approach
versus a more positivistic one. The former focuses on how governments should make choices
regarding overall expenditures and allocations to health, while the latter stresses the reasons
behind government policy choices. This section summarizes some of the theories and their
implications in reprioritizing health.

                                         NORMATIVE ECONOMIC THEORY

Normative mainstream economic theory says that governments should provide key public goods
and enhance individual or private capabilities. 21 Specifically, public finance theory views the
government as conducting two basic activities: those that offset market failures and those that are
redistributive. 22 It assumes that government interventions can — under certain conditions —
improve efficiency when market failures lead to suboptimal social welfare outcomes, and
improve equity when market allocations lead to outcomes perceived to be unfair. 23 The rationale
for government involvement in the health sector stems from some of these same considerations.
Jack (1999), for example, summarizes arguments for the role of government interventions based
on the “merit good” nature of health, with the perspective that health outcomes and consumption
of medical services ought to be related to some concept of need and not to one’s ability to pay, as
well as the presence of three broad forms of market failure prominent in the sector: (a)
externalities; (b) the public benefit of certain health interventions; and (c) large information
asymmetries in the sector. 24

In addition to economic theory arguments, the human rights perspective is often used to justify
public financing for health from a normative perspective. This perspective underlies recent
policy commitments to UHC in many countries. The constitutions of many countries guarantee
access to health or to health care services to all their citizens. This is often taken to imply that

20. Atim et al. 2008.
21 More nuanced justifications for government interventions — for ensuring property rights, enforcing contracts, addressing
market failures related to externalities and information asymmetries, and enhancing equity, for instance — have been emphasized
as well, but these can be subsumed under broader categories of normative government functions and responsibilities. For more
discussion, see World Bank 1997.
22. Gruber 2011.
23. Ibid.
24. Jack 1999.
                                                             10
governments have the legal imperative to ensure that the constitutionally mandated right to
health is realized for all by ensuring adequate public resources are available.

Unfortunately, the same economic theories that justify public financing of health also apply to
government interventions in other sectors such as defense, education, food, housing, water,
sanitation, and infrastructure. Indeed, theories justify military expenditures on the grounds that
national defense is a public good and cannot be provided privately; also, that it is nonrivalrous
(that is, use by one does not reduce use by others) and nonexcludable (that is, consumption
cannot be restricted to certain subpopulation groups), making it impossible to provide and
consume privately. The education sector is another example. While education, unlike national
defense, is largely a private good, theoretical arguments underpinning public financing for
education are strong and relate to the presence of large human capital and productivity-
enhancing externalities that can lead to social benefits not taken into account by individuals
when making choices. The normative human rights perspective also does not imply that the
health sector is by any means exceptional in this regard: other sectors such as food, housing, and
education can and do also make plausible cases for public financing from a human rights angle.

Given competing and equally meritorious priorities across many sectors, how much should total
government expenditure be in an economy and how should public resources be allocated across
sectors? Again, mainstream public finance theory argues for public expenditure levels to increase
as long as social benefits from additional expenditures exceed the cost of raising revenues for
financing the additional outlays. With regard to allocations across sectors, the implications are
that public resources should be utilized up to the point where the marginal benefit of an
additional dollar of spending is equalized across sectors. 25 The operational implications of this
are not easy to derive given the difficulties of estimating the costs and social benefits of public
expenditure. Nevertheless, this implies that — to merit reprioritization — the health sector would
need to demonstrate that the social benefits of additional public spending outlays exceed the
costs of financing this increase in spending, both in terms of the additional costs of raising
revenues and also in terms of foregone public spending in other sectors (something that
ministries of health are often not able to articulate persuasively to ministries of finance and
planning).
                   POSITIVISTIC THEORIES ON GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURES

Unlike the normative perspective, the positivistic approach to understanding government
behavior involves theories that describe “…why existing policies are pursued and … which
policies will be pursued in the future.” 26 This approach helps to address the substantial
disconnect between a theoretically ideal set of policies and what is actually implemented in
practice. Under the positivistic perspective, the above-mentioned reference to Wagner’s Law is
one example of an early theory of public expenditure. Some key positivistic perspectives on the
choice of government expenditure allocation decisions are summarized below.

Most positivistic theories of public expenditure invariably focus on political economy and
“public choice.” Ultimately, because choices about policy directions are made and implemented
by individuals, the most relevant positivistic theories on the role of government are those that
seek to explain the behavior of individuals in a political setting. Public choice theory emphasizes

25. Gillingham 2013.
26. Musgrave 1959.
                                                11
that individuals in the political arena are no different than people in any other market and are
guided by their own self-interests. “Voters ‘vote their pocketbooks,’ supporting candidates and
ballot propositions they think will make them personally better off; bureaucrats strive to advance
their own careers; and politicians seek election or reelection to office.” 27 From this, one critical
conclusion of public choice theory becomes apparent: it is the institutions and the rules
associated with them that determine the nature of the incentives and constraints facing policy
makers. 28 Whereas public finance argues for government interventions when market failures
exist, positivistic theories of public choice help us understand government failure in terms of the
inability or unwillingness of governments to act primarily in the interest of their citizens. 29

Applied to reprioritization in health, public choice theory suggests that bureaucrats and those in
power support increases in government health spending when doing so advances their careers
and/or enables them to stay in power. In a democratic setting, public choice theory predicts that a
party’s policy choices can be seen as influenced (indirectly) by voting behavior. 30 The point is
not that public policies are “…made through a voting mechanism but [that] choice procedures
mirror some voting mechanism.” 31 This mechanism could be via preferences of the median
voter; however, the real world applicability of the median voter theorem in understanding
government allocation choices is limited. 32 Democracies are not perfect and voters lack full
information, two prominent reasons that make it easy to see why in some low-income countries,
even when the median voter is poor and may need public support to access health care,
government allocations may not necessarily favor health and — even if they do — are not pro-
poor in their benefit incidence. Regardless of the acceptability of the median voter theorem, there
is general consensus that in a democracy, the electoral system can play an important role in
determining how governments behave and, more specifically, about the size of the health sector.
In addition, interest groups and institutions can and do play important roles. 33

The preceding discussion focuses heavily on theories relevant to democratic governments.
However, health, education, and other policies are implemented in non-democracies — often
with successful outcomes — and there is unequal participation even within the category of
countries that are technically democratic. 34 The point of departure for autocratic regimes is
whom the leader has an incentive to be responsive to and what type of goods that leader is
motivated to provide. Autocrats can maintain favor by providing the “winning coalition” — a
small group of individuals whose support is required to keep the incumbent in office — with
private goods. 35

In summary, from the perspective of reprioritization, positivistic theories of public resource
allocations generally imply that demonstrations of social welfare–enhancing aspects of additional
government health spending will not necessarily be effective in increasing allocations to health.
Enhancing democratization, improving citizen information, and increasing government

27. Ibid.
28. Touhy and Glied 2011.
29. Gruber 2011.
30. Roberts 1977.
31. Ibid.
32. Meltzer and Richard 1981.
33. Touhy and Glied 2011.
34. Dixit 2009.
35. Plümper and Martin 2003.
                                                 12
accountability may be more effective strategies to ensure that health is accorded the priority it
merits from a public choice perspective. In addition, health sector analyses would need to take
into account country-specific political economy considerations in assessing government
allocations to the health sector from a fiscal space perspective.


      V.       REPRIORITIZING HEALTH: CROSS-COUNTRY AND CASE
                             STUDY EVIDENCE
This section summarizes cross-country and country-specific case studies on the determinants of
the government share of expenditures allocated to the health sector. Overall, empirical evidence
related to the issue of health prioritization in developing countries is sparse and, in some cases,
focuses on government health spending as a share of GDP and not as a share of total expenditure,
obfuscating the link to the issue of prioritization per se.

                                          CROSS-COUNTRY EVIDENCE

One key determinant in cross-country empirical studies focusing on health’s share of government
expenditure is the level of democratization of a country. On average — likely a result of some of
the factors discussed in the previous section — democratic societies and those with higher
degrees of political liberty do tend to devote a larger share of government expenditure and GDP
to health even after controlling for confounding factors. 36, 37, 38

In keeping with the theme of public choice issues as determinants of government allocations, the
other variable to receive attention in empirical studies has been corruption. Most empirical
evidence concludes that higher corruption levels are generally inimical to government allocations
for health and favor spending on defense and energy at the expense of health, likely because of
the higher possibilities of rent-seeking of the generally larger scale of contractual procurement
amounts in the former sectors. 39, 40, 41, 42

The other prominent factor influencing government budgetary allocations for health, especially
in low-income countries, is donor assistance. Development assistance for health (DAH), either
on-budget or off-budget, can be fungible and may lead to unexpected shifts in government own-
sourced revenue priorities, although the precise effect of the aid depends both on the composition
of the aid itself and how government chooses to react to aid flow. 43,44 More broadly, there are
mixed results in the literature on the fungibility of foreign aid. 45, 46

36. Ross 2006.
37. Baqir 2002.
38. Habibi 1994. The level of political liberty is measured by Gastil’s index of political rights.
39. Mauro 1997.
40. The author uses indexes of corruption from two resources: International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) and Business
International (BI). The ICRG data is available for more than a hundred countries for 1982 and 1995. The BI data covers 67
countries between 1980 and 1983. The author’s corruption index is the simple average of the ICRG and BI indexes.
41. Delavallade 2006.
42. Gupta, De Mello, and Sharan 2001.
43. World Bank 1998.
44. Lu et al. 2010.
45. Feyzioglu, Swaroop, and Zhu 1998.
46. Devarajan, Rajkumar, and Swaroop 1999.
                                                          13
Though some of the empirical literature on government spending on health has looked at external
aid inflows, it is worth noting that a considerable portion of foreign aid is tied to loans.
Therefore, isolating the debt impact is important. One study finds that the debt-service burden
shifts public spending away from health but that increases in external aid and the degree of
constraints on the executive government lead to higher government spending on health as share
of budget. 47 However, the positive impact of these two variables is not large enough to
counteract the negative effect of the debt-service burden on public health spending. The study
also implies that countries in sub-Saharan Africa would have spent even less on health without
debt rescheduling.

Other determinants of government allocations to health include the extent of ethnolinguistic
heterogeneity in a country and female political representation. Empirical research on the impact
of heterogeneity on government spending on public goods suggests that governments generally
tend to spend less on health in ethnolinguistically diverse societies, controlling for the level of
development, education, availability of public resources, and corruption. A study examining the
relationship between female political representation and government spending on health as share
of GDP in low-, middle-, and high-income countries finds that there is a positive association
between female political representation and government spending on health as share of GDP,
although not a strong one. 48, 49

To summarize, empirical work on determinants of government health prioritization has been
sparse to date: cross-country econometric analyses suggest that factors such as democratization,
lower levels of corruption, ethnolinguistic homogeneity, and more women in public office are
correlated with higher shares of public spending on health. However, the numbers of studies on
this issue are few, and some of the findings are not robust and are sensitive to model
specification. This is an area that could benefit from further research and analysis.

                  COUNTRY-SPECIFIC EXPERIENCES WITH REPRIORITIZATION

This subsection summarizes experiences of selected country cases wherein attempts to
reprioritize health in government spending have been made in recent years, some more
successfully than others. In general, three sets of reprioritization efforts are evident (although
these groupings are not mutually exclusive): (i) benchmarking of expenditures: this group
includes countries that have focused on setting broad benchmarks for the share of health in
government spending in an attempt to realize fiscal space for health; (ii) earmarking of revenues:
countries that have earmarked certain taxes and other revenues for financing a larger share of
health in government spending; or (iii) focus on outcomes: countries where the focus has been on
improving health system outcomes, and the implications for the share of government health
spending have been derived from this focus on outcomes. Countries in the latter two groups have
generally been more successful in reprioritizing health than those in the former group.

India is a recent and prominent example of a country that has tried to benchmark expenditures to
reprioritize health. The prime minister pledged to increase public spending on health to 2 to 3

47. Fosu 2008.
48. Lie 2010.
49. Kujis 2000.
                                                14
percent of GDP by 2012, up from about 0.9 percent of GDP in 2005. The pledge followed the
2004 election of a Congress Party–led alliance that initiated several social protection schemes
aimed at benefiting the rural poor, taking advantage of an increase in overall fiscal space
resulting from a period of sustained and robust economic growth. Although public financing for
health has increased in the country in recent years, the 2 to 3 percent of GDP target has proved
impossible to realize largely because of India’s decentralized federal structure, with health being
a “state subject,” and aggregate state-level spending averaging about 75 percent of general (that
is, central and state combined) public spending on health. For India to realize this target, state
health spending would have had to increase by 22 to 38 percent per year since 2005, virtually an
impossible scenario. 50 Since 1990, there was a steady increase in central health spending as a
share of GDP, but this was offset by declining state allocations to health for most of the time
period 1990 to 2010 (Figure 1.5). The decline in state-level allocations to health can be traced back
to the fiscal crisis that impacted the states in the 1990s. An upward trend in state health spending
began only around 2008. 51 The country remains far from attaining the 2 to 3 percent of GDP
target for public spending on health: in 2011, India spent only 1.2 percent of its GDP on health.



       Figure 1.5 Trends and Income Elasticity of Government Health Expenditure in India, 1990–2009

                                            Government health expenditure                                                                                 Income elasticity
                                                    1990-2009                                                                                                1990-2009
                          1.2




                                                                                                                               50000




                                                    Total
                                                                                     Government health expenditure (Rs crores)




                                                                                                                                            Total elasticity=0.96
                          .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                              15000




                                                                                                                                                                                               2008
                                                   States                                                                                                                                 .
                  Share of GDP (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                        2006
                                                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                                                                 2004
                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                               5000




                                                                                                                                                                         . 2000
                                                                                                                                       States elasticity=0.87 1998
                                                                                                                                                                   .
                          .3




                                                   Central                                                                                                       1996
                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                          1994          Center elasticity=1.15
                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                   1992
                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                            1990
                                                                                                              1000
                          0




                                     1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011                                          500000              1000000    2500000                             7500000
                                                         Year                                                                                        GDP (Rs crores)
                                      Source: RBI; MOF                                                                                  Source: RBI; MOF; W EO




India’s experience of reaching health-spending targets is not unique: Generally, countries
everywhere have not realized benchmarking pledges. Other examples include Lao PDR, which
plans to increase its spending on health to 9 percent of the budget (it is unclear whether the target
was for total or recurrent expenditures, and whether it included externally financed government
health spending) to improve access to care and reduce OOP payments. Also, Bhutan is
considering whether to earmark 9 percent of government revenues for health. As mentioned

50. Berman et al. 2010.
51. La Forgia and Nagpal 2012.
                                                                                15
earlier, the Abuja Declaration called for sub-Saharan African countries to allocate 15 percent of
government spending for health, and WHO’s EMRO region countries have agreed to earmark 8
percent. In most countries, calls for benchmarking health’s share of government expenditures (or
of revenues or GDP) have been largely aspirational.

Reprioritization efforts have been more successful in some countries that have legally mandated
how changes in GDP or government spending will affect the amounts allocated to health. In
Vietnam, for example, in 2008 the National Assembly increased government allocations by
passing Resolution no. 18/2008/NQ-QH12. According to article 2, the government would
commit “…to increase the share of annual state budget allocations for health, and to ensure that
the growth rate of spending on health is greater than the growth rate of overall spending through
the state budget.” 52 As a result, the government share appears to have increased. 53 In Brazil,
since the 1996 health financing reforms, states and municipalities have been responsible for
managing and financing health care. 54 In 2000, a constitutional amendment was passed which
committed budget resources at federal, state, and municipal levels. At the federal level, the
amendment required a 5 percent increase in aggregate spending in 2000 in real terms, using the
1999 budget as a basis. This spending was to be adjusted according to the growth rate of nominal
GDP from 2001 to 2004. Also, states and municipalities were obliged to earmark 12 percent and
15 percent of their revenues, respectively, to provide health care; and, the share of government
spending on health increased from 4 percent in 2000 to 9 percent in 2011. 55 In fact, total health
spending has increased over time (to about 8.8 percent of GDP in 2011), mostly due to the rise in
public expenditures. This earmarking of revenues appears to have (a) increased the share of state
and municipal governments in health financing; (b) provided incentives to decentralize primary
care according to federal guidelines; and (c) reduced inequalities between municipalities in per
capita health expenditures.

Some countries also earmark specific taxes (that is, other than dedicated payroll tax earmarked
for social health insurance), such as earmarked taxes on cigarettes and alcohol consumption. (See
box 1.2 for a simple typology and some discussion related to earmarking.) For example, Ghana
earmarks part of its VAT revenues for its national health insurance fund. A study by WHO
indicates that more than 20 countries earmark tobacco tax revenue specifically for health. 56
Several countries earmark all of their tobacco tax revenue for health while other countries, such
as Mongolia, Thailand, Qatar, and Bulgaria, earmark a small percentage (that is, 1 or 2 percent)
of the total tobacco tax revenue to health. Still other countries, such as Tuvalu, earmark a fixed
amount (that is, two cents) per cigarette for the health sector. Earmarking taxes on alcohol seems
to be less common, although some countries (for example, Thailand) do have policies that
allocate a portion of tax revenue from alcohol to health. After substantial opposition from
interest groups, the Philippines Senate recently passed a Sin Tax Reform Law, which will
earmark a portion of tax revenues for UHC and district and regional hospitals. 57




52. Grover 2011.
53. Van Tien et al. 2011.
54. WHO 2010a.
55. OECD 2005.
56. WHO 2009.
57. Tan 2012.
                                               16
Box 1.2 On Earmarking

Earmarking is a contentious issue. The basic idea behind it is using specific taxes for specific purposes,
as defined by law. However, some define it more broadly. Before discussing its pros and cons, it is
useful to look at the different forms as detailed by McCleary (1991), summarized in table 1B.2. 58 Type
A includes “strong” earmarking, where a specific tax is levied and revenues are used for distinct
purposes, including for the benefit of those paying the tax. Examples would include gasoline taxes to
pay for highway investments and social health insurance premiums, and those on tobacco for health
promotion activities.

                                      TABLE 1B.2 VARIETIES OF EARMARKING

           Type Revenue                    Expenditure          Examples

           A        Specific tax or        Specific end use     Social health insurance premium
                    fee                                         to provide specified coverage.

           B        Specific tax or        Broad end use        ”Sin” taxes used to finance
                    fee                                         government health spending.
           C        General tax            Specific end use     Fixed percentage of total revenue
                                                                devoted to specific programs (e.g.,
                                                                for health).
          Source: McCleary 1991.

 Types B and C represent weaker forms of earmarking, as the connection between those paying the
 taxes and those receiving benefits is not direct. Type B includes taxes used for general purposes, for
 example, petroleum taxes used for general development. Type C general taxes earmark a part for a
 desired purpose, for example, if a government commits to spending a fixed percent of its revenue on
 health. Type D is the weakest form, with general taxes funding general uses.
Source: Authors

Earmarked allocations (of the type A, B, or C in box 1.2) for the health sector are generally
supported by political rather than economic arguments except in the case of sin taxes, which are
designed to offset negative externalities (for example, taxes on cigarettes to curb smoking).
Earmarking can potentially protect certain forms of spending from political and macroeconomic
vicissitudes. For example, if health spending is low or unstable, earmarking may be seen as a
way to insulate health spending from other competing publicly funded activities. From an
economic perspective, however, earmarking — either on spending or on revenues — is often
viewed as an imposition of an unnecessary constraint on fiscal policy making, one that generally
reduces a government’s macroeconomic policy flexibility and allocative efficiency. In theoretical
terms, earmarking may be justified on the basis of the benefit principle in that those who are
taxed get benefits from the revenue raised. Earmarking may also be favored if there is evidence
of willingness to pay taxes if they are to be used for a well-defined purpose. However, in many
instances, earmarking may lead to over- or under-funding of targeted activities. In addition, there
are numerous examples of situations where earmarked funds have been diverted to other
activities, especially in poor governance settings. 59 Earmarking certain sources of revenues may

58. McCleary 1991.
59. Prakongsai, Patcharanarumol, and Tangcharoensathien 2008.
                                                           17
also often be ineffective in being truly additional. For instance, mandating income-related
contributions for social insurance have been ineffective in many countries with large levels of
informality such as Indonesia, Philippines, and Vietnam. Hence, the implications of earmarking
for reprioritizing health’s share of government spending are not always clear-cut and will vary
significantly by the nature and magnitude of the earmarks and by country context.

Over the past decade, Mexico and Thailand have both witnessed substantial increases in the
share of government expenditure allocated to health. Triggered by positive political events,
reforms in both countries expanded the extent of coverage and reprioritized health issues by
focusing on outcomes. These two demonstrate that a combination of factors can be effective —
such as where political will provided the impetus to reprioritize spending and to implement
policies focused on results (see box 1.3).

 Box 1.3 Reprioritizing Health in Mexico and Thailand
 Mexico
 In 2003, Mexico embarked on a major health insurance reform process. The primary goal of the reform
 was to achieve universal health coverage by 2010. By the end of 2011, almost 98 percent of Mexico’s
 citizens were registered with one of the country’s three health insurance schemes: Instituto Mexicano del
 Seguro Social (IMSS), which covers salaried employees in the private sector; Instituto de Seguridad y
 Servicios Sociales de los Trabajadores del Estado (ISSSTE) for salaried workers in the public sector;
 and the Seguro Popular scheme for nonsalaried workers, self-employed, and families outside the labor
 force. 60
 The financial architecture of each insurance scheme is similar, and contributions come from three
 sources: the federal government (social contribution), coresponsible contributor, and the beneficiary.
 The social contribution of the federal government is funded by general taxes, adjusted periodically for
 inflation, and is equal for all Mexican families.61 The second element of financing comes from co-
 responsible contributors (private employers for IMSS, public employers for ISSSTE, and a solidarity
 contribution split between the state and federal governments for Seguro Popular). The last source of
 funding is derived from beneficiary contributions. Contributions from employees in the formal sector for
 IMSS and ISSSTE are deducted from payroll. For Seguro Popular, family contributions are based on a
 family’s capacity to pay, with an upper limit of 5 percent of disposable income. Families in the bottom
 two deciles are exempt from contributions.
 In part due to the mobilization of resources for implementation of health reform, the Ministry of
 Health’s budget increased 142 percent between 2000 and 2010, while the IMSS and ISSSTE budgets
 increased 42 percent and 103 percent, respectively, in real terms. Some funding also comes from
 earmarked taxes on cigarette sales.
 On October 26, 2010, the Mexican Congress approved a tax increase of seven pesos on all tobacco
 products. This new law increased the price of a pack of 20 cigarettes by 37 percent. 62 Taxes are now 69
 percent of the retail price. 63 Prior to the passage of this tax legislation, cigarette taxes in Mexico, and in
 Latin America more generally, were low compared to other regions of the world. In 2006 in Mexico,




60. Knaul, González-Pier, and Gómez-Dantés 2012.
61. Julio, González-Pier, and Gómez-Dantés 2006.
62. International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease 2011.
63. Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 2011.
                                                            18
 taxes represented 59 percent of the total price of cigarettes compared to 75 percent or more in many
 high-income countries. 64 Revenues from the tobacco tax have increased 39 percent since the
 promulgation of the law and are expected to be used to treat tobacco-related illnesses. 65

 Thailand
 In 2002, Thailand achieved universal health coverage. All citizens of Thailand are covered by one of the
 three health insurance schemes: the Social Security Scheme (SSS), which covers private sector
 employees (excluding their dependents); Civil Servant Medical Benefit Scheme (CSMBS), for
 government employees and dependents (parents, spouse, and two children under 20); and the Universal
 Coverage Scheme (UCS) for the rest of the population that is not covered by SSS and CSMBS. 66 The
 UCS reform was the most important factor in achieving universal health coverage. 67
 The UCS scheme covers 75 percent of the population. This scheme is financed by general taxes and
 covers a comprehensive benefit package that includes clinical prevention and health promotion. Between
 2002 and 2011, the UCS budget rose from $35.4 per capita to $78.8, which constituted a 71 percent real
 increase driven by increasing labor and material costs and increased utilization of services. Between
 2002 and 2008, the general government expenditure on health increased 76 percent, from $2.7 billion to
 $7.4 billion. 68 The SSS, which covers 16 percent of the population, relies on payroll taxes with 1.5
 percent of the salary equally contributed by the employee, employer, and government. Its per capita
 expenditure, at $71, is lower than with the USC. The CSMBS covers 9 percent of the population and
 spends $367 per beneficiary. The higher cost is due to the slightly higher level of coverage and the fact
 that CSMBS members have a free choice of public providers with no registration necessary. 69
 Financial commitment to the UCS, increased utilization of health services, and production led to a
 substantial increase in government health expenditure between 2001 and 2010. Over this time period,
 general government expenditure on health as percentage of the general government budget increased
 from 9.0 to 12.7 percent. 70 In addition, general government expenditure on health as percentage of the
 total health expenditure increased from 56.4 percent in 2001 to 63.5 percent in 2002 and reached 75.0
 percent in 2010. Within the first year of launching UCS, general government expenditure on health
 increased by 42 percent to US$2.7 billion in 2002 from US$1.9 billion in 2001. This upward trend has
 continued since then, and government spending on health reached US$7.4 billion in 2008, reflecting a 76
 percent increase in real terms. In addition, the UCS budget increased 71 percent in real terms between
 2002 and 2011. Even in 2009 when GDP of the country decreased by 2 percent, government expenditure
 on health were protected through spending cuts made by all ministries.
 Thailand has been earmarking tobacco and alcohol taxes since the government in 2001 passed the Health
 Promotion Foundation Act and established the ThaiHealth Promotion Foundation. Each year, 2 percent
 of the total national tax revenues from tobacco and alcohol products are earmarked to finance
 ThaiHealth. This amount is equivalent to US$35 million per year. 71
 Thailand has experienced considerable political instability over the last decade. Between 2001 and 2011
 there were seven different government, five general elections, as well as a coup d’etat in 2006. Between
 2001 and 2010, the minister of health changed eight times, and there were six different Ministry of

64. Jimenez-Ruiz 2008.
65. Ibid.
66. McManus 2012.
67. Ibid.
68. Ibid.
69. Ibid.
70. WHO, Global Health Expenditure Database
http://apps.who.int/nha/database/StandardReport.aspx?ID=REP_WEB_MINI_TEMPLATE_WEB_VERSION&COUNTRYKEY
=84668. Accessed November 26, 2012.
71. WHO 2010b.
                                                   19
 Public Health (MOPH) permanent secretaries. Despite political instability in the country, the UHC
 received considerable support from all political parties since the insurance scheme was highly popular
 among the people.
Source: Authors

One additional constraint to reprioritization that deserves note is the perception, especially
among ministries of finance and planning, that the health sector is inefficient and unproductive.
From a practical perspective, health ministries could do more to develop evidence-based cost-
effective expenditure and implementation plans, ensuring that resource allocations are fully and
effectively absorbed, and providing evidence of impact of interventions on health outputs and
outcomes. 72 This can also be helpful in identifying unproductive or pro-rich spending in other
sectors. For example, in a country such as Indonesia, health gets a small percentage of central
government resources despite policy commitments to attaining UHC in the country by 2019: in
2011, health’s share of the central government budget was only 1.6 percent, compared to 18.2
percent for fuel subsidies, which disproportionately benefit the better-off segments of
Indonesia’s population (Figure 1.6). 73




72. Powell-Jackson, Hanson, and McIntyre 2012.
73. Bi and Tandon 2013.
                                                  20
   Figure 1.6 Share of Central Government Budget to Health, Education, and Fuel Subsidies, 1995–2011


                                                                                    Share of cenral government budget
                                                                                                1995-2010




                                                      100
                         % of central government budget
                                                80
                                                                                                                                                                  Other




                                   40     60


                                                                                                                                                                  Fuel subsidies
                           20




                                                                                                                                                                  Education

                                                                                                                                                                  Health
                                          0

                                                             95

                                                                   96

                                                                         97

                                                                               98

                                                                                     99

                                                                                           00

                                                                                                 01

                                                                                                       02

                                                                                                             03

                                                                                                                   04

                                                                                                                         05

                                                                                                                               06

                                                                                                                                     07

                                                                                                                                           08

                                                                                                                                                 09

                                                                                                                                                       10

                                                                                                                                                             11
                                                            19

                                                                  19

                                                                        19

                                                                              19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                          20

                                                                                                20

                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                            20
                                              Source: MOF (various years)




                       VI.                                   SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The share of overall government expenditure devoted to health is often used as a metric to gauge
the extent to which health is prioritized by governments. While there is a clear income gradient
in health’s share of government expenditure across countries, significant variations persist even
after controlling for income. This paper has provided a global overview of health’s share of
government spending and summarized some of the key theoretical and empirical perspectives on
allocation of public resources to health vis-à-vis other sectors. We have focused attention on this
issue from the perspective of reprioritizing government spending on health, one of the modalities
for realizing fiscal space for health.

Although a government’s spending on health is only one contributing factor to health outcomes
in any country, understanding why some governments allocate a higher share of their resources
to health than others is important and merited for several reasons. First, additional public
financing for health is a prominent policy issue for many low- and middle-income countries
seeking to improve the levels and distribution of health-related MDGs, reduce OOP spending for
health, and attain and sustain UHC. Second, government spending on health is ultimately a
reflection of a decision to prioritize health vis-à-vis government resources, and thus serves as an
intermediate link between a country’s overall macrofiscal environment and the health sector.

Financing is just one of many ways governments can intervene in the economy. From a
normative economic theory perspective, the rationale for government intervention in the health
sector is based on “market failure” and equity-related arguments. Government interventions can
— under certain conditions and in principle — be used to improve efficiency when market
failures lead to suboptimal social welfare outcomes, and to improve equity when market
allocations lead to outcomes that are perceived to be unfair. Three broad forms of market failure
prominent in the health sector are frequently cited as the justification for government
intervention in health, specifically: (i) the presence of externalities; (ii) the public good nature of
certain health interventions; and (iii) the presence of extensive information asymmetries.

                                                                                                       21
Unfortunate from the perspective of reprioritizing health, the same economic theory rationales
used to justify public financing for health also apply to government interventions in many other
sectors including defense, education, food, housing, water, sanitation, and infrastructure, to name
a few. In terms of allocating resources across sectors, public finance theory argues that, given the
real costs to society of raising revenues, the implications for public expenditure for any sector
(including health) are that benefits from such aggregate expenditures should exceed aggregate
costs of raising revenues, and that sectors should compete for allocation of scarce resources up to
the point whereby the marginal benefit of an additional dollar of spending is equal across sectors.

There are limits to using the normative approach to understand the discrepancies in health
expenditure between governments: with its focus on the ideal or optimal role for policy
intervention by a benign government that intends to maximize social welfare, the normative
approach ignores the substantial disconnect between a theoretically ideal set of policies and
achievable actions. Positivistic perspectives on the role of government help clarify how
governments make choices, focusing heavily on the behavior of voters (in democracies), on
private influences on public policy choices, and on inherent individual incentives of politicians
and bureaucrats. Public choice theory argues that elected officials, bureaucrats, and voters are no
different than people in any other market and are guided by their own self-interests. Applied to
health, public choice theory predicts that bureaucrats and those in power will support increases in
government spending on health when doing so would advance their careers or enable them to
stay in power. In a democratic setting, voters will support candidates who call for increased
government spending on health if and when voters perceive they will be better-off as a result.
Theory argues that the median voter will be the decisive voter in a functional democracy.

From the perspective of reprioritization, normative theory implies that the health sector would
need to demonstrate that social benefits of additional public spending outlays exceed the costs of
financing this increase in spending, both in terms of the additional costs of raising revenues and
also in terms of foregone public spending in other sectors. On the other hand, positivistic theories
of public resource allocations generally imply that demonstrations of social welfare–enhancing
aspects of additional government health spending will not necessarily be effective in increasing
allocations to health. Instead, enhancing democratization, improving citizen information,
increasing government accountability, and reducing corruption may be more effective strategies
to ensuring that health is accorded the priority it merits from a public choice perspective.

Empirical evidence on factors associated with government preferences for public financing of the
health sector is generally scarce. In the limited empirical literature that exists, a range of
economic and noneconomic factors has been found to influence government allocations for
health. Prominent among these are democracy, corruption, foreign aid, ethnolinguistic
heterogeneity, and female representation in the polity of a country. On average, cross-country
analyses suggest that democratic societies tend to devote a larger share of their public resources
to health even after controlling for confounding factors, while more corrupt societies do the
opposite. The effect of donor assistance for health on government own-sourced revenue priorities
is a topic of great interest among donors and policymakers alike. The evidence suggests that the
effect is mixed: in some countries, DAH is fungible and in others it is not. Where foreign aid is
tied to loans, the evidence suggests that the debt-service burden shifts public spending away
from health. Research on the impact of heterogeneity on government spending on public goods
suggests that governments generally tend to spend less on health in ethnically diverse societies.
                                                22
There are few empirical studies on the issue of health prioritization; furthermore, some findings
are not robust and are sensitive to model specification. This is an area that could benefit from
further research and analysis.

Evidence from case studies on reprioritization suggests that country-specific political economy
considerations are key and that results-focused reform efforts — in particular efforts to explicitly
expand the breadth and depth of health coverage as opposed to efforts focused only on
government budgetary targets — are more likely to result in sustained and politically feasible
prioritization of health from a fiscal space perspective.




                                                23
                                     REFERENCES

African Union. 2001. “Abuja Declaration on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Other Related
Infectious Diseases, African Summit on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Other Related Infectious
Diseases, 24-27 April: Abuja, Nigeria.” http://www.un.org/ga/aids/pdf/abuja_declaration.pdf.
Accessed December 4, 2012.

Atim, C., L. Fleisher, L. Hatt, S. Musau, and A. Arur. 2008. Health Financing in Africa Today:
Challenges and Opportunities, Washington, DC: Africa’s Health in 2010, Academy for
Educational Development, and Bethesda, MD: Health Systems 20/20 Project, Abt Associates
Inc.

Baqir, R. 2002. “Social Sector Spending in a Panel of Countries,” IMF Working Paper,
Washington, DC.

Berman, P., R. Ahuja, A. Tandon, S. Sparkes, and P Gottret. 2010. “Government Health
Financing in India: Challenges in Achieving Ambitious Goals,” HNP Discussion Paper,
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Bi, X., and A. Tandon. 2013. “Fiscal Space for Jamkesmas: Implications for Universal Health
Coverage in Indonesia,” Mimeo, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Delavallade, C. 2006. “Corruption and Distribution of Public Spending in Developing
Countries,” Journal of Economics and Finance, 30(2): 222-239.

Devarajan, S., A.S. Rajkumar, and V. Swaroop. 1999. “What Does Aid to Africa Finance?”
Policy Research Working Paper, 2092, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Dixit, A. 2009. “Democracy, Autocracy, and Bureaucracy,” Draft for Discussion. November 27,
2009.

Feyzioglu, T., V. Swaroop, and M. Zhu. 1998. “A Panel Data Analysis of the Fungibility of
Foreign Aid,” World Bank Economic Review, 12(1): 29-58.

Fleisher, L., A. Leive, and G. Schieber. 2013. “Taking Stock of Fiscal Health: Recent Trends in
Global, Regional, and Country-Level Health Financing,” Mimeo, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Fosu, A. K. 2008. “Implications of the External Debt-Servicing Constraint for Public Health
Expenditure in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Oxford Development Studies, 36(4): 363-377.

Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. 2011. Tobacco Taxes Success Story, Geneva.
http://www.fctc.org/images/stories/success_Mexico_en.pdf. Accessed December 4, 2012.

Gillingham, R. 2013. “Primer on Fiscal Policy for Health Policy Makers,” Mimeo, Washington,
DC: World Bank.


                                              24
Gottret, P. and G. Schieber. 2006. Health Financing Revisited, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Gruber, J. 2011. Public Finance and Public Policy, New York: Worth Publishers.

Grover, A. 2011. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right of Everyone to the Enjoyment of
the Highest Attainable Standard of Physical and Mental Health, Geneva: Human Rights Council.

Guerard, Y., M Weiner, C. Rokx, G. Schieber, P. Harimurti, and A. Tandon. 2011. “Acturial
Costing of Universal Health Coverage in Indonesia: Options and Preliminary Results,” HNP
Discussion Paper, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Gupta, S., L. De Mello, and R. Sharan. 2001. “Corruption and Military Spending,” European
Journal of Political Economy, 17(4): 749-777.

Haacker, M. 2010. “Macroeconomic Constraints to Health Financing: A Guide for the
Perplexed,” World Health Report Background Paper No. 49, Geneva: World Health
Organization.

Habibi, N. 1994. “Budgetary Policy and Political Liberty: A Cross-Sectional Analysis,” World
Development, 22(4): 579-86.

Heller, P. 2006. “The Prospect of Creating ‘Fiscal Space’ for the Health Sector,” Health Policy
and Planning, 21(2): 75-79.

International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease. 2011. Mexico Approves Very
Significant Increase in Tobacco Tax,
http://www.theunion.org/Regions/LatinAmerica/index.php/Union-Region-News/Mexico-
approves-very-significant-increase-in-tobacco-tax.html. Accessed December 4, 2012.

Jack, W. 1999. Principles of Health Economics for Developing Countries, Washington, DC:
World Bank.

Jimenez-Ruiz, J. A. 2008. “The Impact of Taxation on Tobacco Consumption in Mexico,”
Tobacco Control, (17): 105-110.

Julio, F., E González-Pier, and O. Gómez-Dantés. 2006. “Comprehensive Reform to Improve
Health System Performance in Mexico,” Lancet, 368(9546): 1524-1534.

Knaul, F. M, E González-Pier, and O Gómez-Dantés. 2012. “The Quest for Universal Health
Coverage: Achieving Social Protection for All in Mexico,” Lancet, 380(9849): 1259-1279.

Kujis, L. 2000. “The Impact of Ethnic Heterogeneity on the Quantity and Quality of Public
Spending,” IMF Working Paper, Washington, DC.

La Forgia, G. and S Nagpal. 2012. Government-Sponsored Health Insurance in India: Are You
Covered?, World Bank, Washington, DC.


                                              25
Lie, G. 2010. “Does Government Health Spending Increase When Women Decide?” Master
Thesis. Department of Health Management and Health Economics, Faculty of Medicine
University of Oslo. https://www.duo.uio.no/handle/123456789/30228. Accessed November 27,
2012.

Liang, L., and Mirelman, A. 2012. “An Assessment of Sociopolitical Determinants, International
Aid and Government Health Expenditure: A Cross-Country Analysis over 1995–2010,” HNP
Discussion Paper, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Lu, C., M. T. Schneider, P. Gubbins, and K. Leach-Kemon. 2010. “Public Financing of Health in
Developing Countries: a Cross-national Systematic Analysis,” The Lancet, 375(9723): 1375-
1387.

Mauro, P. 1997 “The Effects of Corruption on Growth, Investment, and Government
Expenditure: Across-country Analysis,” in Corruption and the World Economy, edited by K.A.
Elliot.

McCleary, W. 1991. “The Earmarking of Government Revenue: A Review of Some World Bank
Experience,” World Bank Research Observer, VI (1991): 81-104.

McManus, J. 2012. Thailand’s Universal Coverage Scheme: Achievements and Challenges,
http://www.gurn.info/en/topics/health-politics-and-trade-unions/development-and-health-
determinants/development-and-health-determinants/thailand2019s-universal-coverage-scheme-
achievements-and-challenges. Accessed November 26,2012.

Meltzer, R. and A. Richard. 1981. "A rational theory on the size of government," Journal of
Political Economy, 89: 914-927.

Musgrave, R. A. 1959. Theory of Public Finance: A Study in Public Economy, New York:
McGraw-Hill.

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2005. OECD Economic Surveys
Brazil, Paris: OECD.

Plümper, T., and C. Martin. 2003. “Democracy, Government Spending, and Economic Growth:
A Political-economic Explanation of the Barro effect,” Public Choice, 117: 27-50.

Powell-Jackson, T., K. Hanson, and D. McIntyre. 2012. “Fiscal Space for Health: A Review of
the Literature.” RESYST Working Paper, London.

Prakongsai, P., W Patcharanarumol, and V Tangcharoensathien. 2008. “Can Earmarking
Mobilize and Sustain Resources to the Health Sector?” Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 86(11): 898-901.

Roberts, K. 1977). “Voting Over Income Tax Schedules,” Journal of Public Economics, 8: 329-
340.

                                             26
Ross, M. 2006. “Is Democracy Good for the Poor,” American Journal of Political Science,
50(4): 860-874.

Sachs, J (2001), Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in Health for Economic Development,
Geneva: Report of the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health.

_____. 2012. “Achieving Universal Health Coverage in Low-income Settings,” Lancet, 380:
944-947.

Savedoff, W. 2007. “What Should a Country Spend on Health Care?” Health Affairs, 26:962-
970.

Shelton, C. A. 2007. “The Size and Composition of Government Expenditure,” Journal of Public
Economics, 91: 2230-2260.

Taskforce on Innovative Health Financing for Health Systems. 2009. Working Group 1 Report:
Constraints to Scaling Up and Costs, Geneva: World Health Organization.

Tan, K. 2012. Senate Passes Sin Tax Bill Adding at least P12 per Cigarette Pack GMA News,
November 20, 2012. http://www.gmanetwork.com/news/story/283090/news/nation/senate-
passes-sin-tax-bill-adding-at-least-p12-per-cigarette-pack. Accessed November 27, 2012.

Tandon, A. 2007. “Measuring Government Inclusiveness: An Application to Health Policy,”
Asian Development Review, 24: 32-48.

Touhy, C and S. Glied. 2011. “The Political Economy of Health Care,” in Oxford Handbook of
Health Economics, edited by Sherry Glied and Peter Smith.

United Nations. 2012. The Millennium Development Goals Report 2012, New York: United
Nations.

Van Tien, T., H. T. Phuong, I. Mathauer, and B. T. K. Phuong (2011), “A Health Financing
Review of Viet Nam with a Focus on Social Health Insurance.” Geneva: World Health
Organization.         http://www.who.int/health_financing/documents/oasis_f_11-vietnam.pdf.
Accessed November 26, 2012.

World Bank. 1997. World Development Review: The State in a Changing World, Washington,
DC: World Bank, Washington, DC.

_____. 1998. Assessing Aid: What Works, What Doesn’t, and Why, World Bank, Washington,
DC.

World Health Organization. 2009. Health Financing Strategy for the Asia Pacific Region (2010-
2015), Manila: WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific.

_____. 2010c. Strategic Directions to Improve Health Care Financing in the Eastern
Mediterranean Region: Moving Towards Universal Coverage 2011–2015, Regional Committee
for the Eastern Mediterranean.

                                             27
_____. 2010a. “Brazil's March Towards Universal Coverage,” Bulletin of the World Health
Organization. http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/88/9/10-020910/en/index.html. Accessed
November 26, 2012.

_____. 2009. WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic 2009, Geneva: WHO.
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2009/9789241563918_eng_full.pdf. Accessed November
27, 2012.

_____. 2010b. The Political Economy of Tobacco Taxation, WHO Technical Manual on
Tobacco Tax Administration.
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2010/9789241563994_eng.pdf. Accessed November 26,
2012.

_____. 2012. Global Health Expenditure Database, Geneva: WHO.
http://apps.who.int/nha/database/standardreport.aspx?id=rep_web_mini_template_web_version&
countrykey=84668. Accessed November 26, 2012




                                           28
                                                      About this series...
                           This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Family
                           (HNP) of the World Bank’s Human Development Network. The papers
                           in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary and
                           unpolished results on HNP topics to encourage discussion and debate.
                           The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper
                           are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any
                           manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members
                           of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent.
                           Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take
                           into account this provisional character. For free copies of papers in this
                           series please contact the individual authors whose name appears on
                           the paper.

                           Enquiries about the series and submissions should be made directly to
                           the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Ser-
                           vice (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256, fax 202 522-3234).
                           For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




The world bank

1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC USA 20433
Telephone: 	     202 473 1000
Facsimile:	      202 477 6391
Internet:	www.worldbank.org
E-mail:	 feedback@worldbank.org	
