                                                                                                           85825



     Multi–Donor Trust Fund for Sustainable Logistics (MDTF–SL)
                   Position Note on Agro-Logistics




The Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Sustainable Logistics (MDTF-SL) commissioned a series of
short notes from recognized thought leaders to better understand burgeoning issues within the
MDTF-SL’s thematic pillars. This note explores issues within the Agro-Logistics thematic
pillar and was prepared by Prof. Jack van der Vorst and Dr. Joost Snels from Wageningen
University, The Netherlands1.

The Agro-Logistics pillar is one of three focus areas, or thematic pillars, for the MDTF-SL.
Activities falling under this pillar fall within an overall development objective strengthen food
security programs and improve the competitiveness of agricultural exports by developing
countries by sustainably reducing logistics costs, and expanding market access for rural
producers.

The MDTF-SL will pursue this development objective by financing studies, methodologies
and tools that assist governments, agricultural producers, distributors and other private agents
to increase the efficiency of supply chains, improve the traceability and profitability of "green
goods" and reduce food waste and other logistics costs.




1
    The World Bank MDTF-SL staff recognizes the valuable contribution of Patrick Labaste during the review of this paper.
 Developments and Needs for Sustainable Agro-Logistics in
                                      1
                 Developing Countries
                                      Jack G.A.J. van der Vorst & Joost Snels
                                    Wageningen University and Research Centre,
                                   Jack.vanderVorst@wur.nl, Joost.Snels@wur.nl

                                       World Bank Position Note, January 2014




The Multi–Donor Trust Fund for Sustainable Logistics (MDTF-SL) aims at promoting innovative assistance
projects that can break new grounds, test new ideas, and generate new knowledge for sustainable logistics
that can be replicated in other countries and project. In November 2013 we were asked to write a position
paper that analyses the state of affairs in Agro-Logistics. It aims to (1) review and suggest a conceptual
grounding for the MDTF–SL's activities; (2) outline the specific challenges developing countries face on
Agro-Logistics; and (3) review existing attempts or interventions to meet the identified challenges.

This position note starts with a definition for Agro-Logistics to have a mutual understanding of the concept. Section 2
presents emerging global trends and developments, which are then translated to key logistics objectives in section 3.
Next, in section 4, five international cases are presented that illustrate the needs and key bottlenecks in agro-logistics
for developing countries. Section 5 presents an overview of potential interventions to improve logistics performances,
resulting in recommendations (section 6).

1. What is Agro-Logistics?

Historically, logistics has been considered an issue deserving modest priority in each organization; it was merely
regarded as a cost component. Nowadays (especially in the developed world), logistics is seen as a value-adding
process that directly supports the primary goal of the organization, which is to be competitive in terms of a high
level of customer service, competitive price and quality, in terms of compliance with rules and regulations, in
terms of being able to satisfy extensive qualitative service and information requirements imposed by consumers
and other stakeholders of the supply chain and finally in terms of flexibility in responding to market demands.

Logistics management is defined by the Council of Supply Chain Management (SCM) Professionals as follows:
‘Logistics is that part of the supply chain process that plans, implements and controls the efficient, effective flow and
storage of goods, services and related information from the point-of-origin to the point-of-consumption in order to meet
customer requirements (Lambert et al., 1998) and satisfies the requirements imposed by other stakeholders such as the
government (new rules and regulations such as the General Food Law) and the retail community (e.g. Global Food
Safety Initiative)’. Included within this
1
  This first three sections of this paper are partly based on literal text excerpts taken from Van der Vorst et al.
(2007), Van der Vorst (2012) and Soysal et al. (2012) respectively.
definition are logistics decisions related to network design (e.g. plant site selection), sourcing, order fulfillment
(including demand forecasting), transportation management, inventory management, materials handling, and
return goods handling. In addition aspects of product development such as designing packaging variants of
products and associated product labels are also important. Key to optimal decision making is information
management, that is gathering relevant data in the chain using all kinds of technological and information systems
and distributing this data to chain participants so it can be used in business intelligence applications. In the
definition a supply chain refers to a series of (physical and decision making) activities connected by material and
information flows and associated flows of money and property rights that cross organizational boundaries (Van
der Vorst, 2000). The supply chain not only includes the manufacturer and its suppliers, but also (depending on
the logistics flows) transporters, warehouses, retailers, service organizations and consumers themselves (Chopra
and Meindl, 2012).

Agro-Logistics can be seen as a sub-discipline of Logistics. An agro-food supply chain comprises
organizations that are responsible for the production (farmers), processing (industry) and distribution
(service providers and traders) of vegetable or animal-based products. Agro-Logistics manages the logistics
of three main product types:

1.   Supply chain for agricultural commodities (such as cacao, grain, soy, sugar, coffee). In these foremost
     international supply chains agricultural products are traded and exchanged in the open market place, in the end to
     be foremost used as raw materials for industrial producers for processed food products. A key trend in these chains
     is the search for de-commoditizing of goods and the development of dedicated supply chains that fulfill specific
     requirements (e.g. fair trade coffee).
2. Supply chains for highly perishable agricultural products (such as fresh vegetables, flowers, fruit, fish,
   potatoes). In general, these chains may comprise growers, middlemen, auctions, wholesalers, importers
   and exporters, retailers and specialty shops and their input and service suppliers. Basically, all of these
   stages leave the intrinsic characteristics of the perishable product grown or produced in the countryside
   untouched, although actors try to exploit these as much as possible (for example, ready to eat products
   and processed smoothies). The main processes are the handling, conditioned storage, packing,
   transportation, and especially trading of these goods. A key trend is the increase of partnerships
   between international actors resulting in long-term contracts, in order to deliver the complete
   assortment year-round.
3. Supply chains for high-value, processed and customized products (such as processed dairy or meat
   products). These chains produce goods for the higher end of the market, and are mainly characterized
   by closed relationships between international suppliers and retailers with agree upon contracts for a
   longer term.

Agro-Logistics concerns all activities in the supply chain to match product supply from the farm with
market demand for those products. It aims at getting the right agro-product, at the right place, at the right
time, according to the right specifications (including quality and sustainability requirements) at the lowest
cost. Actors in these types of chains understand that original good quality products might be subject to
quality decay because of an inconsiderate action of another actor, for example storing a unit load of milk on
a dockside in the burning sun.

                                                                                                                Page 2
2. Megatrends and developments

Not long ago agricultural produce was transported to the local marketplace by the farmer. Nowadays
products are flown all over the world to provide products to demanding consumers (foremost) in developed
countries. For example, haricot verts arrive in the Netherlands by air from Africa, bananas are delivered in
refrigerated containers by sea from Central America, and palm oil seeds arrive by bulk carriers from Asia.
Flowers that pass through the Dutch flower auctions in the morning will be on sale that same evening in
New York and bought by customers in Tokyo the next morning (Network Agrologistics, 2011). It is clear
that significant changes have taken place in the last 25 years, but also that more changes are about the
happen. Table 1 presents an overview of megatrends that will impact Agro-logistics to a large extend.

The first megatrend concerns demographic and welfare developments. It is expected that the worldwide
population will further increase, foremost in the BRIC countries, Africa and Asia, and peak at 9-10 billion people
in 2050. The population in Africa will double (adding 1 billion), the population in Asia will also increase by 1
billion persons. In search for labor two-thirds of the world population will live in urban areas in 2050. There is a
rising middle class: in emerging economies: up to 3 billion in next 20 years, with a change in lifestyle and diet
patterns. As a result, world food prices may rise 30-50% in the coming decades, which leads to the question of
affordability of good food for people in developing and emerging countries. This will not only put pressure on the
food system regarding the availability and, accessibility of food in these cities, but it also emphasizes that the
labor force in the rural areas will decrease putting even more pressure on the food system. In contrast, one out of
three European regions will have to deal with a declining population.


The second megatrend relates to the overall societal focus on sustainability, to preserve the environment and
material availability for the next generations and to provide fair working conditions worldwide. Due to the
growing population and overall welfare, demand will increase for high value food, feed, fuel and fibre. Also
the pressure on vulnerable eco-systems further increases, next to already present issues as erosion, pollution,
and depletion of natural resources. Climate change will increase fluctuations and dynamism in weather
conditions, which will further decrease the stability of food and feed availability. This has resulted in
significant price increases in the last five years for staple foods such as sugar, cacao and coffee (FAO food
price index, 2014). Furthermore, it will influence the production areas suitable for food production.

The third megatrend concerns advanced process automation, information and virtualisation. Examples are the increased
use of intelligent robots (think of the modern greenhouses that are setup worldwide), the use of conditioned reefer
containers for international transport and the use of smartphones increasing information availability and transparency in
the supply chain (for example, smartphone usage has nearly doubled in 2013 in the Middle East and Africa). This
changes the way people do business and improves opportunities for organising and managing global cold chains. This
trend is increased by the significant investments Western companies are doing in developing countries (FAO, 2012).
The last megatrend is globalisation and related economies of scale. Nowadays, food products are send around the
world to provide year-round availability of goods. On the other hand, more and more countries are trying to
secure food availability in their own country by setting up integrated agroparks.


Table 1. Megatrends and impact on AgriFood chains (Van der Vorst, 2012).
Megatrend                                     Overall impact on AgriFood supply chains
1. Demographic trends:                        • Increase in demand for food, especially in BRIC countries to 2050 (approx. 65
o    population increase of 7 to 9 billion    %) - also increase in value-added products such as meat, fish and dairy products.
     people in 2050 - especially in Asia ,    However, many people eat too much, but billions of people go hungry.
     Africa and Latin America ( growing       • European markets stabilize. The aging population increases demand for more
     BRIC countries ) which will consume      value-added products, safe and healthy food .
     more high value products due to          • Decline potential labour force.
     rising prosperity;                       • Increase in land, materials and energy use, resulting in scarcity of natural
o    urbanization (in 2050 70% of the         resources and increasing focus on sustainability
     population lives in one of the many      • Increase in waste production and flows fertilizers , packaging materials ,
     mega poles);                             industrial waste streams )
o    multicultural cities due to emigration   • Increase in global flows (for emerging markets ) but also more local
     / immigration                            production, more people need to be fed while the space to grow food is smaller.
o    decline in population in the             • Increase product range by multiculturalism
     Netherlands and Western Europe.          • Increase in shareholders' interests first set in society; less operating from a
o    individualisation                        collective interest
                                              • Increased demand for convenience products
                                              • Increase in complexity regarding food , where to produce fresh food and how
                                              to get it in the right way in the metropolis?
2. Climate change and overall societal        • Companies require a license to operate! Government will focus on more
focus on sustainability                       stringent environmental requirements to combat climate change.
                                              • Worldwide, only 150 crops widely grown and eaten at large scale. Twelve of
                                              them provide three-quarters of the world's food, three (rice , wheat and maize)
                                              half of the vegetable food energy. Less biodiversity (fewer species and varieties)
                                              not only means less variation , but also more vulnerable to diseases and pests ,
                                              and more risk of epidemics .
                                              • Increase price volatility of raw materials.
3. Further process automation,                • Increased automation and computerization level, allowing comprehensive
computerization and virtualization (doing     real-time information exchange and dynamic (central) planning and control of
business via the Internet)                    activities in supply chain networks. This also requires more staff training.
                                              • Increased standardization of IT systems and data sources, as well as
                                              containerization allows virtual business making possible, resulting in global
                                              sourcing and distribution via long complex chains.
                                              • Increased ability to register and store the history of a product throughout the
                                              chain and communicate it to consumers through smart tags
                                              • Increasing decoupling of goods and information flows, thus increasing
                                              internationalization of production
4. Further internationalization versus        • A decreasing number of big (international) companies in every link of the chain
localization / regionalization                dominates the market, as “elephants dance with elephants” (big companies do
                                              business with other large companies).
                                              • Increased outsourcing as companies focus on their core business and due to
                                              fragmentation of production processes (e.g. tires from china, steering from
                                              brazil, mounting the bicycle in NL).
                                              • Increased focus on sustainability also leads to regionalization, buying products
                                              from the region preferably produced on a small scale and close to nature.
                                              • Specialization requires skilled labour


It is clear that these developments have very important consequences and impacts on performance
requirements of the agro-logistics systems and businesses in developing countries. The next section will
discuss such requirements and implications.
3. Logistics performance requirements and key logistics issues

When analyzing the megatrends one of the main concerns is food security, regarding the availability of food
in different parts of the world. Food security is defined as existing “when all people at all times have access
to sufficient, safe, nutritious food to maintain a healthy and active life” (World Food Summit of 1996). It
requires the increase of (higher value added) food production on the one hand, and reduction of food losses
in the supply chain on the other.

The megatrends have consequences for the sourcing, processing and distribution of agroproducts. Last
decades a lot of Dutch farmers have transferred their business to Afrika, Eastern Europe or Asia. The same
is happening worldwide – due to risk management and climate change as well as economic developments.
More and more commodities and standardised products are produced in low-income countries, whereas
products for the high end of the market remain (for now) in such Western countries. By spreading
production or sourcing worldwide chances are reduced the business is affected by extreme weather
conditions.

Due to food related diseases (e.g. EHEC, BSE) and globalization of food production (Nepstad et al., 2006), consumers
(especially in the Western world) have become more aware of the origin and nutritional content of their food. This
leads to a growing interest in traceability, freshness and quality of products. At the same time, producers expand
product assortments to satisfy consumer’s broadening desires. This results in more complicated production and
distribution processes and increased transportation costs.

The need for food security, changing production locations and the request for high quality, value added products
worldwide increase the need for global goods flows. Technological developments such as containerization enable
new ways of transportation (see for air, rail for truck), but also enable transport over larger distances. On the
other hand, the need for resource efficiency and sustainable products requires logistics practices that take societal
and environmental performance indicators into account next to the traditional economic indicators. Urbanization
requires advanced logistics concepts that are able to provide food products in megacity centers. Increasing
uncertainty in food harvests and consumption and related price fluctuations may result in potential stock
formations in the chain – but where these inventories will be located is not clear. Availability of services is often
a major constraint, especially with specialized services for cold chain, an important factor in the overall quality
and costs of the value chain. However the refrigerants used are also one of the largest concerns to climate change.

It is clear that next to the traditional logistics management objectives, such as cost reduction and responsiveness
improvement, sustainable agro-logistics management requires a different management approach that also considers
intrinsic characteristics of food products and processes (c.f. Van der Vorst et al.; 2011) next to sustainability
considerations (Seuring and Muller, 2008; Ahumada and Villalobos, 2009; Soysal et al., 2012). In the remainder of this
section, we discuss the key logistical aims in sustainable agro-logistics management in three groups: (1) cost reduction
and improved responsiveness,
(2) improved food quality and reduction of food waste, and (3) improved sustainability and traceability. We
also discuss the key logistical issues that need to be considered to adequately manage the related key
objective.
2.1. Cost reduction and improved responsiveness

Cost reduction and responsiveness improvement are the two main traditional performance objectives in logistics
management. Cost refers to the total global network costs from the source of supply to its final point of
consumption. The recent economic crises and ongoing globalization have boosted the importance of achieving
lowest cost in almost all supply chains. Unlike the past, food industries are heading towards international markets
for sourcing necessary products for their operations. Additionally, global coordination and optimization of
geographically dispersed facilities is necessary (Brown et al., 2001) to quickly and accurately determine the
distribution options and costs (Chopra, 2003; Simchi-Levi et al., 2009). Responsiveness has two main
dimensions: the time between placing and receiving an order, and how quickly companies respond to the
dynamics of the global marketplace such as customer’s unique and rapidly changing needs, new product
introductions and new sourcing opportunities (Beamon, 1998; Fisher, 1997). Responsiveness and flexibility are
key issues to maintain customer satisfaction in the food industry (Lambert and Cooper, 2000). Nowadays
Western consumers ask for more product variety and high frequent deliveries with short lead times that forces
fast production in small batches. Also, demand uncertainty has increased due to increased product variety and
competition. Gunasekaran et al. (2008) state that the key factors for forming a responsive supply chain are: timely
information sharing, shortening the total cycle time, coordinating the workflow, implementing good decision
support systems, reducing lead times, integrating information about operations, reducing redundant echelons and
creating flexible capacity. In parallel, new ICT tools that facilitate more advanced information exchange (Cachon
and Fisher, 2000) and collaboration (Christopher and Juttner, 2000) help companies to improve their
responsiveness. Companies are also confronted with trade-offs between the cost of the SC (efficiency) and its
responsiveness, resulting in discussions on the position of inventories and the customer order decoupling point
(Van der Vorst et al., 2005; Van Donk, 2001). On one hand, increased product diversity and competition leads to
a make to order production system with a decrease in inventories to reduce inventory costs; on the other hand
producing to stock and keeping more inventory (buffer/safety) in the chain guarantees quick customer response.
Therefore, agro supply chains have the challenge to maintain a reasonable balance between these two issues:
reducing cost versus improving customer service.

If we analyze the key logistics decisions that are relevant in obtaining optimal performances the following
issues are identified (Van der Vorst et al., 2002; Soysal et al, 2012). In terms of network design, crucial
issues are: the roles and the types of operations performed in facilities, locations of facilities, capacities
allocated to each facility, markets that facilities will serve and sources that will feed facilities (Chopra and
Meindl, 2010). Additional generic issues identified are: (i) distribution channel choice among several
distribution options, (ii) outsourcing possibility, (iii) operations excellence with respect to time, quantity
and invoice, (iv) strategic inventory positions choice, (v) transportation alternatives and constraints (e.g.
time windows, number of vehicles, capacity of carriers), (vi) production choices (e.g. workforce scheduling,
multiple product handling, batch size consideration), (vii) incorporation of supply and demand uncertainty
and (viii) use of information technologies (e.g. Geographic Information System or Wireless Sensor
Network).




                                                                                                           Page 6
Table 2: Key logistics objectives in sustainable agro-logistics management (Soysal et al., 2012)


                                 Key aims                                                  Drivers & Enablers                       Explanation                         Key logistics issues           Literature

                                                                                        Economic crisis resulting in                                                                            (Beamon, 1998)
                                                                                        low prices                                                                                              (Cachon and Fisher,
                                                                                                                       The ability to minimize total global                                     2000)
                                                                                        Globalisation resulting in
                                                            Cost reduction




                                                                                        world-wide competition         network costs from the source of supply Network design,                  (Christopher and Juttner,
                                                                                                                       to its final point of consumption.      Distribution channel choice,     2000)
     Logistics Management




                                                                                        Automation resulting in                                                Outsourcing,                     (Chopra, 2003)
                                                                                        more efficient processes
                                                                                                                                                                  Operational excellence,    (Chopra and Meindl,
                                                                                                                                                                  Inventory positions choice,2010)
                                                                                        Demand for more product
                                                            Improved responsiveness




                                                                                        variety, high frequent     The ability to have a flexible and robust Transportation alternatives and (Fisher, 1997)
                                                                                        deliveries with short lead system that satisfies customer orders in
                                                                                                                   time and responds quickly to the          constraints,                    (Gunasekaran et al.,
                                                                                        times and small batches    dynamics of the global marketplace.       Production choices,             2008)
                                                                                        Increased demand           Additionally, to cooperate and            Incorporation of uncertainty, (Lambert and Cooper,
                                                                                        uncertainty                collaborate with the other supply chain Use of information technology. 2000)
                                                                                        New ICT tools that         members in a way that facilitates                                         (Simchi-Levi et al.,
                                                                                        facilitate more advanced movement of information in timely,                                          2009)
                                                                                        information exchange       reliable and    accurate   manner.

                                                                                        Demand for safe and high
                                                                                        quality food products                                                    All the above +
                                                                                        Health consciousness of                                                  Homogeneity controls,
                                                                                                                       The ability to control product quality in
                                                                                        consumers                                                                Dynamic inventory
                                                            Improved food quality




                                                                                                                       the supply chain and deliver high
                                                                                        Year round availability of     quality food products in various forms management,                       (Akkerman et al., 2010)
                                                                                        food                           to final consumers by incorporating       Dynamic control of goods
     Management




                                                                                                                                                                                                (Blackburn and Scudder,
                                                                                        Demand for more                product quality information in logistics flow,                           2009)
                                                                                        convenience products           decision making.                          Cold chain management,         (Dabbene et al., 2008)
                                                                                        Technological                                                            Multiple temperature           (Hafliðason et al., 2012)
                                                                                        improvements                                                             consideration for multiple
                                                                                                                                                                 products,                      (Trienekens and
                                                                                                                                                                                                Zuurbier, 2008)
                                                                                                                                                                 Product interferences
                                                                                                                                                                                                (Van der Vorst et al.,
Logistics



                                                            Reduction of food waste




                                                                                        Demand for high quality                                                  consideration,
                                                                                                                                                                                                2000, 2002, 2007, 2011)
Agro-




                                                                                        products with long shelf                                                Monitoring temperature
                                                                                        lives                          The ability to collaborate in the supply history,                      (Van Donselaar et al.,
                                                                                                                       chain network to reduce food that is                                   2006)
                                                                                        Increased food security                                                 Customer requirements
                                                                                                                       discarded or lost uneaten because the
                                                                                        concerns                                                                consideration,
                                                                                                                       quality has deteriorated.
                                                                                        Pressure from global                                                    Use of specific quality decay
                                                                                        organizations                                                           models,
                                                                                                                                                                Waste management.

                                                                                        Growth of world population
                                                                                                                   The ability to reduce environmental
                                                                Environmentalconcerns




                                                                                        Climate change             impacts (e.g. GHG emission, energy
     Agro-Logistics Management




                                                                                        Limited natural resources use, water use, air pollution, deforested       All the above +
                                                                                                                                                                                                (Bettley and Burnley,
                                                                                        Escalating sustainability land, land availability and noise) of           Use of impact assessment      2008b)
                                  Improved sustainability




                                                                                        awareness                  operations and to facilitate new energy        tools,
                                                                                                                   sources such as biofuels.                                                    (Chaabane et al., 2012)
                                                                                                                                                                  Sustainable food production
                                                                                                                                                                  consideration,                (Dekker et al., 2012)
                                                                                        Increased child labour                                                    Sustainable inventory         (Fritz and Schiefer,
                                                                   Societalconcerns




                                                                                        Employment                     The ability to reduce societal impacts     management consideration,     2009)
                                                                                                                       (e.g. nutritional content of products,
                                                                                        Escalating sustainability      employment opportunities, farm             Sustainable transportation    (Helms, 2004)
                                                                                        awareness                      income) of operations.                     management consideration,     (Linton et al., 2007)
                                                                                                                                                                  Traceability possibility of   (Nepstad et al. , 2006)
                                                                                                                                                                  products.
     Sustainable




                                                                                                                                                                                                (Wang et al., 2011)
                                  Improved




                                                                                                                       The ability to have complete visibility
                                                            traceability




                                                                                        Recent food crises             of all relevant product and process                                      (Wognum et al., 2011)
                                                                                                                       characteristics in the chain allowing to
                                                                                        Legislation                    track and trace products throughout all
                                                                                                                       stages in a supply chain.
2.2. Improved food quality and reduction of food waste

Nowadays, consumers ask for safe and high quality products with a competitive price throughout the year
(Apaiah and Hendrix, 2005; Trienekens and Zuurbier, 2008). In food supply chains (FSCs), the quality of
the product continuously changes starting from the time the raw material leaves the grower (or the slaughter
for meat products) to the time the product reaches the consumer (Dabbene et al., 2008). This quality change
(often degradation) necessitates keeping track of and preserving perishable product quality along the FSC to
increase its freshness. These changes in product value make conventional SC strategies, not taking
perishability into account, inappropriate (Blackburn and Scudder, 2009). Perishable products require
management approaches and models that can cope with additional challenges such as temperature controls,
quality decay or waste reduction methods (Hafliðason et al., 2012; Van Donselaar et al., 2006).
Technological improvements (e.g. temperature controlled facilities and trucks) enable FSCs to manage food
quality throughout the chain. Van der Vorst et al. (2011; 2007) propose the concept of Quality Controlled
Logistics (QCL) and claim that the establishment of better FSC designs depends on the availability of real
time product quality information and the use of that information in advanced logistics decision making
along the chain. Apart from this work, also other studies in literature are devoted to the special planning of
perishable food products (Adachi et al., 1999; Entrup et al., 2005; Tarantilis and Kiranoudis, 2001).
Additionally, consumers have started to desire more convenient products that require minimal preparation
such as ready to eat or just heating before eating.


Related to food quality is the concept of food waste, dealing with preventing or reducing food spoilage in
the supply chain. It is estimated that in developed markets about 40% of food is wasted, predominantly at
the consumer end in the supply chain. Industrialized and developing countries dissipate roughly the same
quantities of food. Low income countries show relatively large food losses in the early stages of the chain,
with decreasing wastage levels in consecutive stages (see figure 1 and 2).

Research shows (see figure 1) that giving exact figures regarding food losses is hard. But the figures also
show that food losses are relatively the same in both developing / Low Income Countries (LIC) and
developed countries. FAO (2013) reports and WRI analyses (Lipinski et al, 2013) states that about 56
percent of total food loss and waste occurs in the developed world―North America, Oceania, Europe, and
the industrialized Asian naTons of China, Japan, and South Korea―whereas the developing world accounts
for 44 percent of the loss. In the developing countries and LIC food losses are predominant in the beginning
of the food chain; handling and storage after harvest show the biggest food losses. As a result, improving
the food supply chain in developing countries / LIC has to focus on improvement of farm practices and
post-harvest logistics.




                                                                                                      Page 8
Figure 1. Overview of food losses by region and supply chain stage (Lipinski et al., 2013) Page 9
Next to the key logistics issues for the traditional indicators, there are some additional issues that need to be taken into
account to improve food quality and reduce food waste (Soysal et al., 2013). These are:
(i) batch homogeneity controls along the chain, (ii) dynamic inventory management that tracks the quality
of products, (iii) dynamic control of goods flow that adopts conditions and logistics to optimize market
fulfilment (e.g. redirecting products to other markets having lower quality requirements), (iv) cold chain
management that considers temperature or enthalpy controlled carriers and depots, (v) multiple temperature
consideration for multiple products, (vi) product interferences consideration (e.g. bananas produce ethylene
that accelerates the ripening process of other fruits), (vii) monitoring temperature history for accurate
quality predictions, (viii) customer requirements consideration for specific markets, (ix) use of specific
quality decay models in logistics decision routines, and (x) waste management practices that considers food
spoilages.

2.3. Improved sustainability and traceability

Consciousness of consumers towards environmental and societal issues put pressure on companies to use sustainable
practices, since world population is growing, climates are changing and natural resources are depleting. Also,
nutritional content of products (Helms, 2004), increased child labor and employment conditions are under discussion as
societal issues. Seuring and Muller (2008) summarize the pressures and incentives for sustainability in supply chains as
follows: legislations, customer demands, response to stakeholders, competitive advantage, pressure groups and
reputation loss. As a consequence, increasing sustainability awareness of stakeholders (Bettley and Burnley, 2008a)
inevitably affects the (logistics) decision making process and operations in FSCs. As such, the concept of sustainable
SC design has emerged and aims to incorporate economic, environmental as well as societal decisions into SCs in the
design phase (Chaabane et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2011). However, it is obvious that the environmental and social
dimensions of SFSCM must be undertaken with a clear and explicit recognition of the economic goals of the firm
(Carter and Rogers, 2008; Wognum et al., 2011).

Due to globalization and recent food scandals, consumers also want to get more insight in production processes as well
as what happened to the product as it moves through the SC (Mogensen et al., 2009). This places emphasis on
especially the people and planet aspects of sustainability. Legislations from governments or pressures from non-profit
organizations aim to stimulate improved SC visibility in FSCs. A good traceability system can contribute to improved
transparency by offering specific information regarding product and related processes to consumers (Fritz and Schiefer,
2009; Wognum et al., 2011). Additionally, Fritz and Schiefer (2008) stress the importance of intensified cooperation
and collaboration between the actors of the chain and improved monitoring of activities to achieve transparency and
tracking and tracing of products and services throughout the value chain. This integration and monitoring can be
enhanced with the use of new ICT tools to redirect the pattern of logistics operations.

Next to the key logistics issues for the traditional and food quality related indicators, there are some additional logistics
issues that need to be taken into account to improve sustainability and traceability (Soysal et al., 2013). These are: (i)
use of impact assessment tools (e.g. Life Cycle Assessment Analysis (LCA) assesses impacts of operations associated
with all stages of a product's life starting from-cradle-to-grave), (ii) sustainable food production consideration (e.g.
using efficient machines that can reduce water use consumption or choosing production locations considering
deforestation, land use issues,

                                                                                                                   Page 10
 closed loop systems), (iii) sustainable inventory management consideration (e.g. controlling energy use of
 cooling stocks in facilities (Akkerman et al., 2010)), (iv) sustainable food transportation management
 consideration (e.g. considering GHG emissions, fuel consumptions of different transportation modes, new
 energy sources such as biofuels or noise, air pollution caused by vehicles (Dekker et al., 2012)), and (iv)
 traceability possibility of products for improving transparency in FSCs (e.g. use of safety focused
 traceability systems).



 4. Global agro-logistics: case examples and key bottlenecks

 In order to illustrate the impact of the trends and developments on the agro-logistics system of different global
 regions, this section presents a number of projects run by Wageningen University and Research Center in India,
 China, and the Filipines, Ethiopia, Ghana, Mexico, and Thailand. It is not intended to provide a complete
 overview of current developments, but rather to illustrate what is happening on agro-logistics in the different
 regions. Subsequently, an overview will be presented of what literature has indicated as key bottlenecks for agro-
 logistics in developing countries.

 Example 1. Metropolitan Food Clusters in India, China, Filipines.

 Country             India, China, Filipines
 Issues in 2013      The world is urbanizing. In 2050 75% of the predicted 9 billion people will live in cities. The
                     growth of the urban middle class with increasing purchasing power revolutionises food
                     consumption in quality and quantity. The reverse of this process is the marginalisation of
                     rural areas through depopulation, ageing and brain drain. Still they are largely responsible for
                     world food production. A radical innovation of the system and an increase in sustainable
                     agricultural productivity is necessary.
 Agrologistics       The system innovation of Metropolitan Food Clusters (MFC) meets these challenges by
 needs               aiming at vertical and horizontal integration of value chains. Components of the MFC-
                     network are, at one end of the chain, production regions with Rural Transformation Centres
                     that shift to sustainable production and precision agriculture. At the other end well
                     developed agro logistics with Distribution and Consolidation Centres which are directly
                     serving metropolitan and export markets. Agroparks form the linking pin and motor between
                     the two. Agroparks are spatial clusters of several value chains in an industrial set up, situated
                     close to the metropolis. They contain a variety of land independent production, processing,
                     agrologistic and support functions. Between them principles of industrial ecology are being
                     applied.
 Interventions       The MFC concept is aiming at sustainable development. It develops through a 'creative
 (performed or       research by design’ process (co-design), in which Knowledge Institutes, Entrepreneurs, Non-
 detected)           Governmental and Governmental Organisations co-operate. Co-design focusses on the'
                     hardware' of the MFC as well as on the more complicated 'orgware' aspects (co-operation
                     structure, business development) and on time consuming 'software aspects’ (education and
                     training, communication).




Page 11
Example 2. Exporting fruits and vegetables from Ethiopia.

Country          Ethiopia
Issues in 2012   Ethiopia’s current fruits and vegetables (F&V) production is low, but the country has potential
                 to increase producing and exporting a wide range of products throughout the year. Demand
                 for fruits and vegetables is growing in nearby international markets, like the Middle East.
                 Although Ethiopia is land locked, it is geographically close to the Middle East. To reach the
                 Middle East, and other international markets, produce has to be transported to Djibouti where
                 it can be shipped. Roads to Djibouti are generally good, but transportation takes long due to
                 waiting times at the border, sometimes up to ten hours. Fresh produce is sensitive and needs
                 to be refrigerated to remain fresh and of good quality during such long transportation time. To
                 start exporting to the Middle East it is of paramount importance to build a good reputation and
                 to deliver the F&V in good condition. Refrigerated container transport offers possibilities to
                 make use of the potential to export more F&V in good quality.
Agrologistics    Fresh fruit and vegetables (F&V) are perishable and have a relative short shelf life. Therefore,
needs            especially for F&V, costs of transportation are a crucial factor determining the competitive
                 position in export markets. Several entrepreneurs have done trials with exporting common
                 F&V by air to the Middle East, but not successfully. Airfreight is only an option for high-value
                 products. The development of a refrigerated cool chain for relatively nearby markets such as
                 the Middle-East could dramatically improve the competitive position of Ethiopia.
Interventions    Sea transportation is becoming more and more interesting due to the decreasing capacity in air
(performed or    transportation and much lower environmental impact (and possibly costs). It is required to
detected)        have good quality to be able to enter the export market and to compete with other exporting
                 countries. Reefer containers will ensure maintenance of quality during transportation. The
                 quality of the produce should be high from the very start. It is therefore recommended to
                 carefully select the seed or seedlings and have proper production and post-harvest
                 technologies.

                 Exporting F&V from Ethiopia to the Middle East and in particular to Saudi Arabia and the UAE
                 over sea by using reefers is practically feasible. For sea transportation it is important that the
                 produce is continuously in the optimal environment. Fortunately, a closed cold chain is feasible
                 – the container does not have to be reopened during transportation. However, the reefers are
                 currently not available in the country but can be imported, including the required gensets.
                 However, the costs of importing the reefers are high, resulting in relatively high costs to get
                 the fruits and vegetables cool in the port in Djibouti. In order to make full use of a container
                 you need to be able to load it completely. Therefore the reefers are yet a feasible option for
                 large scale producers, but not yet for small scale producers who would need a fresh
                 consolidation center. It is recommended to organize such centers who can receive F&V from
                 different farmers, offer cold storage possibilities and fill a container efficiently.

                 The economic feasibility of using reefers for exporting fruits and vegetables depends very
                 much on the type of produce and the negotiated market price. In any case it will be more
                 positive for F&V, which can be packed efficiently and therefore fill a container with a higher
                 tonnage. The market price is always based on a weight basis, and as most container
                 transportation costs are based on a volume basis it is profitable to have a high weight in one
                 container.

                 The activity lead time is a maximum of 18 to 22 days, excluding the desired shelf life of 7 days
                 in the shop and/or at consumers’ home. This slightly long transportation time is a bottleneck
                 for reefer transport to the Middle East. This is due to the fact that ships from Djibouti will first
                 have to go to Salalah before continuing. Djibouti is enlarging its port and if sea transporters are
                 willing to change their routes, transportation times will be shorter.
 Example 3. Reduction of post-harvest losses in Ghana.

 Country          Ghana
 Issues in 2013   For Ghana applies what can be learned from an analytical review of post-harvest losses (PHL)
                  in Africa (IDRC/CRDI 2013), namely:
                      •    Many innovations to reduce PHL are known and available in literature. Various socio-
                           economic factors hinder the promotion of the technologies into the real world;
                      •    Data on cost of PHL reduction and economic benefits are lacking. Most innovations
                           are transferred without a clear economic outlook when adopted;
                      •    Many innovations are launched and after a relative short time abandoned due to lack of
                           organised structures of famer groups and or SME’s who have already an agribusiness concept
                           in place. Technology adoption needs these progressive groups with a minimum of economy
                           of scale. These stronger groups will encourage less progressive parties in value chains to
                           embrace the innovations as well;
                      •    PH innovations need a holistic approach (link farm activities to off-farm practices: processing,
                           storage, packing, transport). Other factors are: no national policies, poor infrastructures, poor
                           marketing systems, lack of knowledge and knowledge capacities.
                  The main challenge is how to reduce PHL making use of available knowledge and innovations.
 Agrologistics    Interventions to minimize PHL are more successful when the stakeholders start up commodity
 needs            oriented projects within the framework of cooperatives, platforms or networks. A good
                  example is the cashew and shea nut network in Ghana, where education, ICT and microfinance
                  improved the livelihood of local farmers and woman. See: http://youtu.be/k32D7UrgkCw;
                  http://youtu.be/pWkuaPdXUB0. From a cash crop perspective a good example of a value chain
                  approach is the processing of pineapples in Ghana into fresh fruit salads for the UK market
                  (Blue Skies inc.). However after almost a decade of successful business affairs the company
                  now suffers from inadequate sourcing (many farmers went down due to price volatility).
 Interventions    To have real impact on PHL a national agro-logistic strategy based upon three pillars is a
 (performed or    necessity. First, efficient vertical value chains aim to coordinate the interventions to be
 detected)        implemented by many stakeholders. This means the integration of hardware (technology),
                  orgware (organisational, institutional, financial and procedural aspects) and software (skills,
                  knowledge, communication, intercultural). Second, it demands an efficient logistics network
                  that focusses on the increase of transport of agro products and food products because of
                  growing distances between primary producers and consumers and increasing diversity of
                  products for urban consumers. The last step will be the horizontal integration between chains.




Page 13
 Example 4. A vision on Agro-Logistics for Mexico.

 Country          Mexico
 Issues in 2013   A key question for the government is: How should the Mexican Ministry of Agriculture and
                  other government agencies act regarding land-use planning and efficient use of human and
                  environmental resources in the Agro-logistics sector. Key is to arrive at a domestic policy
                  agenda on the following topics:
                       • Food security
                       • Improvement in labour conditions and migration in rural areas
                       • Bring the Mexican agrifood sector to par with international quality and phytosanitary
                           standards
                       • Position Mexico as an agrifood power, competitive in international markets

 Agrologistics    In 2014 the project lead by WUR will develop and explicate a Vision Agro-logistics, intended to
 needs            mobilize Mexico’s agrifood sector towards the development of a new nationwide Agro -logistics
                  network. This network must include modern (refrigerated) infrastructures, as well as a dynamic
                  private sector and specialized human capital in Agro-logistics services of the highest quality.

 Interventions
 (performed or
 detected)




                  Three interventions have been identified that will be further elaborated upon in 2014:
                      •    Intervention 1. Infrastructure development: Infrastructure planning (cold chains) and logistics
                           intelligence (cost analysis models, information systems, traceability, etc.);
                      •    Intervention 2. Institutional development: Strategic planning to obtain greater
                           budgetary efficiency and acting capability of institutions, as well as alignment and
                           association of key stakeholders from four main areas: government, business,
                           knowledge and civil society (also known as KENGi);
                      •    Intervention 3. Knowledge development and transfer: Design of new educational
                           programs and resource planning for training, and organization of stakeholders also from
                           four main areas: government, business, knowledge and civil society.


Page 14
 Example 5. Exporting exotic fruits from Thailand.

 Country           Thailand
 Issues in 2010    Thailand encounters the following challenges: spread of plant diseases leading to pre-harvest
                   loss of 30-40%, chemical residues; 2% of produce affected, outdated post-harvest
                   applications and handling practices leading to PHL of 25%, high airfreight costs, limited
                   logistics innovations, unaligned standards and certification schemes; hard to get access to EU
                   market. The question for Thailand was how to enhance international supply chains of exotic
                   fruits knowing that bottlenecks in the Thai agro logistics have a negative influence on the
                   productivity and income of the agricultural sector.
 Agrologistics     The following bottlenecks for exporting Thai products to European markets are distinguished:
 needs
                         inappropriate and unclean machineries, rely on prohibited chemical fertilizers and
                         implement improper post-harvest methods. Consequence: diseases occur on the fruits.
                    •    Chemical residues: Thai farmers are still relying on EU prohibited chemical fertilizer and
                         pesticides.
                    •    Broken cold chains: Unconditioned transport of fruits from farm to packing station..
                         Cold stores facilities at Bangkok airport are modern and clean. Temperate settings are
                         not always sufficient however.
                    •    Inconsistent certification scheme: Mostly, Thai products are not in line with required
                         quality standards from the European market (like GlobalGAP).
                    •    Outdated packaging: due to lack of finance to implement modern packaging techniques,
                         packaging concepts are of limited quality (i.e. ventilation, strength, weight, used materials, et
                         cetera) and lack information that European importers demand. Not only in relation to
                         GlobalGAP but also customer demands and European law.
                    •    Inefficient loading at airfreight capacities and high airfreight cost: There is inefficient loading
                         at the airfreight. Airfreight costs are relatively high in Thailand in comparison to their
                         neighbouring countries due to lack of cargo space and high costs of using Thai airspace (e.g.
                         mango to EU costs are € 2.40 (114 Baht) per kilogram).
 Interventions     Postharvest concepts; Container at the farm or packing center (depending farm accessibility),
 (performed or     Stuffing container with precooled products or hot, ‘ready to pick’ principle at the farm to
 detected)         improve product quality upon arrival, ‘specific packaging’ at the farm to decrease value
                   and/or quality loss (depending on the learning abilities of the farm).
                   Export concepts;
                         Sea-air bridge: sailing the goods to United Arabic Emirates or Singapore, re packing the
                         goods and then flying the goods to The Netherlands. This decreases transportation costs
                         and duration.
                          Air-sea bridge: flying the goods to Singapore, re-packing the goods and then sailing the goods
                          to The Netherlands. This decreases transportation costs and duration.
                          Air triangle: charter a plane and transport goods from Thailand to EU and to return via for
                          example to the United Arabic Emirates (assuming that there is a demand for exporting goods
                          from The Netherlands to for example to the United Arabic Emirates).
                   Macro economic concept. develop towards a regional market place or hub where products not only
                   from Thailand but also from regional producers are brought to and where (potential) buyers are also
                   present. The hub potentially supports the development of more efficiency along the value chains of the
                   various produce at offer as well as an improved functioning of the markets. In addition, bringing both
                   suppliers and buyers physically together at one place potentially has a positive impact on the overall
                   product quality over time. (In analogy to the positive influence that the Dutch flower auctions had and
                   are still having on the level of the overall product quality of the flowers.)


Page 15
The examples given above illustrate that each region has its own specific issues and needs. In literature many reports
and papers can be found that discuss such case-specific findings. Van Gogh et al. (2013) conducted a dedicated
extended review of literature and projects (140 references with reference years 2000-2012) focusing on post-harvest
losses of fruits & vegetables in developing countries. This review concluded with a top 10 of main categories of causes
for postharvest food losses in developing countries given in Figure 2. They conclude that improving the post-harvest
supply chain in developing countries/LIC one first has to focus on cold chain management and climate controlled
transport. The next major enablers are improved storage facilities followed by better product handling and packaging.




Figure 2. Top 10 causes of postharvest losses mentioned by 140 literature references (Van Gogh et al.,
2013).

Other scientific literature takes a broader perspective on logistics issues in international trade. For example,
Devlin and Yee (2005) analysed obstacles facing exporting firms in developing countries by diagnosing the
efficiency of trade logistics in the Middle East and North Africa region. Using logistics chain analysis for six
export commodities, they present evidence that transport and non-transport logistics costs for export commodities
from the MNA region are quite substantial, ranging from 7-25 per cent of landed product prices. Underlying
these costs are key bottlenecks identified as: inefficient
Page 16
trucking and transport services, low export volume leading to long shipping times and the need for costly
inventory accumulation, aggressive, obstructive customs authorities and procedures, low and inconsistent product
quality, an underdeveloped transport intermediary sector, inefficient cross-border transit procedures and others.
They conclude with a number of recommended actions foremost in the policy and legal domain, such as
developing a national transport policy, overhauling the regulatory regime for the trucking sector, export
promotion measures, increasing competition in port and air freight services, reorienting customs authorities
towards trade facilitation and developing cross-border transit procedures. It is clear that next to core logistics
decisions related to infrastructure, capacities and logistics management, also the environment within which the
logistics processes take place (foremost policy and regulations) are key to improved performances.

Overlooking all cases and relevant literature (for example, Tonelli et al. 2012; Van Gogh et al., 2013) the
following bottlenecks become apparent (this list is not intended to be complete):

    •   Inadequate technology & infrastructures:
            o Inadequate road infrastructures; unpaved or highly degraded roads limit transit
            o Transport is irregular and slow –often covering long distances
            o Inadequate storage systems and processing equipment
            o Limited transport means; lack of cold chain capacities (trucks, warehouses, etc.)
            o Lack of appropriate packaging materials
            o Inadequate information and communication systems
    •   Lack of effective food logistics management systems
            o Transport costs are high and have a significant impact on profits
            o Lack of practices to manage variability in availability and quality of raw materials
            o Lack of adequate quality management systems and practices
            o Lack of market information; chain transparency
            o Lack of effective logistics planning practices
            o Lack of collaborative efforts to improve supply chain logistics
    •   Lack of relevant knowledge and skills of personnel
    •   Lack of access to financial means
    •   Insufficient government support
            o Complex trade regulations
            o Long waiting times to cross borders; administration, policy and tax issues
            o Lack of and high prices of fuels, water and energy



    4. Potential interventions to address the needs

It is clear that agricultural supply chains have lots of bottlenecks but also opportunities for improvement and
innovation, as sustainable efficient supply chains contribute to safer food, to more competitive sourcing in
developing countries, and to less waste of food. Efficient food supply chains are also the main hope of
diversification and enhanced export opportunities of a number of the poorest economies,


                                                                                                         Page 17
notably in Africa. When products of high quality can be produced and delivered to international markets,
higher prices can be obtained. Foreign investments already increased the technological standards as well
education levels in developing countries giving space to further economic developments and increase of
food security. It is clear that progress can only be made if local governments support such developments, do
not create trade barriers and co-invest with businesses in road and communication networks.

It is clear that improving quality management, i.e. improving product quality, improving post-harvest handling
will lead to less food losses, higher yield, higher turnover and even higher margins. But also the design of
effective cold chains which requires the constant and reliable availability of power. Innovative solutions as solar
energy are an option. However, this must be ‘proven technologies’ tuned to the conditions in the respective
countries. Processing (for example drying) could be an option for products to lengthen shelf life and being able to
simplify the food chain. But also many other interventions are mentioned, such as clustering and consolidating
production in agroparks, homogenize and/or segregate between quality levels, adapt packaging to product and
chain and invest in good packaging, use a value chain approach: convenient, special packed, minimal processed,
etc., meet international standards: certify for GlobalGap, BRC etc., create awareness and knowledge, combine
R&D, pack house activities and education in regional post-harvest centers.

An extended literature review of Macheka et al. (2014) inventorised effective interventions for reduction of
post-harvest losses. We categorized these and the earlier mentioned interventions to into one framework to
provide an overall overview of interventions to improve agro-logistics in developing countries – see table 3.




5. Conclusion and recommendations

This position paper discussed the state of the art concerning agro-logistics in developing countries. We defined
agro-logistics, discussed megatrends and developments, identified bottlenecks in agro-logistics using literature
and five illustrative cases, and defined a list of potential interventions to improve performance on cost, quality
and sustainability indicators. We end this paper with a number of recommendations that can help tackle the
logistics challenges in agri-logistics.

Recommendation 1. Improve the logistics infrastructure.

It is clear that improvements of road networks next to appropriate vehicles will improve logistics
performances. Furthermore, investments should take place in generators, water reservoirs, storage systems,
cold chain facilities, and the establishment of cold storages in the vicinity of production. Advanced and
appropriate ICT systems (especially for large scale firms) will stimulate advanced logistics practices, and
enhance the capacity of the small and medium agri-food firms to utilize ICT systems to support their
logistics performance.



                                                                                                          Page 18
 Table 3. Overview of possible interventions for improved Agro-Logistics in developing countries.

                                                              Logistics objectives
   Chain aspect           Cost - responsiveness                  Quality – food waste                Sustainability - transparency
   Technology       Improving processing techniques          Use of genotypes that have                Create more market
                    to increase capacity                     longer post-harvest- life                 transparency
                                                             Use of protective (modified               Use more sustainable
                    processing equipment                     atmosphere) packaging to                  vehicles
                                                             maintain quality and safety
                    communication systems                    Use of modified atmosphere to              monitor goods flows
                                                             retard fungal growth
   Infrastructure   Improve road infrastructures             Meet criteria of international             Introduce clustering and
                                                             standards: certify for                     consolidating production
                    are appropriately designed and           GlobalGap, BRC etc.,                       in agroparks,
                    adequately equipped                      Improve cold chain                         Create multimodal logistics
                                                             management facilities at ports             networks
                    transportation or the condition of       Improve sanitary and
                    transportation                           phytosanitary review and
                                                             inspection processes
    Logistics       Support collaborative efforts to         Use integrated crop
   management       improve supply chain logistics           management systems and                     chain by assisting small
                                                             Good Agricultural Practices                farmers to interact directly
                    processes and exchange                   Use proper post-harvest                    with buyers
                    information                              handling practices in order to             Improving communication
                                                             maintain product quality                   between the different
                    systems to improve performance           Homogenize and/or segregate                stakeholders
                                                             between quality levels
                    core to professionals                    Improve procedures for                     tools
                    Introduce operational                    minimizing mechanical                      Sustainable food
                    excellence/lean practices,               damage                                     production consideration
                    Asses inventory positions in the         Cold chain management                      Sustainable inventory and
                    chain                                    Monitoring temperature                     transportation
                                                             history                                    management
                    by packing of produce directly into      Multiple temperature                       Introduce traceability
                    marketing packages in the field at       consideration for multiple                 systems
                    harvest                                  products,                                  Introduce waste
                                                             Use quality decay models to                management practices
                                                             predict quality changes
      People          Educate personnel
                      Create awareness and knowledge,


                                                       supervisors along with delegation of responsibility and authority
      Policy          Combine R&D, pack house activities and education in regional post-harvest centers.

                       Establish of suitable market institutions
                                                 -standard’ products to avoid throwing away of products

                                                   to prevent and reduce food wastage

                                                            -sanitary standards to facilitate access to international market.




Page 19
Recommendation 2. Improve quality management practices

It is of utmost importance that product quality and safety becomes leading, hence, quality assurance systems
along with traceability systems are required to monitor and control goods flows. Actors and employees in the
chain should be educated and trained to handle the product in the best way.




Recommendation 3. Accelerate and support collaborative initiatives and increase investments to reduce
postharvest losses

Maintaining quality in the chain and reducing food losses requires actions from all stages in the supply chain – from
households, farmers, logistics companies to policy makers. It also requires changes in technology, processes and
behavior. For each country, the most relevant and promising techniques and practices should be identified and
implemented. Food loss and waste measurement protocols should be developed in collaboration with FAO and
organizations such as WRAP in the UK. Collaborative initiatives can facilitate sharing and transferring of best practices
and help to build capacity for all actors. This collaboration refers to the primary actors in the chain as well as with
research and financial institutions. Also, knowledge on post-harvest losses reduction should be transferred to education
centers (see Lipinski et al. (2013) and figure 3 for a more extended view on this recommendation).




Figure 3. Possible approaches for reducing food loss and waste (Lipinski et al., 2013).




Page 20
 Recommendation 4. Encourage political willingness and good governance

 The most important external bottleneck faced in agro-logistics relates to tax issues, trade barriers, phytosanitair
 and inspection regulations, etc. If local governments can allocate appropriate budget for logistics and install
 working practices that facilitate the elimination of regulations, resulting in fast throughputs of goods in ports and
 over country border lines, product quality as well as costs can be maintained within required performance
 boundaries. If also investments are done in alternative power supply schemes such as solar energy, wind energy
 etc. this might also decrease refrigerated transport and processing costs and stimulate cold chain management
 practices. Such policies will also bring along foreign investors to upgrade the logistics infrastructure and
 knowledge network.

 Governments in emerging and developing markets want to improve their national food system but do not have a
 strategic plan how to get there. There are many scattered initiatives that hardly contribute to a national
 improvement in food security and are difficult to be multiplied. Sometimes there are plans on a very high national
 level, but these hardly connect to regional or local initiatives. The development of a national vision on agro-
 logistics and food security with concepts & tools that can be extended and connected to lower level regional plans
 will further enhance performances.

 Recommendation 5. Conduct extended case studies

 Every country has its own dynamics and every product type (dairy, meat, fruits, coffee, grain etc.) has its
 own specific characteristics. It is advised to conduct dedicated studies on agri-food logistics covering wider
 regions and multiple product types and analyze specifically what contextual factors influences best
 practices. This work should be conducted in collaboration with logistics operators and customs agents that
 have representative data on transport costs and times within the region. A series of supply chain analyses at
 country level that compare results for well-developed supply chains and potential growth exports can help
 in diagnosing each countries particular weaknesses. In each case the research team has to go through series
 of key questions that will need to be answered. Examples of key questions are given below.

 Key question                            How could the key question be answered?

 What is the present situation of                Literature review
 the agrologistics sector identified             Report on global agrologistics best practices prepared by
 by data analysis and expert                     international experts
 views?                                          Diagnosis Report

 What       are      the     present             Literature review
 agrologistics costs compared     to
 international standards?

 How to increase the quality of
 agrologistics services in         the           identification of opportunity areas where value can be added
 concerning country/region,         in           through interviews and local specialist analysis
 order to add value to the product
 chains?


Page 21
References

Adachi, Y., Nose, T. and Kuriyama, S. (1999) "Optimal inventory control policy subject to different selling
         prices of perishable commodities", International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 60-61 No.
         pp. 389-394.
Ahumada, O. and Villalobos, J. R. (2009) "Application of planning models in the agri-food supply chain: A
       review", European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 196 No. 1, pp. 1-20.
Aiking, H. and Boer, J. (2004) "Food sustainability diverging interpretations", British Food Journal, Vol.
         106 No. 5, pp. 359-365.
Akkerman, R., Farahani, P. and Grunow, M. (2010) "Quality, safety and sustainability in food distribution:
       a review of quantitative operations management approaches and challenges", Or Spectrum, Vol.
       32 No. 4, pp. 863-904.
Apaiah, R. K. and Hendrix, E. M. T. (2005) "Design of a supply chain network for pea-based novel protein
         foods", Journal of Food Engineering, Vol. 70 No. 3, pp. 383-391.
Beamon, B. M. (1998) "Supply chain design and analysis: Models and methods", International Journal of
        Production Economics, Vol. 55 No. 3, pp. 281-294.
Bettley, A. and Burnley, S. (2008) "Towards Sustainable Operations Management Integrating Sustainability
          Management into Operations Management Strategies and Practices", Springer-Verlag, pp.
Blackburn, J. and Scudder, G. (2009) "Supply chain strategies for perishable products: The case of fresh
         produce", Production and Operations Management, Vol. 18 No. 2, pp. 129-137.
Brown, G., Keegan, J., Vigus, B. and Wood, K. (2001) "The Kellogg company optimizes production,
        inventory, and distribution", Interfaces, Vol. 31 No. 6, pp. 1-15.
Carter, C. R. and Rogers, D. S. (2008) "A framework of sustainable supply chain management: moving
          toward new theory", International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, Vol.
          38 No. 5, pp. 360-387.
Chaabane, A., Ramudhin, A. and Paquet, M. (2012) "Design of sustainable supply chains under the
        emission trading scheme", International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 135 No. 1, pp. 37-
        49.
Chopra, S. (2003) "Designing the distribution network in a supply chain", Transportation Research Part E-
         Logistics and Transportation Review, Vol. 39 No. 2, pp. 123-140.
Chopra, S. and Meindl, P. (2010) Supply Chain Management: Strategy, Planning and Operation, 4
        ed.,Pearson Education, New Jersey.
Christopher, M. and Juttner, U. (2000) "Developing strategic partnerships in the supply chain:a practitioner
         perspective", European Journal of Purchasing & Supply Management, Vol. 6 No. pp. 117-127.
Dabbene, F., Gay, P. and Sacco, N. (2008) "Optimisation of fresh-food supply chains in uncertain
        environments, Part I: Background and methodology", Biosystems Engineering, Vol. 99 No. 3, pp.
        348-359.
Dekker, R., Bloemhof, J. and Mallidis, I. (2012) "Operations Research for green logistics – An overview of
         aspects, issues, contributions and challenges", European Journal of Operational Research, Vol.
         219 No. 3, pp. 671-679.

                                                                                                   Page 22
Devlin, J; Yee, P (2005), Trade logistics in developing countries: The case of the Middle East and North
          Africa, WORLD ECONOMY Volume: 28 Issue: 3 Pages: 435-456
Entrup, M. L., Gunther, H. O., Van Beek, P., Grunow, M. and Seiler, T. (2005) "Mixed-Integer Linear
         Programming approaches to shelf-life-integrated planning and scheduling in yoghurt production",
         International Journal of Production Research, Vol. 43 No. 23, pp. 5071-5100.
FAO. (2013). Toolkit: Reducing the food wastage footprint: Food and Agriculture Organization.
Fisher, M. L. (1997) "What is the right supply chain for your product?", Harvard Business Review, Vol.
         March-April No. pp. 1-16.
Fritz, M. and Schiefer, G. (2008) "Food chain management for sustainable food system development: a
          European research agenda", Agribusiness, Vol. 24 No. 4, pp. 440-452.
Fritz, M. and Schiefer, G. (2009) "Tracking, tracing, and business process interests in food commodities: A
          multi-level decision complexity", International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 117 No. 2,
          pp. 317-329.
Gunasekaran, A., Lai, K. H. and Cheng, T. C. E. (2008) "Responsive supply chain: A competitive strategy
        in a networked economy", Omega-International Journal of Management Science, Vol. 36 No. 4,
        pp. 549-564.
Hafliðason, T., Ólafsdóttir, G., Bogason, S. and Stefánsson, G. (2012) "Criteria for temperature alerts in
         cold supply chains", International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, Vol.
         42 No. 4, pp. 1-14.
Helms, M. (2004) "Food sustainability, food security and the environment", British Food Journal, Vol. 106
        No. 5, pp. 380-387.
Lambert, D. M. and Cooper, M. C. (2000) "Issues in supply chain management", Industrial Marketing
         Management, Vol. 29 No. pp. 65-83.
Lipinski, B., C. Hanson, J. Lomax, L. Kitinoja, R. Waite and T. Searchinger, Installment 2 of “Creating a
          Sustainable Food Future” Reducing Food Loss and Waste. World Resource Institute. Working
          Paper. (May, 2013)
Macheka L., R. Germs, P. A. Luning, J.G.A.J. van der Vorst, A hierarchical framework on quality and
        logistic management decisions affecting food losses in fresh supply chains, working paper
        Wageningen University.
Nepstad, D. C., Stickler, C. M. and Almeida, O. T. (2006) "Globalization of the amazon soy and beef
         industries: Opportunities for conservation", Conservation Biology, Vol. 20 No. 6, pp. 1595-1603.
Seuring, S. and Muller, M. (2008) "From a literature review to a conceptual framework for sustainable supply
          chain management", Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 16 No. 15, pp. 1699-1710.
Simchi-Levi, D., Kaminsky, P. and Simchi-Levi, E. (2009) Designing and Managing the Supply Chain:
        Concepts, Strategies and Case Studies,McGraw-Hill/Irwin, New York.
Soysal M., J.M. Bloemhof-Ruwaard, M.P.M. Meuwissen, and J.G.A.J. van der Vorst, A Review on
        Quantitative Models for Sustainable Food Logistics Management, Int. J. Food System Dynamics
        3 (2), 2012, 136-155
Tarantilis, C. D. and Kiranoudis, C. T. (2002) "Distribution of fresh meat", Journal of Food Engineering,
          Vol. 51 No. 1, pp. 85-91.

Page 23
Tonelli, Marcello & Dalglish, Carol L. (2012) The role of transport infrastructure in facilitating the survival
          and growth of micro-enterprises in developing economies. In The Joint ACERE-DIANA
          International Entrepreneurship Conference, 31 January – 3 February 2012, University of Notre
          Dame, Fremantle, WA.
Trienekens, J. and Zuurbier, P. (2008) "Quality and safety standards in the food industry, developments and
          challenges", International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 113 No. 1, pp. 107-122.
Van der Vorst, J.G.A.J., Effective food supply chains; generating, modelling and evaluating supply chain
        scenarios, PhD thesis, Wageningen University, 2000
Van der Vorst, J. G. A. J., Beulens, A. J. M. and Van Beek, P. (2000) "Modelling and simulating multi-echelon food
          systems", European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 122 No. 2, pp. 354-366.
Van der Vorst, J. G. A. J. and Beulens, A. J. M. (2002) "Identifying sources of uncertainty to generate
        supply chain redesign strategies ", International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics, Vol.
        32 No. 6, pp. 409-430.
Van der Vorst, J. G. A. J., Beulens, A. J. M. and Van Beek, P. (2005) "Innovations in logistics and ICT in food
         supply chain networks" Jongen, W. M. F. and Meulenberg, M. T. G., Innovation in Agri-Food
         Systems, Wageningen Academic Publishers, Wageningen, pp. 245-292.
Van der Vorst, J.G.A.J., C. Da Silva and J.H. Trienekens (2007), Agro-industrial Supply Chain
        Management: Concepts and Applications, FAO Agricultural Management, Marketing And
        Finance, Occasional Paper 17, March 2007, 56 p.
Van der Vorst, J. G. A. J., Van Kooten, O. and Luning, P. (2011) "Towards a diagnostic instrument to
        identify improvement opportunities for quality controlled logistics in agrifood supply chain
        networks", International journal on food system dynamics, Vol. 2 No. 1, pp. 94-105.
Van der Vorst, J.G.A.J. (2012) Toekomstverkenning transities tot 2040 voor de topsectoren Agrofood en
        Tuinbouw vanuit logistiek perspectief, December 2011, In opdracht van de Raad voor de
        Leefomgeving en Infrastructuur, 17 pages
Van Donk, D. P. (2001) "Make to stock or make to order: The decoupling point in the food processing
        industries", International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 69 No. 3, pp. 297-306.
Van Donselaar, K., Van Woensel, T., Broekmeulen, R. and Fransoo, J. (2006) "Inventory control of
       perishables in supermarkets", International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 104 No. 2, pp.
       462-472.
Van Gogh, B. Lusine Aramyan, Addie van der Sluis, Han Soethoudt, Frans Peter Scheer (2013), Feasibility
        of a network of excellence postharvest food losses; Combining knowledge and competence to
        reduce food losses in developing and emerging economics, Wageningen University & Research
        Center, Rapport 1402, May 2013
Wognum, P. M., Bremmers, H., Trienekens, J. H., Van der Vorst, J. G. A. J. and Bloemhof, J. M. (2011)
       "Systems for sustainability and transparency of food supply chains – Current status and
       challenges", Advanced Engineering Informatics, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 65-76.
World Economic Forum 2012, Driving Sustainable Consumption. Value Chain Waste. Overview Briefing




Page 24
