                                                                                     85826




   Multi–Donor Trust Fund for Sustainable Logistics (MDTF–SL)

             Position Note on Green Logistics (Supply Chains)




The Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Sustainable Logistics (MDTF-SL) commissioned a series of
short notes from recognized thought leaders to better understand burgeoning issues within the
MDTF-SL’s thematic pillars. This note explores issues within the Green Logistics / Supply
Chains thematic pillar and was prepared by Prof Dr Ir Jan C Fransoo from Eindhoven University
of Technology, The Netherlands.

The Green Logistics pillar is one of three focus areas, or thematic pillars, for the MDTF-SL. The
goal of this pillar is to support activities in low income and developing countries that contribute
to the development of transport corridors and logistics services, while minimizing the carbon
footprint and greenhouse gases associated with the delivery of goods.

By allowing for trade patterns and product value chains to be built sustainably, the "greening" of
supply chains can improve the competitive positioning of developing country exports,
particularly in industries and production value–chains monitored for their carbon footprints.




                                                1
GREEN LOGISTICS: ENABLERS FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT1




Edited by Jan C. Fransoo, Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands
Email: j.c.fransoo@tue.nl

This version: January 26, 2014




1
 This paper is based on literal text excerpts from a draft working paper titled: “Green Logistics: Sustainable Supply
Chain and Enabling Policies”, authored by Jan C. Fransoo and Yann Bouchery (Eindhoven University of
Technology), Jean-Francois Arvis (World Bank) and Lauri Ojala (University of Turku).


                                                          2
      1. INTRODUCTION

    Logistics is the backbone of industry and commerce. As a discipline, it describes the
management and coordination of activities along supply chains. These activities include freight
transport, storage, inventory management, materials handling and related information processing.
A large part of logistics activities are often outsourced to specialized providers that provide cost-
effective services. Research has shown that, at least in high income economies, the value of
services is not assessed in monetary and service quality terms alone. In making decisions,
logistics professionals are increasingly taking into consideration external effects such as
emissions, pollution, noise, and accidents.

    The last LPI report release in 2012, for instance, pointed out that in shipments to OECD
countries, environmentally friendly solutions are considered far more often than elsewhere.
Mounting regulatory pressure, together with changes in customer preferences, are the main
drivers of this phenomenon. One of the more widely used terms to describe this set of
preferences is “Green Logistics,” especially when the activities of logistics service providers are
concerned.

    Research, including a recent book by Alan McKinnon, has established that “Green Logistics”
is an emerging concern of private operators and providers and users of logistics. From a policy
standpoint, and especially for the global environment, “Green Logistics” is potentially a major
topic as well: estimates vary, but about 15% of global greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) can be
traced to logistics activities.

    “Green Logistics” may not be an independent policy area. Rather, the supply chain
perspective provides a framework to understand and deal with issues that are separate but
ultimately interrelated. Importantly, looking at supply chains helps policy makers understand the
interests and actions of private sector operators. “Green Logistics” may therefore propose a
number of tools and identify emerging sustainable solutions contributing to the overarching
objective of “Green Growth.”

    From a policy perspective, logistics cut across several areas and sectors. The performance of
supply chains depends on areas or activities where government as regulator or catalyst of
investment is critical, such as:

  •     Transport infrastructure: road and rail corridors, ports and airports




                                                  3
  •    The efficiencies of logistics services: services include not only modal freight transport,
       but also warehousing and intermediary services, such as brokers and forwarders, and
       related information-flow management. In modern economies, the trend is towards
       integration in multi-activity logistics providers (3PLs, 4PLs) to which industrial and
       commercial firms outsource their supply chain activities. Understanding the regulatory
       dimension of services is becoming increasingly critical to the development of effective
       policies in areas such as: professional and operational standards, regulation of entry in
       market and professions, competition, enforcement…

  •    Procedures applying to the merchandise, such as trade procedures (customs and other
       controls).

  •    The soft infrastructure that supports information or financial flow associated with the
       physical movements along supply chains: IT infrastructure, payment systems…

    The concept of national logistics performance – capturing the outcome of these policies – is
widely recognized by policy makers and the private sector worldwide as a critical contribution to
national competitiveness. A key question for sustainable development is how to integrate supply
chain participants’ concern with environmental sustainability with the concept of national
logistics performance.

    Within logistics, transport creates the largest environmental footprint. But the volume of
emissions can vary greatly, depending on the mode of transport. The volume of emission per ton
per km increases by an order of magnitude from maritime to land transportation and to air
transportation. This is a key environmental aspect of logistics that is not taken into consideration
by most supply chain operators. Logistics experts typically integrate freight modes and other
related activities so that the transport and distribution network is used in the most efficient
manner, which is important for keeping emissions in check, as well. Depending on the type of
industry and geographical region, supply chain operators can place varying emphasis on the
reliability of supply chains, as well. In summary, supply chain choices typically include multiple
criteria and trade-offs, and this makes an analysis of their environmental impact complex; the
most environmentally friendly choices do not only depend on mode of transportation, but also on
other elements, such as efficiency and reliability.

   To reduce the environmental footprint of a supply chain, the focus should be on several
dimensions and should select the best mode of transport, efficient movements, and innovation.
Comprehensive work on “greening” individual modes of transportation is already available.
Here, the key drivers have been energy efficiency and the urge to diminish various types of


                                                 4
emission. Given the integrated nature of supply chains, however, the manner in which price
signals and incentives catalyze supply chain structure is a rather intricate problem: lower-
emission modes of transport (maritime, e.g.) are typically also less reliable or have other
limitations (such as maritime access to a landlocked country). Such limitations may include the
cost of such technologies, the temperature range within which they can be used or the availability
of certain types of fuel. It is therefore critical to complement the current knowledge about
emissions produced by different modes of transportation with an understanding of what drives
the demand for “Green Logistics” within supply chains.

    The emerging response is likely to take the form of top-down policy, such as measures in the
form of standards or taxes addressing emissions (GHG, SO2, NOx) by mode of freight. For
instance, a cap on SO2 emissions on major maritime routes will go into effect at the end of 20152.
At least as important is the response from the bottom up. These are supply-chain strategies
coming from the private sector in response to policy or price changes, but also demand from
consumers, clients and stake-holders. Green Supply Chain management has to be taken seriously
by policy makers.

    An exclusive focus on price mechanism (including taxes), as is the current tendency, may
miss some of the major driver of changes in supply chain management. Another complication, at
least in the context of international trade, is that the focus on the impact on international logistics
does not capture the footprint of production processes. These processes may have different
impact than the supply chain itself, as in the case of food production.

    There is also evidence that much of the environmental footprint of logistics operations is tied
to short distances and distribution. “Green Logistics” is intimately linked with concerns such as
urban congestion, and innovations in “City Logistics” are critical to sustainable supply chains.
Grassroots innovations in “City Logistics” have recently flourished, often producing win-win
solutions in terms of jobs and the environment. More generally, there is increasing awareness
that green supply chains can be also competitive, either because the awareness of the
environment helps productivity or because consumers expect it, particularly in wealthy countries.


2
  A concrete case in point is also the so-called sulphur emission regulation by IMO that enters into force on January
1, 2015 in most of North Sea, Baltic Sea and along west and east coasts of US & Canada (bar Alaska). Ships have to
go over from fuel with 1.5 % sulphur to 0.1 % sulphur – or invest in so-called scrubbers, that absorb the sulphur
from exhaust gases; technology that is still nascent in the maritime context. Scrubber investment per cargo ship is
USD 2 million and uo with multiples as the ship engine size increases, with annual maintenance cost approx.. 7-10
% of investment. This seemingly innocent and rather technical change is going to have a huge impact on shipping
and the spillover effect to other modes & Supply chains are goi ng to be significant…


                                                         5
    “Green Logistics” also encompasses potentially longer-term concerns. A green focus within
logistics analysis could examine a supply chain’s vulnerability to climate events or to large
swings in the price of transport inputs, for instance. A recent volcanic episode in Iceland showed
the vulnerability of one specific supply chain that relies heavily on air freight – fresh produce
coming from Africa spoiled when flights were cancelled because of the volcanic ash. Resilience
concerns and other form of uncertainty are likely to shape supply chain choices by regional and
global operators. Given the importance of trade in components and intra-firm trade, how large
operators develop green supply chain strategies will have profound economic impact. Resilient
and greener supply chains are likely to be less extended and leaner, for example, though the
consequences for trade and integration of low income economies cannot be treated fully here.

    Policy makers should be concerned by both the supply and demand aspects of logistics’
environmental dimensions. So far, the policy focus has been on modal footprint and has not
taken into account a supply chain perspective. There have not been major initiatives in “Green
Logistics,” even in the countries most sensitive to the issue, such as those in Northern Europe.
Rather the most important changes have occurred as a combination of largely uncoordinated
public and private initiatives: voluntary behavior by shippers, innovation in terms of technology,
information (environmental logistics dashboard) or services, or common public-private
objectives such as in modal shifts.




                                                6
   2. DEFINING GREEN LOGISTICS AND GREEN SUPPLY CHAIN
      MANAGEMENT

There are many variations in the terminology regarding green logistics and green supply chain
management. This section aims at providing a brief overview on some of the key terms used in
the literature.
   Green logistics refers mainly to environmental issues related to transportation, material
handling and storage, inventory control, warehousing, packaging, and facility location allocation
decisions (Min & Kim, 2012). Gonzalez-Benito and Gonzalez-Benito (2006) use the term
environmental logistics to describe logistics practices that are divided into supply/purchasing,
transportation, warehousing and distribution, and reverse logistics and waste management.
Although distribution is considered to be one of the interrelated areas of supply chain
management, the term green distribution has also been used to describe the whole process of
integrating environmental concerns into transportation, packaging, labelling and reverse logistics
(Shi et al., 2012).
   Reverse logistics is often used as a synonym to efforts to reduce the environmental impact of
the supply chain by recycling, reusing and remanufacturing. However, originally green logistics
was used to describe the movement of the material against the primary flow in the form of
commercial returns, wrong deliveries and recalls etc., i.e. from the customer towards the
producer. (Rogers & Tibben-Lembke, 2001.) In addition to reverse logistics, closed-loop supply
chain has also been used to emphasize that the reverse flow of material (e.g. Zhu et al., 2008).
However, the activities motivated mainly by environmental concerns might be better labelled as
green reverse logistics (Hazen, Cegielski & Hanna, 2011) or in the more general terms of green
or environmental logistics (Rogers & Tibben-Lembke, 2001) instead of reverse logistics or
closed-loop supply chains.
   The above-mentioned concepts are mainly used to describe the actions taken by the logistics
service provider side. Green supply chain management (GSCM) is a more extensive concept that
has been gaining increasing interest among practitioners and academia and is mainly directed
towards manufacturing companies. The term implies that the focus of environmental
management has shifted from a facility or organisation level to supply chain level (Linton et al.,
2007). Srivastava (2007) defines that GSCM is ‘integrating environmental thinking into supply
chain management, including product design, material sourcing and selection, manufacturing


                                                7
processes, delivery of the final product to the consumers as well as end-of-life management of
the product after its useful life.’ GSCM is also known as environmental supply chain
management (ESCM) (e.g. Zsidisin & Siferd, 2001;Walker et al., 2008). Some authors (e.g.
Seuring & Müller, 2008; Craig & Carter, 2008) use sustainable supply chain management
(SSCM) as a synonym of GSCM or ESCM although they mostly focus on the environmental
aspect of sustainability, thereby paying less attention on economic and social aspects. According
to Zhu et al. (2005) GSCM is strongly related to inter-organisational activities such as industrial
ecosystems, industrial ecology, product life cycle analysis, extended producer responsibility and
product stewardship.
    GSCM is often described to consist of green purchasing, green manufacturing, green
distribution/green marketing and reverse logistics (Hervani et al., 2005). Green or environmental
purchasing or green supply refers to efforts to improve environmental performance of purchased
inputs or of suppliers that provide them (Bowen et al., 2001). Green manufacturing is typically
tried to be achieved by various types of environmental practices, such as pollution control,
pollution prevention and product stewardship (Hart, 1995). The definitions of GSCM emphasize
that environmentally conscious practices are evident in all stages of the supply chain and the
product life-cycle (Hervani et al., 2005). Furthermore, Vachon and Klassen (2006) divide these
green supply chain management practices into two sets: one of them being environmental
monitoring and the other environmental collaboration. In the former the focus is on arm’s length
transaction in which the buying organisation evaluates and monitors its suppliers, and in the
latter the environmental solutions are developed jointly.
    GSCM activities aim at achieving market advantages and profits while reducing
environmental impacts. One generally used concept to measure the effect of supply chain
activities on natural environment is the environmental or ecological footprint. It accounts for
human demand on global biological resources and compares the level of consumption with the
available amount of bioproductive land and sea area and has been designed to show whether this
‘sustainability threshold’ is exceeded (Wiedmann & Barrett, 2010). Lately the use of carbon
footprint has increased rapidly but the question still remains whether it should contain only
carbon dioxide emissions or other greenhouse gas emissions as well (Wiedmann & Minx, 2007).
   The increasing interest in environmental issues has led to the development of voluntary
environmental management systems. Environmental management systems (EMS) is ‘a collection
of internal efforts at formally articulating environmental goals, making choices that integrate the


                                                8
environment into production decisions, identifying opportunities for pollution (waste) reduction
and implementing plans to make continuous improvements in production methods and
environmental performance’ (Khanna & Anton, 2002). The most commonly used framework for
an EMS is developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) for the ISO
14001 standard. In addition, for example the European Parliament has created its own
environmental management system, EMAS. (Gonzalez et al. 2008.) In order to obtain a
certification an environmental audit conducted by a registered external auditor is required
(Rondinelli & Vastag, 2000).

2.1 Where is the Footprint coming from?

Different types of actors can use different approaches to contribute to environmental
sustainability. These approaches can be viewed from macro and micro perspective. Actions in
the macro domain are taken by governments and other legislative authorities, while in the micro
domain the actions are taken by the companies (Aronsson & Huge-Brodin, 2006). When viewed
from a supply chain perspective, the micro domain can be further divided into the logistics
service users (manufacturing, trading) and logistics service providers. The decisions concerning
the actions to be taken can be made at different levels: strategic, tactic and operational. Each
level indicates different scope and time span of the decision. In general, the policy makers’
decisions are prepared for several months and even years beforehand, whereas logistics service
providers and users also make plenty of day-to-day decisions. Figure X illustrates some of the
actions taken by different actors that impact on the environmental footprint. It is not meant to be
conclusive but to provide some examples on what kinds of activities affect the environmental
footprint.


  Table 1: Actions Taken by Different Actors to Impact the Environmental Footprint




                                                9
   Management can take several approaches to greening the supply chains. Some firms choose to
be reactive and commit minimal resources, while more proactive firms may choose to seek value
by strategically committing to environmental sustainability and by integrating environmental
policy in strategy. (van Hoek, 1999.) Formulating environmental strategy is equally important
for both logistics service users and providers. An environmental management system (EMS) can
be implemented to address environmental practices within the organisation. It is used to formally
articulate environmental goals, to make choices that integrate the environment into production
decisions, and to identify opportunities for pollution reduction and to implement plans to make
continuous improvements (Khanna & Anton, 2002.) The two most widespread EMSs in Europe
are ISO 14 001 and EMAS (Gonzalez, Sarkis & Adenso-Diaz, 2008).
   Green purchasing or green supply attempts to improve environmental performance of
purchased inputs or of suppliers that provide them (Bowen et al., 2001). Green purchasing
enables to “green” specific issues, such as to reduction the waste produced, to substitute material
through environmental sourcing of raw materials and to minimize the use of hazardous materials


                                               10
(Rao & Holt, 2005), e.g. through materials that are either recyclable or reusable, or have already
been recycled. Supplier selection is an important decision at this stage. (Sarkis, 2003.) Supplier
evaluation and development forms another important part of green purchasing (Zsidisin &
Siferd, 2001). The survey study by Holt and Ghobadian (2009) revealed that over 50 % of UK
manufacturers used informal supplier assessment and evaluation practices and over 30% used
formal systems. Greener production is typically addressed through various types of
environmental practices, such as pollution control, pollution prevention and product stewardship
(Hart, 1995). It can be achieved by using renewable and recycled materials and by incorporating
reverse logistics so that wasted generated in the production processes are processed and recycled
into the production phase (Rao & Holt, 2005).
   There is a growing trend to outsource transport and logistics services to third party logistics
service providers. Logistics service buyers increasingly ask for information on environmental
performance of logistics service providers. (Wolf & Seuring, 2010.) Network design, planning
and management are some of the pivotal issues to be considered by logistics service providers.
Environmental sustainability usually calls for fewer shipments, less handling, shorter
movements, more direct routes and better space utilization. Network design has an impact on fill
rate, e.g. by increasing the size of warehouses, by centralizing distribution and by changing the
location of warehouses. Consolidation is a central aspect to logistics systems on many levels,
since consolidation of freight affects fleet size, vehicles, container and package sizes. (Aronsson
& Huge-Brodin, 2006.) Other operational measures include e.g. educating and training drivers
on eco-driving leads to reductions in fuel consumption (Helmreich, Bonilla, Akyelken, Düh
&Weiss, 2009).
   Although the supply chain to the retailers were optimized in terms of environmental
sustainability, the importance of ‘last mile deliveries’ cannot be underestimated. Browne, Rizet,
Leonardi and Allen (2008) note that personal shopping trips can use more energy than the whole
supply chain before, even if production is included. Hence, the consumers should be made aware
of the environmental effects of their shopping behavior. Growing online retail can reduce these
effects and retailers can actively aim at reducing their share by e.g. consolidating orders and by
adopting off-peak/out-of-hours deliveries, allowing delivery vans to run more of their mileage at
fuel-efficient speeds. (Edwards, McKinnon & Cullinane, 2009.)
   In the macro domain, the harmful effects of logistics have been recognized long ago. The
transport strategy of the European Union highlights development needs towards sustainable


                                               11
transport and promotes multimodal and rail transport (European Commission white paper, 2011).
Several policy instruments used by legislative bodies have long-term impacts on the supply
chains. European commercial air transport and energy intensive manufacturing sectors are
subject to the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS). According to European
Commission (2013a), the EU ETS is “a cornerstone of a cornerstone of the European Union's
policy to combat climate change and its key tool for reducing industrial greenhouse gas
emissions cost-effectively”. The system applies to emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) from
power plants, energy-intensive industry sectors and commercial airlines. The EU ETS works on
the 'cap and trade' principle. A 'cap' refers to the limit of the total amount of certain greenhouse
gases that can be emitted by the factories, power plants and other installations in the system.
Within the cap, companies receive or buy emission allowances that can be traded with one
another as needed. After each year a company must surrender enough allowances to cover all its
emissions or it will be imposed heavy fines.
   Apart from financial incentives, governments can use regulation to affect vehicle design and
operation, the status of freight operators, the tariffs they charge and even the capacity of the
freight sector. Furthermore, freight markets that are beneficial for environment, such as rail
transport, can be liberalized and privatized. Infrastructure and land-use planning has a long-range
impact in the spatial structure of the supply chains and modal choice. Governments also have a
central role in promoting best environmental practice, often in close collaboration with trade
associations. Climate change can ultimately lead to the need to limit the growth of ton-
kilometers. Either the level of material consumption can be brought down or the structure of the
supply chains can be changed. The latter can be achieved by e.g. promoting more localized
sourcing and production and more centralized warehousing. (McKinnon, 2012).




                                                12
   3. ECONOMICS OF GREEN LOGISTICS

   Understanding the key economic trade-offs of freight transportation is a prerequisite for
designing efficient carbon emissions mitigation policies. After reviewing the main regulatory
policies based on the pricing of carbon emissions, we argue that these regulatory policies have a
limited potential for supply chain carbon emissions reduction due to the relative price inelasticity
of freight transportation. A short example is also presented in order to illustrate the effect of a
carbon tax on modal shift. Finally, some other types of regulatory policies that may indirectly
have an effect on supply chain carbon emissions are reviewed.

3.1 Pricing of carbon emissions

   The pricing of emissions has been proposed as an important mechanism to curb their growth.
In general, two types of pricing can be distinguished, namely taxation and cap-and-trade systems.
   In a taxation system, emissions are taxed by a certain financial penalty. Taxation is typically
applied to internalize external costs. For instance, societal costs such as pollution and noise are
external to the industrial decision makers, and hence they are not part of a financial trade-off.
Different types of taxes may be applied to account for carbon emissions. In the transportation
sector, taxes on carbon emissions are usually charged indirectly by considering energy/fuel
consumption, vehicle miles traveled, road usage or vehicle acquisition. Table 2 synthesizes the
main types of taxes related to carbon emissions for transportation and provides examples of
implementation.

Table 2: Taxes on Carbon Emissions

                            Types                                   Examples

                   Energy / Fuel consumption                          Fuel tax

                     Vehicle miles traveled               Oregon mileage tax (pilot study)

                          Road usage                            Eurovignette (EU)

                      Vehicle acquisition                   Passenger car taxation (EU)


   Fuel taxation is the most commonly used carbon emissions taxation mechanism. In Europe,
taxes have gradually increased to reflect the increasing concern over the environment. In the



                                                13
United States, taxes on fuel have remained more or less the same. Due to the increase in oil
price, actually the relative taxes have decreased in the US. Although the fuel price is still subject
to market fluctuations, a fixed tax leads to price certainty on the taxes. Other advantages related
to carbon taxation may be emphasized. First a regulatory policy based on carbon taxation is easy
to implement and to enforce as it is simple and transparent. For the same reasons, this type of
regulatory policy is effective in advance of any international treaty and is less vulnerable to
abuse. Second, fuel taxation enables designing a carbon mitigation mechanism that is
homogenous across all economy. On the other hand, there is no outcome certainty on imposing
taxes. This could be viewed as a main drawback of such a regulatory policy. In theory, the tax
rate should be equal to the marginal harm from the regulated parties. In reality, the setting of the
tax rate is challenging because it is difficult to obtain accurate information about the costs and
benefits of reducing emissions or mitigating climate change (Metcalf and Weisbach, 2009).
Moreover, the pricing of carbon emissions implies that the marginal harm caused by carbon
emissions can be expressed in monetary units. This idea is in accordance with the concept of
weak sustainability that assumes significant possibilities for substitution between natural capital
and human-made capital (Simpson et al., 2005). Weak sustainability is traditionally opposed to
strong sustainability that states that some ecological services are critical to life support, i.e. that
substitutability between the different sustainable development dimensions is not desirable
(Gasparatos et al., 2008; Neumayer, 2004). Finally, carbon taxation may also encourage the
phenomenon of carbon leakage, i.e. the shift of production to locations without regulation. In this
case, the global level of carbon emissions may be increased due to extra transportation
requirements and possibly extra emissions from production.
   Unlike taxation, a cap-and-trade system provides outcome certainty. Under a cap-and-trade
system, permits are required to emit, and the total number of available permits is limited (and
freely tradeable). From the perspective of a firm, this also leads to a price associated with
emissions (like in the taxation case), but the price is fluctuating in function of the market. Since
the diesel price is however also uncertain, the impact on operational decision making is not that
different between dealing with emissions costs under a cap-and-trade system and dealing with
varying diesel (or kerosene, for that matter) prices. Examples of such cap-and trade regulatory
policies are the emissions trading system (EU), the western climate initiative (US) and the
regional greenhouse gas initiative (US). Note that emissions from transportation are generally
out of the scope of such initiatives. An exception is the emissions trading system that includes


                                                 14
aviation emissions since the beginning of 2012 even if the enforcement of such regulation has
witnesses some difficulties. The enforcement of the emissions trading system has indeed been
postponed for flights arriving at or departing from EU airports.
   In addition to the guaranteed carbon emissions reduction provided by a cap-and-trade
regulatory policy, this system is also recognized to achieve carbon emissions reduction at least
cost by allowing market selection. Under this type of policy, the companies may indeed focus on
the projects with the strongest carbon abatement potential.
  A cap-and-trade system is however a relatively new legislation format that is more complex to
monitor. Moreover, the detailed rules are complex. Finally, this complexity creates a risk of
market manipulation. As an example of such manipulation, the emissions trading system has
been subject to cyber-crime as well as value added tax fraud.

3.2 Price elasticity of Freight Transport

    The price elasticity of transport has been researched extensively in the transport economics
literature. Most of the research focuses on passenger transport, and within this area the focus in
mainly on automobile traffic elasticity as a response to fuel cost.
   The work by Goodwin et al. (2004) concludes that subject to a 10% increase in the fuel price
“volume of traffic will fall by roundly 1% within about a year, building up to a reduction of
about 3% in the longer run (about 5 years or so)” indicating elasticities of 0.1 and 0.3
respectively. Looking at related factors, he concludes that the same price increase of fuel (10%)
leads to “efficiency of the use of fuel [rising] by about 1.5% within a year, and around 4% in the
longer run”, suggesting that there is a response by car manufacturers and subsequently by drivers
in the change of the fleet, but less so in terms of vehicle miles travelled. An important effect
mentioned by Goodwin is the income effect: if income rises by 10%, the “number of vehicles,
and the total amount of fuel they consume, will both rise by nearly 4% within about a year, and
by over 10% in the longer run. However, the volume of traffic does not grow in proportion: 2%
within a year and about 5% in the longer run” (Goodwin et al., 2004).
    In the context of international tourism flow, Tol (2007) develop a simulation model to study
the impact of a carbon tax on aviation fuel. The study shows that a carbon tax of 1000$/t CO2
would decrease the carbon emissions from international aviation from 0.8%. This result
illustrates the limited impact of a regulatory policy based on taxation in curbing carbon
emissions from transportation.


                                               15
   With regard to freight, data is more sparse. The work by Goodwin et al. (2004) shows that
overall elasticities, both in terms of fuel bought and vehicle miles travelled are even smaller if
the fleet considered is both commercial and private. This would suggest that commercial fleet
elasticities are considerably smaller than those for passenger vehicles. As a potential explanation
they argue that car owners are less rational in their decision making and would only look at the
directly observable variable cost of operating a car (i.e., fuel) when making a decision on how
much to drive, and not take issues such as depreciation and maintenance into account, while this
would be less so for commercial vehicle operators. Graham and Glaister (2004) provide a more
extensive review of studies that investigate freight transport price elasticities, suggesting
substantially higher elasticities, in a few cases even exceeding unity. Most of the studies are
however old (at least 20 years) at it is unclear to what extent findings would hold in current
markets. It could be argued that the cost structure has changed over time, with especially labor
cost increasing as a share of the cost price. The review by Graham and Glaister (2004) does
suggest clearly that elasticities for road transport over long distances are substantially larger than
over short distances, suggesting opportunities for modal shift over long-distance traffic as a
consequence of price increases.
   An interesting, and much more detailed study than the usual aggregate econometric modeling
on which many of these results are based is the work by Beuthe et al. (2001). They develop a
detailed simulation model of a multi-modal transport network, parameterize it using actual cost,
and then optimize in the network from the perspective of the shipper. They deduce the elasticities
from the decisions resulting from these optimizations. Their results suggest that total tonnage
shipped is completely inelastic, while tonkilometers is more elastic, leading to modal shift over
longer distances.
   This relative price inelasticity of freight transportation implies that pricing emissions would
only marginally affect the global level of carbon emissions from the transportation sector.


3.3 Other Emissions Mitigation Policies
3.3.1. Technical regulation
   Technical regulations that impose maximum requirements on fuel consumption and/or on
emissions associated to transportation are generally only applicable to new vehicles entering the
market. In Europe, a standard for trucks has been in existence for pollutants such as SO2, NOx,



                                                 16
and particulate matter. These Euro-standards also have an indirect effect on the level of carbon
emissions even if there are no direct requirements associated to carbon emissions.
   The costs of conventional regulations are often invisible. Therefore, they are often criticized
for costing more than needed to achieve a particular environmental target, since uniform targets
are imposed on a group of heterogeneous emission sources. Consequently, investments are not
necessarily channeled to creating the largest marginal environmental benefits (Dessler and
Parson, 2009).
  Dessler and Parson (2009), conclude that, over the past 30 years, conventional regulations
have brought large environmental improvements. It should be noted that these have been largely
related to pollutants with local environmental impact, such as ozone and particulate matter. In
general technical standards have an impact on emissions over time. Response is generally slow
due to the fact that they generally apply to new vehicles only. If technical standards for
greenhouse gases were to be applied, the likely global effect is going to be even slower, as old
trucks that come off the developed markets are exported to emerging and developing economies,
and could be used for an additional number of decades in those countries.

3.3.2. Innovation support
   Fostering the emergence of low-carbon technologies may have a strong effect on carbon
emissions reduction. Several tools are available to support companies in their innovation efforts.
First, technical regulations such as standards may be viewed as emissions mitigation policies that
foster innovation. Second, innovation may be supported by subsidizing, granting and funding.
Such innovation support activities are often referred in the literature on emissions mitigation
policies as induced technological change. Kemfert and Truong (2007) study the impact of
emissions stabilization scenarios with and without induced technological change. They find that
emissions reduction targets are generally achieved by declines in production if technological
change is not induced. This decrease in production translates into an overall welfare reduction.
On the other hand, they argue that emissions mitigation result in fewer GDP drawbacks in case
of induced technological change. In a review paper on technological change in economic models
and environmental policy, Löschel (2002) shows that the incorporation of induced technological
change tends to reduce the costs of environmental policy, accelerates abatement and may lead to
positive spillover and negative leakage.




                                               17
3.3.3. Infrastructure investment
   In the literature on emission mitigation policies, public expenditures are usually mentioned as
an important category, referring to public buying (greening the purchasing of the government)
and investments into R&D on sustainable energy. For transport, investments in public
infrastructure should be part of this category, due to the fact that in transport energy efficiency
and cost often go hand-in-hand. Rail and barge transport are not only causing lower greenhouse
gas emissions than road transport, they are also cheaper. This implies that if the rail and inland
water systems have sufficient capacity and are reliable, shippers would tend to move cargo off
the road to water and rail. Public investments determine the availability of capacity on the
various modes of transportation by investments in motorways, rail tracks, and canal locks.
Recent examples show strong anecdotal evidence for this move, such as the modal shift in the
Netherlands from road to rail after opening a new and dedicated cargo rail track, and the increase
in the use of rail traffic in China after passenger traffic was moved from the conventional rail
system to the high-speed rail system. We are not aware of large-scale studies documenting the
consequences of infrastructure investment on emissions reduction, and the relative cost and
effectiveness of these compared to other policies.

3.3.4. Disclosure requirements
   The policy makers may also enact regulations to enforce companies to disclose their
performance in terms of carbon emissions. By doing so, the companies may be inclined to reduce
their carbon emissions in order to be perceived as environmentally friendly by stakeholders. For
instance, the companies may be required to publish a sustainability report. Carbon labeling also
enters into this category. We are not aware of any paper studying the consequences of disclosure
requirements on emissions reduction. The closest situation is studied by Kolk et al. (2008),
where institutional investors urge firms to voluntarily disclose extensive information about their
climate change activities. They prove that such initiative has been successful in increasing the
number of disclosing firms, but that the effects on carbon emissions reduction are hardly
evaluable.




                                               18
   4. COMPANIES’ FIVE SUSTAINABLE PRESSURES

   The role of companies in implementing sustainable development actions is indisputably
recognized. “It has become increasingly clear that business must play a central role in achieving
the goals of sustainable development strategies” (Elkington, 1994). Indeed, companies may
strongly leverage sustainability actions. For instance, companies may design and produce
environmentally and socially responsible products. However, the companies need motivations to
pursue sustainable development goals. In this section, a synthesis of some sustainable pressures
is presented. We refer to sustainable pressures to encompass both opportunities and threats that
the companies may take into account to act in a more sustainable way. We propose to classify the
sustainable pressures into five categories. This classification is not purposed to be exhaustive.
However, we have tried to give an overview of the main sustainable pressures on companies.




Figure 1: Pressures on Companies to Act.



   Figure 1 synthesizes our classification. The five main sustainable pressures on companies are
linked to resource scarcity, regulatory pressures, customer awareness, stakeholders’ pressure and
employees’ motivation.

4.1. Resource scarcity
   The first type of companies’ sustainable pressure is linked with non-renewable and renewable
resource depletion. The concept of sustainable development was initially proposed as an answer


                                               19
to resource depletion issues. Resource depletion may indeed affect companies in several ways. A
dependency on a scarce resource may affect companies due to speculation, price manipulation
and political intentions. Resource depletion may also cause civil and transnational conflicts
influencing both supply and demand. To tackle resource depletion problems, companies may
diversify their supply sources, design products requiring low resource consumption or invest in
cleaner technologies. Natural resource depletion problems thus require companies to implement
sustainable development actions.

4.2. Regulations
   The second type of sustainable pressure is generated by governments and international bodies.
The United Nations and national governments have indeed been the driving force behind
sustainable development. Once the central role of companies in achieving the goals of
sustainable development strategies has been recognized, governments and national bodies started
setting up political tools requiring companies to operate in a sustainable manner. The risk of
more stringent regulations in the future may also motivate companies. “To start with,
corporations get involved with sustainability programs forced by legislation. Some companies
anticipate such legislative changes, in order to gain some competitive advantage from acting as
first movers” (de Brito et al., 2008).

4.3. Customer awareness
   The third reason for companies to focus more on sustainable development actions is the
increasing customer awareness on sustainability issues (Blengini and Shields, 2010; Jaffry et al.,
2004; Vlosky et al., 1999). Customer awareness is indeed a strong pressure for companies as it
may positively affect the business for two reasons. First, selling sustainable products may be a
way to attract more customers. Second, sustainable products may deserve a price premium. The
DHL green trends survey on end consumers and business customers thoughts about green
logistics illustrates these facts (DHL, 2010). The main findings of this survey may be
summarized as follows:
  - Climate change is viewed as the most prominent challenge faced by the world.
  - Logistics is perceived as strategically important for carbon emissions reduction.
  - Business customer are inclined to use green logistics.
  - Business customers have huge expectations towards government.




                                               20
   Moreover, half of the interviewed consumers expressed the view that they would favour a
company with green solutions over a cheaper one in the next ten years. The customer willingness
to pay for a price premium is however hardly predictable as a gap often exists between intention
and action (Vermeir and Verbeke, 2006). For instance, Vanclay et al. (2011) recorded the sales
of 37 products that were labeled to indicate embodied carbon emissions. They found that the
change in consumption patterns was substantial only when the green-labeled products were also
the cheapest. Upham et al. (2011) also assess the public perception of a UK carbon labeling trial.
They found that there was little evidence of a willingness to use labels for product selection.

4.4. Stakeholder pressure
   Enhancing the company image is often argued to be a company’s motivation for establishing
sustainability programs. Continuous improvements in information technologies indeed lead to
the advent of the global information society. Whatever happens wherever in the world may thus
affect the company’s business. In this context, companies are under pressure to disclose more
and more about their environmental goals and performance (Elkington, 1994). This public
opinion, non-governmental organization and other stakeholders’ pressure is very intense for
companies. This phenomenon is amplified by government regulations requiring companies to
communicate about their sustainability performances.

4.5. Employees’ motivation
   Finally, the fifth identified sustainable pressure is self-motivation. Companies may indeed
have “the desire to do the right thing” as reported by Lieb and Lieb (2010) survey. In this sense,
sustainability may be viewed as an entire part of company’s values. This integration of
sustainable development in the strategic vision of companies may also be beneficial for
employees’ motivation. Modern employees are more and more focused on a positive and
responsible company culture. This may also be a valuable argument to attract skilled employees
as more and more employees argue that they would choose working for a company with strong
sustainability commitments.




                                                21
   5. IMPACTS FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES



The above outlines a variety of different measures that could be taken by policy makers. In all
measures, the private sector response needs to be taken into account. Logistics activities are part
of international supply chains, and the measures to be implemented need to take into account that
the policies are aligned with the anticipated response of private operators. In that respects,
pricing is not effective in many cases, and measures should further enhance and strengthen the
developments in the private sector.

In the text below, we will summarize the main factors that impact the current status of
developing countries in the greening of their logistics.

1. Lack of footprinting standards

“To measure is to know” as the saying goes, is highly relevant for most of the developing
countries. Most of the current carbpon footprinting models have been based on either North
America or Europe, and little reliably data or models exist for developing countries. As a last
resort, policy makers and companies usually take the reference models from the developed world
to measure their emissions. Sparse studies that have been conducted, demonstrate that fuel usage
is substantially worse in developing countries due to poor road conditions, an aged fleet, poor
driving conditions and poor driver behavior. It is important that more reliable measurement
standards for carbon footprinting in developing countries become available, such that shippers
that are greening their supply chains may make better informed decisions.

2. Poor regulation of the transport sector

The transport sector is usually poorly regulated. This has effects on matters such as safety and
labor conditions, and also on fuel consumption. Gradual fleet renewal is important to reduce
emissions. Some countries have been successful by banning the import of old cars, but similar
programs for trucks have barely been put in place. Simultaneously, it should be realized that the
costs of transport are still high despite the low labor cost, the often subsidized fuel costs, and the
old fleet, dues to poor coordination of transport. Long journeys with unbalanced flows often lead
to trucks waiting very long to obtain return loads, for instance.

3. Little attention for any pollution




                                                 22
Governments in developing countries have relatively little attention for Green House Gases. If
pollution by the transport sector receives attention, it is usually focused on local pollutants.
Starting work on greening supply chains by reduction of local pollutants is a good starting point,
as this creates local support, and in many cases the reduction of local pollutants go hand-in-hand
with reductions of green house gases.

4. Few infrastructure alternatives

Research within Europe has demonstrated that shippers are usually willing to switch to greener
modes of transport as usually the cost are also lower. The main impediment is usually the
availability of reliable alternatives. Proper analysis of transport infrastructures across the
country, and the bundling of transport along corridors.



As discussed above, international shippers can play a major role with the greening of logistics.
Projects should be conducted that involve those shippers in the policy changes that are
considered. Especially voluntary (and often industry-driven) mechanisms have been successful,
such as the EPA SmartWay program in the US, the Lean and Green Program in the Netherlands,
and the Greenfreight Europe Program.



References available upon request.




                                               23
