86039 v2
                    A WOMAN MAKES HER LIVING AS A
                    CHICKPEA FARMER IN TULU BOLO,
                    ETHIOPIA. TRAINING FROM A FARMER’S
                    COOPERATIVE ON FARMING TECHNIQUES
                    HAS INCREASED HER CROP PRODUCTION
                    AND TRANSFORMED HER AND HER
                    FAMILY’S LIVES.

                    PHOTO: MIKE TURNER




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                   iii
INTRODUCTION
African agriculture has the potential to spur growth, reduce poverty and transform millions of lives. Yet, suffering from
a lack of investment and political attention, it has not realised this potential. Further hindering agricultural
development and broader growth is a wide and pervasive gender gap in agricultural productivity, caused by numerous
economic, cultural and institutional disadvantages faced by women farmers. Investing in women farmers and
instituting policies that close the gender gap in African agriculture could yield enormous benefits, not only for women
themselves, but also for their families, their communities and their entire countries. The UN Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) has estimated that if women worldwide had the same access to productive resources as men,
they could increase yields on their farms by 20–30% and total agricultural output by 2.5–4%, lifting between 100 and
150 million people out of hunger.1 Furthermore, when a woman gains more control over her income, she gains more say
over important decisions that affect her family, especially her children. Families where women influence economic
decisions allocate more income to food, health, education and children’s nutrition, thus benefiting Africa’s next
generation.2

While many African policy-makers, donor governments and development partners have turned their attention to
the gender gap in African agriculture, their efforts could be enhanced by a better understanding of which factors
matter, how they matter in different contexts and what policies can be effectively employed to bridge that gap. For
too long, policy-makers have lacked high-quality, consistent data on agriculture, let alone sex-disaggregated data
for the sector.3

This report, “Levelling the Field: Improving Opportunities for Women Farmers in Africa”, offers new evidence and fresh
insights on the factors that account for the gender gap in six African countries: Ethiopia, Malawi, Niger, Nigeria,
Tanzania and Uganda. Drawing on data collected by national statistics offices with assistance from the Living
Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) programme, and applying an
established statistical method in a new way, the report allows for richer, more detailed analyses of gender dynamics in
agriculture. By identifying the precise factors responsible for the gender gap in each of these six countries, it suggests
specific policy proposals to address the main constraints that women farmers face and generate benefits for the
economy as a whole. These findings and policy recommendations are outlined in the following pages.




LEVELLING THE FIELD: Improving Opportunities for Women Farmers in Africa                                                     1
KEY FINDINGS
                 Women farmers consistently produce less per hectare than their male
        1        counterparts.i

This report, profiling six countries that comprise more than 40% of sub-Saharan Africa’s population, presents the
clearest evidence to date attesting to the breadth and depth of the gender gap in African agriculture. A simple
comparison of average male and female productivity shows that the gaps range from a low of 13% in Uganda to a high
of 25% in Malawi.ii This suggests that in Malawi, for instance, male-managed plots produce on average 25% more per
hectare than female-managed plots. A more refined measure of these gaps, accounting for differences in plot size
and geographic factors, reveals a starker picture: When comparing women and men with similar-sized plots in a
similar context, the gender gaps range from 23% in Tanzania to a strikingly large 66% in Niger.iii


FIGURE 1: Gender Gaps in Agricultural Productivity, by Country


                               SIMPLE DIFFERENCE


                ETHIOPIA                                                    23% ***
                MALAWI                                                          25%***
                NIGER                                               19%***
                     North              4%
       NIGERIA
                     South                                                    24%*
                TANZANIA                   6%
                UGANDA                                   13%***
                              0                 10                20                 30


                              DIFFERENCE AFTER ACCOUNTING FOR PLOT SIZE AND REGIONS


                ETHIOPIA                                                      24% ***
                MALAWI                                                          25%***
                NIGER                                                                                                                              66%***
                     North                                                                                             46%***
       NIGERIA
                     South                                       17%
                TANZANIA                                                    23%***
                UGANDA                                                                         33%***
                              0                 10                 20                 30                40                 50                 60    70


Note: The symbols */**/*** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels respectively.


 i
   The terms “women farmers”, “female farmers” and “female plot managers” are used interchangeably throughout the full report and indicate women who make
important managerial decisions about a given plot of farmland. The full report provides more information about this definition.
ii
     The gaps in Tanzania and northern Nigeria are statistically insignificant based on a simple comparison.
iii
      The gap in southern Nigeria is statistically insignificant with this refined measure, probably due to a relatively small sample size.



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                                                                           2
   2         The gender gap is caused by more than unequal access to inputs; women also
             face unequal returns to the inputs they have.

Previous research highlighting the gender gap in agriculture has focused exclusively on women’s access to key inputs,
such as fertiliser, agricultural information and farm labour, concluding that if women had better access, they would be
equally productive. The methodology in this report looks not only at the quantity and levels of resources that women
use, but also assesses the returns that they receive from these resources, or how well these resources actually
translate into increased agricultural productivity. In doing so, the report reveals that in many countries, even when
women have access to the same amount of inputs as men, equal access does not achieve the same effect in terms of
agricultural productivity. This novel insight points to broader norms, market failures or institutional constraints that
alter the effectiveness of these resources for women. For example, women in Ethiopia and Uganda benefit less than
men, in terms of increased agricultural productivity, from extension advice that their households receive, suggesting
that current agricultural extension programmes may be better attuned to the needs of male farmers. These crucial
new findings will empower governments and development organisations to better tailor policies and programmes to
those issues and constraints that are most critical to the livelihoods of women farmers in their countries.


             Focusing on the key drivers of the gender gap in individual countries can both
   3         enhance gender equality and foster economic growth.
Women farmers face numerous disadvantages, such as barriers to accessing credit and lower levels of education,
though not all of these disparities contribute equally to the gender gap, if at all. This report provides evidence on the
principal factors behind the gender gap, as well as the relative importance of these particular factors. For example, in
Malawi, women use lower levels of agricultural inputs on their plots, including fertiliser and extension services, than
men, and this difference accounts for more than 80% of the gender gap in productivity in that country. The report also
shows that not every factor matters in each country. By focusing political attention and marshalling resources to tackle
the specific issues identified in their respective countries (see Table 1), policy-makers, practitioners and development
partners can begin to address gender equality and help usher in greater productivity and growth. This report reveals
the following to be key drivers of the gender gap in the six countries analysed.


        Labour poses the main barrier to achieving equality in productivity across all the countries profiled. To
        address this inequality, African governments and donors must do more to develop effective policies and
        programmes to help female farmers overcome this barrier.

Agriculture in Africa depends heavily on manual labour, supplied by farmers’ households, families and communities.
Yet women farmers face many difficulties in mobilising extra help to work on their farms, and these challenges begin in
the home. On average, female farmers tend to live in smaller households with fewer men, possibly due to widowhood,
migration or divorce. Consequently, women farmers across Ethiopia, Malawi, northern Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda
have fewer household members to provide labour on the farm or support in the home. Even after taking into account
household size, female farmers in Malawi, Niger, southern Nigeria and Tanzania deploy fewer household male labourers
on their plots. Further, in all these countries except Nigeria, these male labourers generate lower returns for female
farmers relative to male farmers. Female farmers also face challenges in hiring effective outside labour. These findings
suggest that women may not be able to afford to pay as much as men for effective farm workers; that cultural norms
may mean that these labourers work harder for a male supervisor; and/or that women’s time constraints (due to their
household roles) may affect their ability to supervise their farm labourers. Indeed, women typically assume a larger role
in child-care and household responsibilities than men, which is likely to restrict their ability to work on their own farms
or manage their labourers. Men, meanwhile, tend to have greater control over how to allocate family labour, including
that of younger household members. For these reasons, having a larger proportion of children in the household
(relative to adults) reduces women’s productivity more than men’s in Malawi, Niger, southern Nigeria and Uganda.

Despite the fact that female farmers across all six profiled countries face these types of labour challenges, evidence
on policies aiming to help women overcome these barriers is rare. For these reasons, African governments and donors
must prioritise attention in this area and develop effective programmes that help women farmers hire outside labour,
use tools and equipment that reduce the amount of labour they require on the farm, and access community-based
child-care.

 iv
    Statements explaining the returns findings in this section and in the full report assume that all other variables are held constant. The full report provides more
information on the variables controlled for in the individual studies.




LEVELLING THE FIELD: Improving Opportunities for Women Farmers in Africa                                                                                                 3
      Differences in the use of, and returns to, fertiliser and other non-labour inputs matter for the gender
      gap.

Women have unequal access to a variety of productive inputs,4 and this report also demonstrates the importance of
unequal returns to those inputs. Indeed, differences in input use and returns contribute to the gender gap across all
the countries profiled. In Malawi, Niger, northern Nigeria and Uganda, women use lower overall levels of fertiliser than
men, which reduces their relative agricultural productivity. In Ethiopia and Tanzania, gender differences in returns to
fertiliser contribute to the gap, suggesting that female farmers in these countries use lower-quality fertiliser, apply the
input incorrectly or use it at the wrong time. African governments and donors should support programmes that
encourage women to apply higher levels of fertiliser and other non-labour inputs to their plots, and to secure better-
quality fertiliser.


      Even after a woman accesses farm land, other associated challenges can limit her productivity.

Access to, and control of, land are critical for agricultural investment and rural household welfare. Yet statutory and
customary land tenure systems often disadvantage rural women, who are less likely to control land than rural men,
and women’s insecurity of tenure reduces their investments in their land, thus undermining their productivity. The
analysis in this report can shed only partial light on complex issues related to land access and control. Nevertheless, it
suggests that a number of factors relating to land (beyond access itself) can help explain the gender gap. One of these
challenges relates to land size. In Ethiopia and Tanzania, women receive lower returns than men to an extra hectare of
land. This could be due to lower quality of the land, but it could also be due to women’s relative difficulty in managing
farm labour or the application of other inputs across larger tracts of land. African governments must focus on
strengthening women’s land rights in order to begin to address these issues undermining women’s productivity.


      Agricultural extension and information does not improve female farmers’ productivity to the same
      degree as that of male farmers.

Knowledge and training in farming methods and techniques are critical for both women and men, but women farmers
tend to have less access to this information, and particularly information attuned to their needs. Women farmers tend
to receive second-hand information from husbands and friends if they are not the head of their household.
Furthermore, they may not attend training activities due to household responsibilities or mobility constraints, and they
may not be able to interact effectively with male extension agents due to cultural norms.5 In fact, this report shows
that women in Ethiopia and Uganda benefit less than men, in terms of increased agricultural productivity, from some
sources of extension advice that their households receive, suggesting that current agricultural extension programmes
may be better attuned to the needs of male farmers. Female farmers in Malawi, meanwhile, belong to households that
receive less technical guidance on agricultural production and marketing, which contributes to the gender gap.
Policy-makers in these countries should consider better tailoring extension services to women’s needs and spreading
agricultural knowledge through other mechanisms, perhaps including women’s social networks.


      The gender gap in education, prevalent in previous decades, continues to affect women farmers today.

Although countries across Africa have recently made great strides in achieving gender parity in schooling, the gender
inequalities of previous decades continue to have an impact on the gender productivity gap today. Differences in
schooling between male and female farmers translate into differences in agricultural productivity in Uganda and, to a
lesser degree, Malawi. Policy-makers in these countries should therefore strive to raise the education levels of adult
female farmers to help close the productivity gap.


      Improving women’s access to markets and enabling female farmers to shift into high-value commercial
      agriculture both show promise.

In Malawi, women farmers are less likely to cultivate export crops, such as tobacco, than men. This difference
contributes substantially to the country’s gender gap because these export crops command a higher market value
than traditional staple crops. Yet in Malawi, northern Nigeria and Uganda, female farmers enjoy higher returns than
male farmers from switching into high-value agriculture. Policies that leverage this advantage can therefore enhance
gender equality and boost agricultural growth.




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                                         4
A SMALLHOLDER FARMER IN UGANDA.

PHOTO: USAID
    TABLE 1: Factors that Widen the Gender Gap in Agricultural Productivity




                                     Ethiopia   Malawi      Niger     N. Nigeria   S. Nigeria   Tanzania   Uganda



                            Land
                             Size

       LAND

                     Other Land
                 Characteristics*




                      Household
                           Size



                      Household
                      Male Farm
                        Labour†



                     Household
                   Female Farm
                       Labour†

    LABOUR

                      Hired Farm
                         Labour†



                     Time Spent
                        on Farm
                       Activities


                         Ratio of
                      Children to
                    Adults within
                      Household


                      Improved/
                      Purchased
                          Seeds



                       Pesticide/
                       Herbicide
                             Use†



                    Fertiliser Use
NON-LABOUR            (Organic or
     INPUTS            Inorganic)†




                        Irrigation




                    Farm Tools &
                      Equipment




    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                               6
                                     Ethiopia        Malawi           Niger         N. Nigeria     S. Nigeria       Tanzania         Uganda



                      Agricultural
 INFORMATION           Extension




                     Export/Cash
                           Crops



                        Credit or
                      Agricultural
                          Capital
   ACCESS TO
    MARKETS
                         Distance
                        to Market
                          or Road



                       Non-Farm
                        Income/
                         Activity




                             Age

     AGE AND
HUMAN CAPITAL
                         Years of
                       Schooling




                        Wealth/
      WEALTH
                    Consumption




                                                Levels of factor found to widen the gender gap              Note:

                                                                                                            Only statistically significant
                                                                                                            factors (10% significance
                                                                                                            threshold) that widen the
                                                Returns to factor found to widen gender gap                 male-female gap reported.

                                                                                                            * Number of plots managed
                                                                                                            and plot-level slope, elevation,
                                                                                                            soil quality, ownership and
                                                Levels and returns to factor found to widen gender gap
                                                                                                            documentation.

                                                                                                            † Includes both use and
                                                                                                            intensity of factor use
                                                Factor included in country analysis but not found to
                                                                                                            (quantity/value per hectare or
                                                widen the gender gap
                                                                                                            acre).



                                                Factor not incuded in country analysis




      LEVELLING THE FIELD: Improving Opportunities for Women Farmers in Africa                                                                 7
  4       2014 offers an historic opportunity for African policy-makers, donor governments
          and development partners to move the agenda forward and commit to concrete
          policy action to redress the gender gap in African agriculture.

In many African countries, agricultural policy has not distinguished between men and women farmers and their
different needs. The persistent gender gap, documented in this report, underscores the fact that a shift in thinking is
long overdue: Existing agricultural policies need to become better attuned to the issues that undermine the
productivity of female farmers, and new policies and programmes must be designed and implemented to meet their
needs. Without sufficient attention to increasing women’s productivity, an opportunity for growth in agriculture will
remain unexploited, and broader development efforts will be hampered.

The African Union has declared 2014 to be the “Year of Agriculture and Food Security”, bringing much needed
attention to the sector’s potential to transform the continent. As part of this historic year, African governments should
make a new, robust commitment to narrow the gender gap in agriculture and should unveil this commitment at the
African Union Summit in Equatorial Guinea this June.

To make progress in narrowing this gap, African leaders should consider the ten policy priorities and options, detailed
in this report, to address the particular challenges in their countries (see Table 2). These policy priorities are informed
by the report’s new and comprehensive evidence of the main drivers of the gender gap. Based on the best available
research and impact evaluation evidence, they provide both promising interventions, for which existing evidence
indicates a high potential for success, and emerging interventions, which may benefit from further testing.

Meanwhile, given the limited knowledge of effective policies to date, donors and development organisations can play a
catalytic role in supporting African governments to close the gender gap in agriculture by taking the following
measures:

ű Create a “challenge fund” to support the piloting and scaling up of effective policies to support female farmers and
   close the gender gap.
ű Support national agriculture plans with clear attention to the differing needs of male and female farmers.
ű Consider this report’s findings in relation to donor programmes and continue to use gender analysis to inform the
   design of programmes and collect sex-disaggregated data as part of the monitoring and evaluation of programme
   impacts.
These steps will mark an important turning point for Africa’s women farmers towards the opportunity and equality they
rightfully deserve.




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                                             8
TABLE 2: Ten Policy Priorities for Narrowing the Gender Gap in African Agriculture


                                                                        Promising policy option (based on available evidence)

                                                                        Emerging policy option (based on available evidence)


  KEY DRIVER      POLICY PRIORITY                                  POLICY OPTION

                                                                   Formalise land rights through registration to increase
                                                                   women’s tenure security.

  LAND            1. Strengthen women’s land rights.               Expand co-titling and individual titling for women.

                                                                   Reform family and inheritance law to protect women’s
                                                                   rights.

                                                                   Offer women farmers financing to hire farm labour.
                  2. Improve women’s access to hired labour.
                                                                   Task agents with helping women farmers to find labour.

                  3. Enhance women’s use of tools and
  LABOUR                                                           Provide women farmers with financing or discounts for
                     equipment that reduce the amount of
                                                                   hiring or purchasing machinery.
                     labour they require on the farm.

                  4. Provide community-based child-care
                                                                   Provide community-based child-care centres.
                     centres.

                                                                   Provide women farmers with financing or price discounts
                                                                   aligned with their cash flow to encourage the purchase of
                  5. Encourage women farmers to use more,
                                                                   fertiliser.
                     and higher-quality, fertiliser.
  NON-LABOUR
                                                                   Certify small bags of fertiliser for use by women.
  INPUTS

                                                                   Provide flexible financing for seeds.
                  6. Increase women’s use of improved seeds.
                                                                   Help women better identify and obtain good-quality seed.

                                                                   Train extension agents to target female farmers and be
                                                                   more responsive to their agricultural information needs.

                  7. Tailor extension services to women’s needs,   Bring agricultural training and advice to women’s
  INFORMATION        and leverage social networks to spread        doorsteps through farmer field schools and mobile phone
                     agricultural knowledge.                       applications.

                                                                   Identify female volunteer farm advisors to spread
                                                                   information within women’s social networks.

                  8. Promote women’s cultivation of high-value/
                                                                   Promote women’s cultivation of high-value/cash crops.
                     cash crops.

  ACCESS
                                                                   Provide market services through information and
  TO MARKETS
                  9. Facilitate women’s access to and effective    communications technology (ICT).
                     participation in markets.
                                                                   Channel existing groups to access market opportunities.

  HUMAN           10. Raise education levels of adult female
                                                                   Raise education levels of adult female farmers.
  CAPITAL             farmers.




LEVELLING THE FIELD: Improving Opportunities for Women Farmers in Africa                                                        9
ENDNOTES


INTRODUCTION
1.   FAO. 2011. “The State of Food and Agriculture 2010–2011:            Child Nutrition in Developing Countries”. Research Report
     Women in Agriculture: Closing the Gender Gap for                    No. 131. IFPRI. Washington, DC; C.R. Doss. 2005. “The
     Development”. http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i2050e/                 effects of intrahousehold property ownership on
     i2050e00.htm                                                        expenditure patterns in Ghana”. Journal of African
2.   E. Kennedy and P. Peters, 1992. “Household food security            Economies 15(1): 149-180.
     and child nutrition: the interaction of income and gender of   3.   C. Carletto, D. Jolliffe and R. Banerjee. “The Emperor Has No
     household head”. World Development 20(8): 1077-1085; E.             Data! Agricultural Statistics in Sub-Saharan Africa”. http://
     Kennedy and L. Haddad. 1994. “Are preschoolers from                 mortenjerven.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/
     female-headed households less malnourished? A                       Panel-3-Carletto.pdf
     comparative analysis of results from Ghana and Kenya”.
     Journal of Development Studies 30(3): 680-695; J.
                                                                    KEY FINDINGS
     Hoddinott and L. Haddad. 1995. “Does female income share
                                                                    4.   A. Peterman, A.R. Quisumbing and J. Behrman. 2014. “A
     influence household expenditure patterns?”. Oxford Bulletin
                                                                         Review of Empirical Evidence on Gender Differences in
     of Economics and Statistics 57(1): 77-96; D. Thomas. 1997.
                                                                         Nonland Agricultural Inputs, Technology, and Services in
     “Incomes, expenditures and health outcomes: evidence on
                                                                         Developing Countries”, in A. Quisumbing, R. Meinzen-Dick,
     intrahousehold resource allocation”. In L. Haddad, J.
                                                                         J. Behrman, T. Raney, A. Croppenstedt and A. Peterman
     Hoddinott and H. Alderman (eds.). “Intrahousehold
                                                                         (eds.). “Gender in Agriculture and Food Security: Closing the
     Resource Allocation in Developing Countries”. Johns
                                                                         Knowledge Gap”. Springer (in press), Dordrecht, The
     Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, USA; L. Haddad. 1999.
                                                                         Netherlands.
     “The earned income by women: impacts on welfare
     outcomes”. Agricultural Economics 20(2): 135-141; A.           5.   A.R. Quisumbing and L. Pandolfelli. 2010. “Promising
     Quisumbing and J. Maluccio. 2000. “Intrahousehold                   Approaches to Address the Needs of Poor Female Farmers:
     Allocation and Gender Relations: New empirical evidence             Resources, Constraints, and Interventions”. World
     from four developing countries”. IFPRI. Washington, DC; L.C.        Development 38, 581-592.
     Smith, U. Ramakrishnan, A. Ndiaye, L. Haddad and R.
     Martorell. 2003. “The Importance of Women’s Status for




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                                                                    10
                                               ONE

                                              Berlin
                                   Luisenstrasse 40
                               10117 Berlin, Germany

                                           Brussels
                                           3rd Floor
                                   Rue d’Idalie 9-13
                             1050 Brussels, Belgium

                                    Johannesburg
                            Silverstream Office Park
                             Main Building, 1st Floor
                                    10 Muswell Road
                                      Bryanston 2191
                         Johannesburg, South Africa

                                             London
                                 151 Wardour Street
                            London, United Kingdom
                                           W1F 8WE

                                          New York
                            49 W. 27th Street, Floor 3
                                 New York, NY 10005
                                       United States

                                               Paris
                            47 rue du Montparnasse
                                 75014 Paris, France

                                  Washington, DC
THE WORLD BANK         1400 Eye Street NW, Suite 600
1818 H St NW                 Washington, DC 20005
Washington, DC 20433                   United States


WORLDBANK.ORG/AFRICA
