                                                                            86188
          Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




  CROSS COUNTRY COMPARISON OF REGIONAL
  MECHANISMS FOR DELIVERY OF FREE LEGAL
                             ASSISTANCE
_____________________________________________________________


   World Bank Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector Support
                                January 2014




                                                                                    1
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




PREFACE


       This report provides comparative analysis of different delivery models of Free
Legal Aid (FLA) in Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina (Brčko), Lithuania, Croatia and
Slovenia. The field work and data collection was conducted from November to December
2013. The survey was funded by the Multi Donor Trust Fund for Justice Sector Support,
established with generous contributions from the EU Delegation in Serbia, United
Kingdom Department for International Development, the Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency, Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain,
and   Switzerland.   More    information     about   the    trust   fund   is    available   at
www.mdtfjss.org.rs

       The report was produced by a World Bank Team composed of Klaus Decker
(Senior Public Sector Specialist and Task Team Leader), Georgia Harley (Public Sector
Specialist), and Srdjan Svircev (Public Sector Specialist) together with the Lawyers’
Committee for Human Rights (YUCOM).

       The team would like to thank the officials from the countries consulted for this
report, particularly those in the Ministries of Justice, for their time, hospitality, and
availability to discuss the issues raised by this report in a frank and open manner.




                                                                                             2
           Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                    CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION

MONTENEGRO
I GENERAL INFORMATION ON FREE LEGAL AID LEGAL FRAMEWORK
    1. Beneficiaries
    2. The procedure for the approving of free legal aid
    3. Types of legal aid
    4. Non-eligible procedure/matters for granting FLA
    5. FLA providers
    6. Funding
    7. Register
    8. Supervision
II IMPLEMENTATION OF FREE LEGAL AID


CROATIA
I GENERAL INFORMATION ON FREE LEGAL AID LEGAL FRAMEWORK
    1. Beneficiaries
    2. Types of free legal aid
    3. Eligible procedure/matters for granting FLA
    4. FLA providers
    5. Funding
    6. Register
    7. Supervision
II IMPLEMENTATION OF FREE LEGAL AID


SLOVENIA
I GENERAL INFORMATION ON FREE LEGAL AID LEGAL FRAMEWORK
   1. Beneficiaries
   2. The procedure for the approving of free legal aid
   3. Types of FLA
   4. FLA providers
   5. Funding
   6. Supervision
II IMPLEMENTATION OF FREE LEGAL AID


BRCKO DISTRICT
I GENERAL INFORMATION ON FREE LEGAL AID LEGAL FRAMEWORK
   1. Beneficiaries
   2. The procedure for the approving of free legal aid

                                                                             3
             Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




    3. Types of FLA
    4. Eligible procedure/matters for granting FLA
    5. FLA providers
    6. Funding
    7. Supervision
II IMPLEMENTATION OF FREE LEGAL AID

COMPARATIVE OVERVIEW

CONCLUSIONS/SUMMARY

Basic recommendations




                                                                               4
                  Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                         MONTENEGRO


        I GENERAL INFORMATION ON FREE LEGAL AID LEGAL FRAMEWORK
       On April 15th 2011 Montenegro adopted the Law on Free Legal Aid. Act is being
applied since January 1st 2012. As stated by the government, the law was passed with
the aim to provide free legal assistance, in order to achieve right to fair trial and equal
access to courts, to people who due to financial condition are unable to exercise their
right to judicial protection without damaging the necessary support of themselves and
their families.
       The Law regulates the issues of conditions and the right to free legal assistance,
the principle related to legal assistance, the process of approval of free legal aid; way of
achieving free legal assistance in disputes with a foreign element, record keeping,
financing activities and fees for provided services, as well as control over the provision
of free legal assistance and supervision of the implementation of the law.
       The European Commission has emphasized the issue in its progress report on
Montenegro for 2012 and expressed the concern that “Montenegro remains one of the
countries with the highest number of basic courts, judges, prosecutors and
administrative staff per capita in Europe. Due to this high administrative cost, there are
not enough budget resources to implement the new Law on Free Legal Aid or to
remedy shortfalls in infrastructure and equipment, which continue to hinder judicial
efficiency. The quality of judicial statistics needs to be improved and a system to monitor
the length of trials introduced. “...With regard to access to justice, some progress has
been made. The Law on Free Legal Aid came into effect in January and relevant
services are now available in all the basic courts in Montenegro . Nevertheless,
certain categories of people are not covered. Administrative capacity needs further
development. The length of court proceedings remains an issue of concern. ...”
       „As regards access to justice, following the entry into force of the Law on Free
Legal Aid in January 2012, three implementing acts were adopted and free legal aid
offices were opened in all basic courts. The implementation of the law is hampered by
the offices’ insufficient budget. The 2012 budget for the judiciary and the prosecution is
€ 24.9 million, which represents approximately 0.75 % of the GDP. As the salaries of
                                                                                          5
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




magistrates and administrative staff continue to account for most of this total, there are
not enough resources to remedy deficiencies in infrastructure and equipment, which
continue to hinder efficiency. Initial steps have been taken to rationalize the court
network, but Montenegro continues to be one of the countries with the highest number
of basic courts, judges, prosecutors and administrative staff per capita in Europe.“1
       In its progress report on Montenegro for 2013, European Commission repeated:
„As regards access to justice, the implementation of the law on free legal aid through the
free legal aid offices established in all basic courts continues to be hampered by the
offices’ insufficient budget and the lack of public awareness. Free legal aid services are
inaccessible to some ethnic groups due to linguistic barriers. The timeframe established
by law for deciding whether an application meets the eligibility criteria is considered to
be extremely short.“2
       United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has emphasized that free legal
aid provided based on this law is limited to court procedures. „Currently,
marginalized groups are left in a precarious situation without access to legal procedures
and protection of their basic rights. UNHCR has been funding the provision of free legal
aid for persons of its concern in Montenegro for a number of years. However, the need
for free legal assistance remains high, especially for SGBV cases among displaced
persons. The Law covers only judicial procedures and not administrative procedures,
which are mainly of benefit for UNHCR’s persons of concern.“3




1 European Commission, “Montenegro 2012 Progress Report. Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges
2012-2013” SWD(2012) 331 final, Brussels, 10 October 2012:
http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/pdf/key_documents/2012/package/mn_rapport_2012_en.pdf
2 European Commission, “Montenegro 2013 Progress Report. Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges

2013-2014” SWD(2012) 411 final, Brussels, 16 October 2012:
http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/pdf/key_documents/2013/package/mn_rapport_2013.pdf
3 Submission by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees - For the Office of the High

Commissioner for Human Rights’ Compilation Report - Universal Periodic Review: MONTENEGRO.
http://www.refworld.org/docid/4ffd355f2.html

                                                                                               6
                 Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                            1. Beneficiaries
        The law has the standpoint that holders of the right to free legal assistance, as an
individual human right, can only be natural persons (not legal entities).4
        Population of Montenegro is 625 266 citizens.
        The law stipulates that the right to free legal assistance, in accordance with the
law, exercise Montenegrin citizens, stateless persons and other persons lawfully
residing in the country, asylum seekers and foreigners who have permanent residence
or who have been granted temporary stay in the country, which is in agreement with the
standards of the ECHR.
        When it comes to the persons who are entitled to free legal aid, law identifies as
priority categories: indigent persons (not necessarily only those who are beneficiaries
of social protection), children without parental care, persons with disabilities and
victims of crimes of domestic violence/family community and human trafficking.
        The law in Art. 6 regulates that a person who has exercised the right to free legal
assistance by other law, may not under this Act be entitled to the same form of legal aid
in the same matter.
        There are 456005 beneficiaries of family cash benefits.


                      1. The procedure for the approving of free legal aid
        Legal aid offices6 or sections are formed within every basic court in Montenegro
(15) and they are in charge of technical and administrative tasks in the process of
granting legal aid.
        Office is obliged to provide information and advices to all interested parties
regarding the possibilities and terms for exercising the right to free legal aid.
        Applications for free legal aid approval services shall be submitted to the
competent court, in the unique form which can be obtained at any basic court or office
for legal aid. Data on applicants or their family members’ real property and tax
obligations Office obtains within 15 days.

4 Art. 1, Law on Free legal aid, Official Gazette of Republic of Montenegro No. 23-3/11-2/13, EPA 486 XXIV.
5 Izveštaj o radu i stanju u upravnim oblastima iz Nadležnosti Ministarstva rada i socijalnog stanovanja
Crne Gore – 19.03.2013. godine, 42 strana (Tabela 1.1, 1.2)
6
  Legal Aid Offices - further in the text – Office.

                                                                                                         7
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




       Based on that data, the president of the court or a judge who is in charge of
examining applications (according to annual schedule) issues a decision for granting
free legal aid. These decisions shall be kept on register and these records can
periodically be claimed by the Ministry of Justice. It also presents register of the number
of all beneficiaries of free legal aid system.
       Against the decision of the President of the Court on the application for legal aid,
which is final, administrative action may be led. So far, regarding this issue,
Administrative Court was deciding within four months.
       An applicant who has been granted free legal aid is given directive which, inter
alia, includes: form of approved legal aid, name of the lawyer who is assigned, brief
description of the legal matter for which the legal aid is being granted. During the period
from approval of free legal aid to the day of the final cost calculation, a person to whom
legal aid is granted shall be obliged to inform the Office about the changes in his/hers
financial status. If the user of the right to free legal aid fully or partially succeeds in the
proceeding, and so acquired the property (or any kind of income) he will be obligated to
return/cover cost of the approved legal aid to the Budget.
       The Service employs at least one person meeting the requirements for
performing the tasks of advisors with courts. The president of the court may assign
advisors with the court, judicial trainees and volunteers to work within the Service.
       For example: in Bjelo Polje – 1 advisor with the court has meetings with clients
on working days from 12 PM to 3 PM; in Herceg Novi – 1 advisor on Monday and
Wednesday from 8.30 AM to 10.30 AM. In Herceg Novi, according to Annual work
schedule, there is Section for free legal aid. The body for approving free legal aid is one
of the judges of the Court.
       In Berane, according to the Annual work schedule, there is Office. One advisor
with court and Secretary of Court works with clients on Wednesday and Friday from 11
AM to 13 PM.




                                                                                             8
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                      2. Types of legal aid
       When it comes to the types of legal aid, the law defines the right to legal counsel,
drafting documents and legal representation.
       Legal representation considers representation before the state prosecution,
courts and the Constitutional Court, but not for representation in administrative
proceedings, commercial disputes, proceedings conducted by independent regulatory
bodies and proceedings for damages in respect of defamation and contempt.




                    3. Non-eligible procedure/matters for granting FLA
Legal aid shall not be provided in:
       1) Proceedings before commercial courts and in the procedure for registration of
       a commercial activity,
       2) In criminal proceedings and the indemnification proceedings concerning
       defamation and libel,
       3) Proceedings as per action to reduce the amount of child support in a case of
       the person obliged to pay support who failed to do so, unless in default of such
       obligation without any fault of his own.


                                       4. FLA providers
       Legal aid is provided by lawyers (685) according to order from the list of the
Bar Association of Montenegro compiled as per territorial jurisdiction of basic courts.
     Legal advising can be provided by the Legal Aid Office of the competent court.
According to advisors, the Office still hasn’t been enough recognized as free legal aid
provider.


       Training program for FLA providers in Montenegro
       Since the Law on FLA defines that providers of FLA are lawyers, trainings in
Montenegro are organized for the decision makers in the process of granting FLA.




                                                                                          9
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




        During the year 2012, which is the first year of implementation of Law on Free
Legal Aid, three roundtables on the topic of the Free legal Aid were organized. 7 The aim
of these round tables was resolution of practical dilemma regarding conditions under
which free legal assistance can be provide; representation of the scope of approved
providers; types of legal aid; subjects who can use free legal aid services; procedures
which guarantee the right to free legal aid for the citizens, all in accordance with the
Law. The first was intended for presidents of basic courts and counselors who work in
free legal aid offices, with the goal of exchanging the experiences and solutions to the
problems related to the implementation of the Law on Legal Aid (a total of 19
participants). The second round table was also dedicated to the representatives of the
judiciary, as well as representatives of state bodies involved in the implementation of
the Law (20 participants, including 15 representatives of the judiciary, five
representatives of state authority (Real Property Management, Central Depository
Agency, representatives of the Centers for Social Work of Podgorica, Niksic and Bar)).
And the third one gathered representatives of the judicial and non-governmental
organizations interested in the implementation of this Law (attended by 22 participants,
including 15 representatives of the judiciary and 7 NGO representatives).

                                             5. Funding
       Article 9 stipulates that funding for legal aid is provided from the state budget of
Montenegro.
       Lawyers charge 50% of the regular tariff of legal practitioner. In the end of
proceedings they submit costs to Legal Aid Office. Based on the bill of costs, president of
the court issues a decision regarding the costs, which is a final document. Decision is
sent to Court Council in charge of paying the lawyers. The Law regulates cost obligations
of the client towards the State.


                                           6. Register
       Legal Aid Offices keep on register of new requests and approved applications for
free legal aid, which is available for the Ministry of Justice. Records are concentrated
7
  Round tables are organized with the financial support from United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) Office in Montenegro, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) - Mission
to Montenegro and the Human Resources Administration of Montenegro.

                                                                                                  10
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




more on the elements of requests for legal aid (data on the applicant and his family
members, the number of cases and forms of aid provided, number and date of decision,
the amount of funds disbursed), than on the type and content of the proceedings to
which legal aid have been granted, which may affect the evaluation of results.
Furthermore, if one takes into account that the Act does not limit other agencies and
organizations in providing legal aid (Article 5), then it would be necessary to prescribe
the obligation of all legal aid providers to keep track of free legal aid and to provide this
information promptly to the body that is responsible for the coordination and control of
the legal aid system .


                                      7. Supervision
       The issue of control over the quality of free legal encompasses elements and
mechanisms of establishing the quality of FLA, but also the elements and procedures of
quality control procedures to be carried out subsequently. Quality is being ensured and
controlled in relation to the contents of free legal aid services and procedures under
which they are provided, which takes into account the relationship between the fee for
the cost of the service provided and the quality of the same. Articles 63 - 65 stipulate
that the administrative supervision of the implementation of the Act is carried out by the
Ministry of Justice, while overseeing the quality of legal aid is delegated to the authority
before which the proceedings in which legal aid is granted are conducted. In case that
the authority that acts in the case for which legal aid is granted, assess the quality of
legal aid as obviously unsatisfactory it has the right and obligation to inform the
beneficiary and authority that make decisions on its approval.
       This means that the judge has the obligation to inform the President of the
competent basic court, as well as the beneficiary of free legal aid, about misbehaving and
mal-performance of the lawyer.
       Although this is a good solution because it allows direct control over the quality
of provided legal aid, it is not well specified. More detailed data on what constitutes
quality of legal aid is obviously missing, evaluates acting organ praeter legem.
       In addition, beside the decision to change counsel and procedural sanctions that
may be imposed by the authority acting in the procedure, there is no direct
authorization of the competent authority to impose disciplinary measures or sanctions,
                                                                                          11
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




but only to put a proposal to the Bar Association for removal from the list of lawyers.
These provisions did not elaborate proceedings on complaints of users, which is one of
the important mechanisms of quality control, regardless of the fact that the competent
authority is obliged to look after the quality of legal assistance ex officio.
       Article 63, in paragraph 3 provides that legal aid user has the right to submit a
request to change lawyer, on which the competent authority shall decide within eight
days. This paragraph can be interpreted as if the application by the user depends on
previous assessment of involved body that legal aid is obviously unsatisfactory, even
though the beneficiary should have the right and obligation to object to quality of legal
assistance at any time, and to inform the acting authority.


                        II IMPLEMENTATION OF FREE LEGAL AID
       In year 2012, which was the first year of the implementation of the Law on Free
Legal Aid, citizens have filed 428 applications for approval of FLA. It was granted in 304
cases. Users of FLA were citizens of Montenegro in 332 cases, while in the remaining 34
cases users were foreign nationals who have permanent residence or temporary stay
permit, as well as one stateless person. FLA was granted on the basis of family allowance
or other rights of social protection in 168 cases, in four cases to persons with special
needs, in a single case to victim of act of domestic violence and human trafficking, and in
141 case users were indigent individuals.
       In 2012 following forms of FLA were granted: 1) legal advice - 11, 2)
preparation of documents - 50, 3) legal advice and representation in proceedings before
the State Prosecutor's Office - 2, 4) legal advice and representation in proceedings
before the courts of first and second instance – 263.




                                                                                        12
                  Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




    300

    250

    200

    150

    100

    50

     0
             Legal advice       Preparation of      Legal advice and      Legal advice and
                                 documents         representation in     representation in
                                                  proceedings before    proceedings before
                                                       the State         the courts of first
                                                  Prosecutor's Office   and second instance




          For the period 01.01.2012 - 31.12.2013, on behalf of free legal aid lawyer’s was
approved an amount of 24,483.38 euro. Of this amount, 9,342.02 have been transferred
to lawyers, while the remaining 15,141.36 euro is still not paid. State is given on January
21st 2014. For 2014, the planned funds for this purpose are 380,000.00 euro.8
          It is evident that the Budget of the Republic of Montenegro does not particularly
provide funds for the implementation of the Law on Free Legal Aid. The part of the
Budget – Judiciary (subpart-contractual services) is predicted for lawyers` expenditures.
          However, taking into account that legal aid offices and services are usually placed
in courtrooms9, and that the lawyers can work with parties only for 4 hours per week
(eg, Herceg Novi); the tasks of gathering documents for granting legal aid is performed
by counselors; and that the decision on the approval of applications is issued by the
President of the court or a judge designated by him, it is abvious that system of granting




8
 According to the response of the Secretariat of the Judicial Council for the cost of free legal aid, pursuant
to the Law on Free Legal Aid, in a letter SU.R.no.1/14 dated on January 23rd 2014.

9 During monitoring CEDEM came to the conclusion that these courtrooms were never marked as Offices
for Free Legal Aid. Based on the interviews that YUCOM conducted with advisor Ana Radunović from Basic
Court in Berane we got the information that the Office for FLA was equipped with the support of Bar
Chamber of Montenegro.

                                                                                                            13
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




free legal aid does not require special tools, because the approval of free legal aid is a
part of regular assignment of basic court stuff.


                       Planned improvement of the Free Legal Aid system

        According to the Strategy of reform of judiciary (2014-2018)10 the so far
implementation of the Law on Free Legal Aid showed the existence of some
disadvantages that need to be eliminated in order to ensure efficient and effective
access to justice. Past practice has shown many violations of the deadline for acting
on requests for free legal aid. Also, informing the general public on the existence of
free legal aid and possibilities given by the Law on Legal Aid is not satisfactory .
Victims of torture and discrimination are not recognized as privileged beneficiaries of
free legal aid. So far, adequate mechanisms and indicators for monitoring the quality
of provided legal aid are not provided. The cooperation between the offices of free
legal aid in basic courts and NGOs involved in the protection of vulnerable social
categories also has flaws.
        Strategic guidelines are identified as follows:
      Providing a higher level of information to the general public about the free legal
        aid system;
      Improving the legal framework through amendments to the Law on Legal Aid in
        terms property threshold specified by law in order to comply with changes to the
        welfare and protection of children and the conditions in securities market;
      Developing mechanisms and indicators for monitoring the quality of provided
        legal aid;
      Improving cooperation between the offices of free legal aid within basic courts
        and NGOs involved in the protection of vulnerable social groups in order to
        promote the institute of free legal aid among potential users in this group;
      Promoting free legal aid among students of legal sciences through the
        implementation of the curriculum of clinical legal education at the universities of
        Montenegro.


10http://www.pravda.gov.me/rubrike/Sektor-pravosuda/133794/Ministartvo-pravde-daje-na-raspravu-
Nacrt-Strategije-reforme-pravosuda-2014-2018.html

                                                                                            14
                 Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                             CROATIA


         I GENERAL INFORMATION ON FREE LEGAL AID LEGAL FRAMEWORK
        In Croatia, Free Legal Aid Act is adopted in 200811. The implementation of FLA is
regulated by several by-laws: 1) Ordinance establishing the application form for the
approval of free legal aid, the order form and the record of the orders issued
(OG 148/11); 2) Ordinance establishing the project valuation criteria of associations
authorized to provide primary legal aid and legal clinics and establishing the method of
project reporting (OG 148/11); 3) Ordinance establishing the keeping of the register of
associations authorized to provide free legal aid (OG 93/08); and 4) Regulation on the
tariff for determining the value of the amount of compensation for providing primary
and secondary legal aid for 2013 (OG36/13).
        The European Commission has emphasized the issue in its progress report on
Croatia for 2011 and expressed the concern that “Implementation of legal aid system
has improved, including by means of simplified application procedures and a narrowing
of the gap between legal aid and normal lawyers' tariffs. The Constitutional court
revoked some provisions of the Law on Legal Aid in April 2011. Provisions concerning
the formulation of eligibility criteria, determination of beneficiaries for legal aid;
apportioning of the budget for free legal aid and the refusal by attorneys to take on legal
aid cases were subsequently amended in July 2011. However, further improvements to
the system are needed, including in terms of facilitating access to legal aid as well as
fostering the role of NGOs. Implementation of the new system of administrative justice
needs to be speeded up12.
     In 2012, European Commission said that “the legal framework for free legal aid has
to be improved to enable better access to legal aid and to foster the role of NGOs as legal
aid providers.”13



11 Free Legal Aid Act (OG 62/08, 44/11 – Decision and Order of the Constitutional Court of the RoC
and 81/11).
12 European Commission, Croatia 2011 Progress Report, Brussels, 12.10.2011, SEC(2011) 1200 final , page

50

 European Commission, Comprehensive monitoring Report on Croa tia’s state of preparedness for EU
13

Membership, Brussels, 10.10.2012 SWD(2012) 338 final, page 37

                                                                                                    15
                   Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                             1. Beneficiaries
          According to the Act, the beneficiaries of free legal aid are Croatian citizens,
foreigners with temporary residence, foreigners with permanent residence, asylums,
foreigners under subsidiary protection and foreigners under temporary protection. The
beneficiaries of legal aid are also the asylum seekers in procedures for which legal aid to
asylum seekers is not envisaged by a special law.
          Foreigners with temporary residence and foreigners with permanent residence
may exercise the right to legal aid under the condition of reciprocity.
          The beneficiaries of legal aid are foreign children who are in the Republic of
Croatia without a parent or legal guardian.
          The beneficiaries of legal aid are foreigners who illegally reside and foreigners on
a short-term stay who are in the procedure of adopting a decision on deportation and in
the procedure of adopting a decision on leaving the Republic of Croatia14.


                                     Criteria for the approval of legal aid
          Primary legal aid can be exercised under the following criteria:
          a) The applicant does not have sufficient knowledge and ability to exercise the
right;
          b) Legal aid is not provided to the applicant according to special regulations;
          c) The material circumstances of the applicant are such that the hiring of
professional legal assistance would jeopardize the maintenance of the applicant and the
members of his/her household, in accordance with the conditions prescribed by Article
8 of this Act.
          Secondary legal aid can be exercised under the following criteria:
          a) If it relates to a more complex procedure;
          b) The applicant is not able to represent himself/herself;
          c) The request submitted by the applicant is not obviously unfounded, or
unrealizable;




14See:   http://www.pravosudje.hr/beneficiaries-of-free-legal-aid-

                                                                                            16
                    Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




          d) The material circumstances of the applicant are such that hiring a
lawyer would jeopardize the maintenance of the applicant and the members of his/her
household, in accordance with the conditions prescribed by Article 8 of this Act.
          e) If it does not relate to wanton litigation15.
          Legal aid shall be approved when the financial situation of the applicant and
members of his/her household meets the following criteria:
          a) The total income and revenue of the applicant and adult members of his/her
household each month do not exceed, per member of the household, the amount of the
lowest base for calculation and payment of contributions for obligatory insurance on the
day the application is submitted, pursuant to the Act on Obligatory Insurance
Contributions;
          b) The applicant or adult members of his/her household do not possess assets, in
monetary or non-monetary form, except for real estates, whose total value exceed the
amount of twenty of the lowest monetary bases for calculation and payment of
contributions for obligatory insurance on the day the application is submitted, pursuant
to the Act on Obligatory Insurance Contributions;
          c) The applicant or adult members of his/her household do not own, except for
the flat or house they live in, a flat or house or another real estate;
          d) The applicant or adult member of his/her household do not own a vehicle
whose value exceed eighteen of the lowest monthly bases for calculation and payment of
contributions for obligatory insurance on the day of submitting the application,
pursuant to the Act on Obligatory Insurance Contributions.
          Exceptionally, legal aid will be granted to the applicants who do not fulfill the
previously mentioned criteria if their financial status is such that, with regard to the
actual or predictable expenses of the procedure, the payment of the costs of the
procedures would endanger the maintenance of the applicant and members of his/her
household. Legal aid shall also be granted to children whose parents or other persons
are obliged to support them according to the provisions of the law, in proceedings
conducted before competent bodies for exercising the rights of children to maintenance
regardless of the financial status of the family.


15   http://www.mprh.hr/beneficiaries-of-free-legal-aid-

                                                                                        17
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




       Legal aid shall be granted without determining the financial status if:
       a) A person has been granted the right to maintenance in accordance with special
regulations governing the exercise of rights from the social welfare system or
       b) The right to maintenance pursuant to the Act on the Rights of Croatian
Homeland War Veterans and Members of their Families and the Act on Protection of
Military and Civilian War Invalids.
       The approval of legal aid relates to the complete or partial payment of the costs of
legal aid according to the financial situation of the applicant. In fact, it has been foreseen
the possibility for the beneficiary of legal aid to participate to the costs of the
proceeding, in a determined amount, depending on his/her financial possibility.


                                  2. Types of free legal aid
       In Croatia, types of FLA are:
       a) Primary legal aid
       b) Secondary legal aid
       c) Exemption form payment of court fees
       d) Exemption from payment of court procedure costs


       Primary legal aid includes:
            Legal advice
            Drafting of applications before public authorities
            Representation in procedures before public authorities
            Legal aid provided in peaceful out-of-court settlement of disputes


       Secondary legal aid includes:
            Legal advice
            Drafting of applications in court procedures
            Representation in court procedures
            Legal aid provided in peaceful settlement of disputes


       The approval of secondary legal aid includes the exemption from payment of
       court fees and costs of the proceeding.
                                                                                           18
          Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




The approval of exemption from payment of costs of the proceeding includes the
exemption from payment of court fees.


                3. Eligible procedure/matters for granting FLA
Primary legal aid may be approved in the following procedures:
a) Relating to the status rights of citizens;
b) Relating to the determination of rights and obligations from the pension
and/or health insurance;
c) Relating to the determination of rights and obligation form the social care
system;
d) Exceptionally, in all other administrative procedures when this need arises
from specific life circumstances of the applicant and members of his/her
household, in accordance with the basic objective and purpose of this Act;
e) Protection of workers’ rights before the employer.


Secondary legal aid may be approved in the following procedures:
a) Relating to real rights, except for land registry procedures;
b) Labor relations;
c) Family relations;
d) Enforcement procedures and security procedures when it relates to
involuntary collection or security of a claim arising from the procedure for which
legal aid may be approved, according to the provisions of this Act;
e) Peaceful settlement of disputes;
f) Exceptionally, in all other administrative procedures when this need arises
from specific life circumstances of the applicant and members of his/her
household, in accordance with the basic objective and purpose of this Act;
g) Exceptionally, the court may approve legal aid, in judicial procedures, for
reasons of fairness upon the request of the party who does not fulfill the criteria
prescribed by law.




                                                                                19
                     Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                                4. FLA providers
           The Free Legal Aid Act envisages as legal aid providers: lawyers (269),
authorized associations (35), trade unions, legal clinics (2)16 and state administration
offices (29 state administration offices, 64 municipal courts, 91 social welfare centers) in
the counties where the forms of legal aid that each entity may provide have been
defined.
           In the Register organizations that provide legal aid there are 35 registered
authorized associations. 17


                                                  5. Funding
           Funding for the organization of the system and providing legal assistance on the
basis of the decision on the approval of legal aid is provided by the state budget. Minister
of Justice makes the decision on allocation of funds to finance projects of registered
providers of primary legal aid.
           Every year, Ministry of Justice announces a public tender for the allocation of
funds to finance projects of CSOs registered for providing free legal aid and legal clinics
of law faculties.
           Every year, Ministry of Justice announces a public tender for the allocation of
funds to finance projects of CSOs registered for providing free legal aid and legal clinics
of law faculties. In 2012, 12 projects of registered CSOs and legal clinics were financed.
In this way, to the Legal Clinic in Zagreb and registered CSOs for providing legal
assistance projects from the state budget in the 2012, a total amount of 200,397.05
kunas (26,493.53 euros) was allocated.
           According to data from the State Treasury in 2012 for the Legal aid total amount
of 2,278,000.00 kunas (301,163.41 euros) was planned. The amendments to the State
Budget for year 2012 planned assets are reduced to the sum of 1,261,500.00 kunas
(166,776.84 euros).
           In the reporting period for legal aid total of 1,258,134.89 kunas (166,331.95
euros) has been spent, while the reserved funds (payment is expected in the next
period) amounted to 5,238,172.78 kunas (692,513.59 euros)18.

16   Law Faculty in Split and Law faculty in Zagreb.
17   Report on the approving right to legal aid and the expenditure of funds 2012.

                                                                                           20
                 Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                                6. Register
According to the Article 11 of Ordinance establishing the application form for the
approval of free legal aid, the order form and the record of the orders issued
(OG 148/11), district office of state administration and office of City of Zagreb keep
records on applications and granted FLA and expenditures. Records are kept in
electronic form.


                                          7. Supervision
      Administrative Supervision
        Administrative supervision of the implementation of FLA Act is carried out by
the ministry responsible for justice affairs. The Ministry in particular supervises the
work of the competent office in giving approval for legal aid.
      Professional supervision
        Supervision of the conscientious and professional provision of legal aid is
performed ex officio by the body before which the proceedings are being conducted for
which the party is exercising the right to legal aid.
        Furthermore, supervision of the work of associations is also performed directly
by the ministry responsible for justice affairs, which carry out an inspection at least once
in two years of the provision of legal aid by the association.
        When the body before which the proceedings are being conducted establishes
that legal aid has been provided negligently or unprofessionally, it shall make a note of
this in the file and point this fact out to the provider of legal aid, the beneficiary of legal
aid, the body which issued the order and the ministry responsible for justice affairs.
        A beneficiary of legal aid, who has been warned of the negligent or
unprofessional provision of legal aid, has the right to withdraw the order and chose
another provider of legal aid. The provider of legal aid has the right to calculate the costs
up until the moment the order was withdrawn, except for the legal actions immediately
preceding the withdrawal of the order.



18According to the archive of National bank of Croatia, middle exchange rate on date December 31th 2012
7,564 http://www.hnb.hr/tecajn/h310112.htm

                                                                                                    21
                  Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




     The beneficiary of legal aid is obliged to inform the office about the change of
provider of legal aid, or, if he/she is to relinquish the right to legal aid, to return the
order according to the provisions of this Act.
      Supervision of lawyers
If the legal aid was provided by an attorney, the ministry responsible for justice affairs
shall inform the Croatian Bar Association of the unprofessional or negligent provision of
legal aid.
      Supervision of authorized association
        If the legal aid was provided by an authorized association, the ministry
responsible for justice affairs shall re-examine the authority for providing legal aid and
enter a note of this in the register. In cases of negligent or unprofessional provision of
legal aid by an association, a decision shall be rendered to prohibit it from providing
legal aid and delete it from the register of associations providing legal aid.
      Supervision of Law clinic
        If the legal aid was provided by a law clinic, the ministry responsible for justice
affairs shall inform the institution of higher education offering university studies in law
of the negligent and unprofessional provision of legal aid.


                          II IMPLEMENTATION OF FREE LEGAL AID
        According to the Ministry of Justice Report on Exercise of Right to Free Legal Aid
and Utilization of Funds in 201219, citizens filed 7068 applications for approval of FLA. It
was granted in 5877 cases.
        The vast majority of beneficiaries were Croatian citizens - 5775 and 100 were
foreigner nationals.
        In 2012 following forms of FLA were granted: 4936 as secondary FLA (83,94%)
while 448 as primary FLA (7,62%).
        Within the 448 granted cases of primary free legal aid the structure is the
following:
              404 in drafting of applications before public authorities (90,18%).
              44 in representation in procedures before public authorities (9,82%).

19YUCOM got the Report from Ministry of Justice of Croatia upon Free Access to Information Request
submitted on November 26th, 2013.

                                                                                                     22
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




       Within the 4936 granted cases of secondary free legal aid the structure is the
following:
           314 in drafting of applications in court procedures (6,36%).



                                 Court procedure



                2%   0%                                      In family matters
                          0%
                                                             In executive procedures
     4%        9%

                                                             In property matters


    10%                                                      In labour case


                                                             In other court cases


                                     60%                     In administrative disputes
    15%

                                                             In procedures on extraordinary
                                                             remedies
                                                             In Procedures before
                                                             Constitutional Court




           4622 in representation in court procedures (93,64%).


Within the 5877 granted cases of legal aid, the structure is the following:
   Court procedure
           3158 in family matters
           793 in executive procedures
           514 in property matters
           201 in labour case


                                                                                              23
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




            477 in other court cases
            70 in administrative disputes
            8 in procedures on extraordinary remedies
            13 in Procedures before Constitutional Court
   Administrative procedure
            231 in pension and health insurance matters
            189 in social welfare matters
            37 in status matters
            17 in residents and working permits matters
            140 in other administrative matters
   9 in procedures before employers
   19 in alternative dispute resolution procedure



           3%       Administrative procedure
              1%
                                                          In pension and health
                                                          insurance matters
                                                          In social welfare matters
        22%
                                      36%
                                                          In status matters


                                                          In residents and working
 3%                                                       permits matters
      6%                                                  In other administrative
                                                          matters
                                                          In procedures before
                                                          employers
                      29%




Free legal aid was provided by lawyers in 78,2%, while 21,9 % by registered CSOs.


            Budgetary data for 2012
      In 2012, 12 projects of registered CSOs and legal clinics were financed. In this
way, to the Legal Clinic in Zagreb and registered CSOs for providing legal assistance



                                                                                         24
                 Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




projects from the state budget in the 2012 a total amount of 200,397.05 kunas
(26,493.53 euros) was allocated.
        According to data from the State Treasury in 2012 for the Legal aid total amount
of 2,278,000.00 kunas (301,163.41 euros) was planned. The amendments to the State
Budget for year 2012 planned assets are reduced to the sum of 1,261,500.00 kunas
(166,776.84 euros).
        In the reporting period for legal aid total of 1,258,134.89 kunas (166,331.95
euros) has been spent, while the reserved funds20 (payment is expected in the next
period ) amounted to 5,238,172.78 kunas (692,513.59 euros)21.




20 Reserved amount is amount that is expected to be paid in the period between 2013-2015 since the
realization of payment for lawyers comes after finalization of process.
21 According to the archive of National bank of Croatia, middle exchange rate on date December 31th 2012

7,564 http://www.hnb.hr/tecajn/h310112.htm

                                                                                                     25
                   Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                             SLOVENIA

         I GENERAL INFORMATION ON FREE LEGAL AID LEGAL FRAMEWORK
        Actual Law on Free Legal aid in Slovenia was brought in 2001, while the last
amendments entered into force in 2008           22.   The Ombudsman considered that access to
legal protection is very difficult for individuals who are weaker in social or economic
terms. It is especially alarming that legal aid is very difficult to receive in lawsuits
concerning child support, where the plaintiff -parent has to cover the costs of the court
procedure23.
        The constitution and law provide for the right to a public fair trial, and an
independent judiciary generally enforced this right. Defendants enjoy the right to a
presumption of innocence; a trial by jury; to consult with an attorney; to confront
prosecution witnesses and present their own witnesses and evidence; access
government-held evidence; and appeal. While indigent defendants have the right to an
attorney provided at public expense, the government had not established a formal
system to provide legal counsel to the indigent. However, free counsel was available to
indigents from the nongovernmental organization (NGO) PIC (Legal Information Center)
and the government-sponsored Free Legal Aid. The judicial system was overburdened
and lacked administrative support, resulting in frequent delays in the judicial process. In
many instances criminal trials took from two to five years. 24



                                           1. Beneficiaries
        The law prescribes that legal aid shall mean the right of the eligible person to the
entire or partial provision of funds necessary to cover the costs of legal assistance and
the right to exemption of payment of the costs of the judicial proceeding (Free Legal Aid
Act, Article 1).


22 Free Legal Aid Act – Zakon o brezplačni pravni pomoči (Official Gazette of the Republic of
Slovenia 48/2001, 50/2004, 96/2004-UPB1, 23/2008)
23 Human Rights Council, Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, Seventh session , Summary

prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, in accordance with paragraph 15 (c)
of the Annex to Human Rights Council Resolution 5/1, Geneva, 8-19 February 2010
24 Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, United States Department of State, 2011 Country

Reports on Human Rights Practices - Slovenia, 24 May 2012, available at:
http://www.refworld.org/docid/4fc75a623a.html [accessed 8 January 2014], UNHCR

                                                                                                    26
                  Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                      2. The procedure for the exercising of free legal aid

        Free legal Aid Act25 stipulates that competent free legal aid authority will apply
general administrative procedure, unless otherwise provided by the Act.
Application for free legal aid should include prescribed application form. It should be
filed to the competent free legal aid authority operating at the court based in the region
where the applicant has his or her permanent or temporary residence or where his or
her head office is based. The competent legal aid authority collects data on the applicant
or eligible person or opposing party, and other data when and if this is necessary in
order to:
         Approve free legal aid;
         Verify the data specified in the application;
         Ensure the repayment of funds paid as the result of unjustifiably received free
            legal aid;
         Collect the amounts owed pursuant to this Act in the enforcement procedure.
        The applicant may, for well-founded reasons, request priority consideration of
the application by the competent free legal aid authority.
        The president of the local court must ensure that applications received are sent
immediately to the competent court. Competent free legal aid authority decides on
applications for free legal aid upon by issuing a decision and, for proceeding-related
issues, by issuing an order. When deciding on applications for free legal aid, the
competent free legal aid authority takes into account the principle of expeditiousness
and effectiveness of the proceedings. Decision includes determined or specified the
explicit form and scope of the free legal aid granted, and set forth in more detail the
matter for which free legal aid has been granted (e.g. the type, extent and date of
completed acts of free legal aid and the person or authority that provided the free legal
aid). The decision is also served on the Attorney General and the competent court before
which the proceedings for which the free legal aid has been granted.




25Free Legal Aid Act – Zakon o brezplačni pravni pomoči (Official Gazette of the Republic of
Slovenia 48/2001, 50/2004, 96/2004-UPB1, 23/2008)

                                                                                               27
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




       Generally, there is no appeal against the decision of the competent free legal aid
authority; still, an administrative dispute is possible. An action in an administrative
dispute may also be filed by the State Attorney General. Pursuant to The Free legal Aid
Act, administrative dispute matters shall be deemed to be urgent.



                                        3. Types of FLA
        Further on the law defines that legal aid may be approved for legal advice, legal
representation and other legal services laid down in this Act, for all forms of judicial
protection before all courts of general jurisdiction and specialized courts based in the
Republic of Slovenia, before the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Slovenia, and
before all authorities, institutions or persons in the Republic of Slovenia authorized for
out-of-court settlement (hereinafter referred to as: judicial proceedings), as well as in
the form of exemption from payment of the costs of the judicial proceeding (Free Legal
Aid Act, Article 7).
       On the other hand the approved legal aid shall not cover the costs of the
proceeding and actual expenditure of and remuneration for the person authorized by
the opposing party (Free Legal Aid Act, Article 9).
       The law specifically lists the costs that can be covered by the approved legal aid
(Free Legal Aid Act, Article 26):
    For legal advice surpassing initial legal advice;
    For the formulation, verification and certification of documents on legal relations,
       facts and statements;
    For legal advice and representation in cases of out-of-court settlement;
    For legal advice and representation before courts in the first and second
       instances;
    For legal advice and representation involving extraordinary appeals;
    For legal advice and representation involving constitutional action;
    For legal advice and representation before international courts;
    For legal advice and representation involving the filing of a petition for the
       assessment of constitutionality;
    In the form of exemption from payment of the costs of the judicial proceeding.


                                                                                       28
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




       Legal aid may also be granted in the form of an exemption from payment of the
costs of proceedings before courts, particularly in the form of an exemption from
payment of:
       1. Court fees;
       2. Costs of experts, witnesses, interpreters, servicing orders and translations,
       costs of external operations of the court or other authority in the Republic of
       Slovenia, and other justified costs;
       3. Security deposits for the costs, or of the costs, of the implementation of the
       proceeding (advance payments);
       4. Costs of public documents and receipts required for the proceeding before a
       court;
       5. Other costs of the proceeding.


                        4. Eligible procedure/matters for granting FLA
       Matters that can qualify for FLA granting are not defined explicitly, since the Law lay
down matters that are to be seen as excluded from possible FLA granting consideration.
       According to Article 8 of Free legal aid Act FLA shall not be granted in the following
matters:
      Criminal offences involving insulting behavior, libel, defamation or slander,
       unless the injured party proves the probability that he or she has suffered legally
       recognized damage due to these offences;
      Disputes involving a reduction in maintenance when the person obliged to pay
       maintenance has failed to settle the due liabilities arising from maintenance,
       unless he or she has failed to settle these liabilities for reasons beyond his or her
       control;
      In damage disputes involving compensation for non-property and property
       damage caused by defamation or libel, unless the injured party provides credible
       evidence that this has affected his or her material, financial or social position.


                                       5. FLA providers
       In Slovenia legal aid is provided by attorneys who pursuant to the act governing
attorneys (the Lawyer's Act) are entered in the Directory of Attorneys, by law firms

                                                                                            29
                  Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




founded on the basis of the act regulating attorneys, and by notaries in matters dealt
with pursuant to the act regulating notaries.
        The request for free legal aid is decided by services (offices) for free legal aid at
all district courts of the Republic of Slovenia (district courts are one of the two types of
courts of first instance, exercising "major" jurisdiction).26

                                                 6. Funding
        Funds for implementation of Free Legal Aid Act are provided from the budget of
the Republic of Slovenia. However, if a person eligible for free legal aid was fully or
partially successful in the proceedings and if he or she, on the basis of a court’s final
decision or on the basis of an out-of-court or court settlement, acquires property or
revenues, he or she is obliged to reimburse the Republic of Slovenia for the difference
between the costs effectively paid as free legal aid and the amount repaid by the
opposing party and arising from the costs of the proceedings, or the amount the
Republic of Slovenia has collected from the opposing party pursuant. However, he/she
may in no case be requested to repay a higher amount than he in fact obtained during
the proceedings.27
        In reporting period total of 6 562 466.95 euros was paid to FLA before district,
administrative and labour and social courts in Slovenia.28
Funds paid to FLA in cases before district                                 6 228 606.93
courts
Funds paid to FLA in cases before                                              570.17
administrative court
Funds paid to FLA in cases before labour                                    333 289.85
and social courts


                                               7. Supervision
        Para. 4 Art. 29 prescribes that minister responsible for justice sets regulations on
supervision over the provision of legal aid in special bylaw.

26 Official response of Ministry of Justice of Republic of Slovenia to our Free access to information request
sent.
27 ibid
28 Judicial Statistics for 2012 of Ministry of Justice of Republic of Slovenia (Sodna Statistika 2012)

http://www.mp.gov.si/fileadmin/mp.gov.si/pageuploads/mp.gov.si/PDF/Sodna_statistika/SodnaStatisti
ka_2012.pdf


                                                                                                           30
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




       According to Para.9 Art. 30 quality control of work of attorneys providing FLA is
conducted by the competent free legal aid authority, which may decide to dismiss an
appointed attorney who does not perform his/her services well, either at the request of the
applicant or with his/her consent. The authority shall appoint another attorney in place of the
one who was dismissed. The Bar Association or the Chamber of Notaries of Slovenia shall be
notified of the dismissal.



                        II IMPLEMENTATION OF FREE LEGAL AID
       According to Judicial Statistics of Ministry of Justice of Republic of Slovenia
(Sodna Statistika)29 during the reporting period (01.01. – 31.12.2012. 2012) FLA was
granted to 8380 cases before three types of courts in Slovenia: district, administrative
and labour and social courts. Cases to which FLA was granted:
              civil 6039
              labor 846
              criminal 1032
              other matters 357
              minor offences 57
              social 41
              administrative 8

                             1%         1%      0%
                                  4%

                       12%
                                                                               Civil
                                                                               Labour
                                                                               Criminal
                10%
                                                                               Other matters
                                                                               Minor offences
                                                                               Social
                                                                               Administrative
                                                        72%




29http://www.mp.gov.si/fileadmin/mp.gov.si/pageuploads/mp.gov.si/PDF/Sodna_statistika/SodnaStatist

ika_2012.pdf

                                                                                                31
              Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




In 11 District Courts FLA was granted to 7302 cases:
            civil 6038
            labor 11
            criminal 1032
            other matters 157
            minor offences 57
            social 1
            administrative 6
                        2% 1%              0%       0%

                            14%

                  0%                                                     Civil
                                                                         Working
                                                                         Crimiinal
                                                                         Other matters
                                                                         Minor offenses
                                                                         Social
                                                                         Administrative


                                                     83%




In 1 Administrative Court FLA was granted to 2 cases:
           civil 0
           labor 0
           criminal 0
           other matters 0
           minor offences 0
           social 0
           administrative 2



In 4 Labour and Social Courts FLA was granted in 1076 cases:
           civil 1
           labor 835
           other matters 200
           minor offences 0
           social 40
           administrative 0

                                                                                          32
              Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                  0%0%    0%
                                     4%


                        18%
                                                                          Civil
                                                                          Working
                                                                          Other matters
                                                                          Minor offenses
                                                                          Social
                                                                          Administrative


                                                    78%




    Type of procedural action in cases to which FLA was granted in reporting period

                                    before all courts

Exemption from costs                                                            4073
Legal advice and representation before international courts                       2
Legal advice and representation before courts of first and                      2074
second degree
Legal advice and representation before courts of first degree                   3301
Legal advice and representation before the courts in second                      175
degree
Legal advice and representation in lodging the initiative for                     2
assessing the constitutionality
Legal advice and representation in connection with                                42
extraordinary legal remedies
Legal advice and representation in connection with the                            11
constitutional complaint
Legal advice and representation for the conclusion of of-court                    29
settlement
Legal advice that goes beyond first legal advice                                207
First legal advice                                                              218
Composition, verification and validation of documents                           244




                                                                                           33
                 Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




       Total of 16126 cases were solved before district, administrative and labor and
social courts in Slovenia in reporting period. Out of this number FLA was granted in
8380 cases.

Unsolved cases at the beginning of period            2194
Received cases                                      16311
Solved cases                                        16126
Unsolved cases at the end of period                  2379

       According to Para. 2 Art. 3 of Free legal aid Act it shall be granted as regular,
extraordinary, exceptional, special or emergency free legal aid. The table below shows
overview of these types of FLA granted in 2012:

Exceptional                                            18
Extraordinary                                        1976
Emergency                                             592
Special                                                18
Regular                                              5324




                                            LITHUANIA


        I GENERAL INFORMATION ON FREE LEGAL AID LEGAL FRAMEWORK
       Lithuania has reformed Legal Aid System by adopting the Law of the Republic of
Lithuania amending the Law on State-guaranteed legal aid (No X-78 of January 2005)30.
       The purpose of this law is to establish the provision of State-guaranteed legal aid
(SLA) to natural persons to enable them to adequately assert their violated or disputed
rights and the interests protected under law.


                                             1. Beneficiaries
       Lithuanian law guarantees to every person under the Lithuanian jurisdiction
the right to receive free legal advice or the so called “primary legal aid”. Population



       30   Official Gazette 2000, No 30-827; 2001, No 71-2521; 2003, No 38-1722, No 123-5584.


                                                                                                 34
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




of Lithuania is 3 043 429 citizens. In 2012, persons who got PLA makes 1,48 % of
Lithuanian population.
   Lithuanian law guarantees free legal representation or “secondary legal aid” to
persons with low income level. In 2012, persons who got SLA makes 1,66 % of
Lithuanian population.
   The following persons shall be eligible for secondary legal aid regardless of the
property and income levels established by the Government of the Republic of Lithuania
for the provision of legal aid under the Law on State-guaranteed legal aid:
    1) The persons eligible for legal aid in criminal proceedings according to Article 51
       of the Republic of Lithuania Code of Criminal Procedure (mandatory defense) and
       in other cases specified by laws when the physical presence of a defense lawyer is
       mandatory;
    2) The aggrieved parties in the cases concerning compensation for the damage
       incurred through criminal actions, including the cases when the issue of
       compensation for damage is heard as part of a criminal matter;
    3) The persons receiving a social allowance under the Republic of Lithuania Law on
       Cash Social Assistance for Low-Income Families (Single Residents);
    4) The persons maintained in stationary care institutions;
    5) The persons who have been established a severe disability or for whom
       incapacity for work has been recognized or who have reached the pensionable
       age and for whom the level of considerable special needs has been established,
       also guardians (custodians) of these persons, where State-guaranteed legal aid is
       required for the representation and defense of rights and interests of a ward
       (foster-child);
    6) The persons who have presented a proof that they cannot dispose of their
       property and funds for objective reasons and that for these reasons, their
       property and annual income which they can freely dispose of do not exceed the
       property and income levels established by the Government of the Republic of
       Lithuania for the provision of legal aid under the Law on State guaranteed legal
       aid;
    7) The persons suffering from serious mental disorders, when issues of their forced
       hospitalization and treatment are being considered according to the Republic of
                                                                                      35
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




       Lithuania Law on Mental Health Care, and their guardians (custodians), where
       State guaranteed legal aid is required for the representation of rights and
       interests of a foster-child (ward);
    8) Debtors in execution proceedings, when a recovery is levied against the last
       housing wherein they reside;
    9) Parents or other legal representatives of minor children, when the issue of their
       eviction is being considered;
    10) Minor children, when they independently apply to a court for the defense of
       their rights or interests protected under law in the cases specified by laws, with
       the exception of those who have entered into a marriage in accordance with the
       procedure laid down by laws or have been recognized by the court as legal
       capable (emancipated);
    11) The persons who it is requested to recognize as legally incapable in the matters
       concerning recognition of a natural person as legal incapable;
    12) Persons in the matters concerning registration of birth;
    13) Other persons in the matters provided for in treaties of the Republic of
       Lithuania.


                     2. The procedure for the approving of free legal aid
   A person wishing to receive secondary legal aid submits an application and the
documents attesting to his/her eligibility for secondary legal aid to the Legal Aid Service
(there are 5 Legal Aid Services whose jurisdiction correspond to the geographical areas
of county courts).


    The eligibility for SLA of the persons whose property and annual income do not
       exceed the property and income levels established by the Government is attested
       to by a resident’s property declaration with a stamp of the local tax
       administrator confirming the submission of the declaration.
    The eligibility for SLA of the persons eligible for legal aid in criminal proceedings
       is attested to by the decisions of a pre-trial investigation officer, prosecutor or the
       court.


                                                                                           36
              Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




    The eligibility for SLA of the persons the aggrieved parties in the cases
      concerning compensation for the damage incurred through criminal actions is
      attested to by a decision of a pre-trial investigation officer, prosecutor or by a
      court ruling whereby a person is recognized the aggrieved party and/or by a
      court judgment.
    The eligibility for SLA of the persons eligible for a social allowance is attested to
      by a certificate issued by the municipality of the place of residence as declared
      by a person.
    The eligibility for SLA of the persons maintained by the State in stationary care
      institutions is attested to by a certificate issued by the head of a stationary care
      institution.
    The eligibility for SLA of the persons with disability is attested to by a document
      issued by the Disability and Working Capacity Establishment Service under
      the Ministry of Social Security and Labor and confirming the level of a person’s
      disability or incapacity for work.
    The eligibility for SLA of the poor persons is attested to by a property seizure act
      and/or other documents certifying the objective reasons for which a person
      cannot dispose of his property and funds as well as a copy of a resident’s
      property declaration submitted to the local tax administrator.
    The eligibility for SLA of the persons with serious mental disorders is attested by
      a certificate issued by a health care institution.
    The eligibility for SLA of the persons in the cases provided for in international
      treaties is attested by the documents specified in international treaties of the
      Republic of Lithuania.


   The Service makes decision within 3 working days of the receipt of the applicant’s
documents, in which it specifies the lawyer who provide SLA. Decisions of the service
may be appealed against in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Republic of
Lithuania Law on Administrative Proceedings.
   When selecting a lawyer, the service shall take into account an applicant’s proposal
regarding the specific lawyer, the place of residence of the applicant, the place of
employment of the lawyer, the workload of the lawyer and other circumstances
                                                                                          37
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




significant for the provision of secondary legal aid.


                                         3. Types of FLA
    Primary FLA includes:
         Legal information
         Legal advices
         Drafts of documents which should be submitted to state and government
           institutions (except process documents)
         Advices on alternative dispute resolution
         Peaceful settlement of disputes
         Preparation of a settlement agreement
         Filling requests for secondary FLA
Primary FLA is provided on: civil, administrative and criminal cases.
Primary legal aid is provided to everyone, regardless of income and assets.


    Primary legal aid is provided to person immediately. If it is not possible, person will
       be notified of the time of an appointment, which must take place not later than 5
       days from the day of application.
    The duration of legal advice should not be longer than one hour. Its duration may be
       extended by a decision of the executive institution of a municipality or a person
       authorized by it.
    A person may apply for primary legal aid on the same issue only once.


    Secondary FLA includes:
         Documents drafting
         Representation and defend before courts, including executive procedure;
         Representation in the preliminary extrajudicial procedure
         Covering of court costs
         Cost recovery expert, interpreting and collecting evidence
         Travel costs of the person who submitted the request, in cases when his/her
           presence before the court is necessary, etc.


                                                                                        38
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




       There are two levels of financing legal. If person`s income and assets do not
   exceed the first level of financing (2317 EUR + 869 EUR for every dependent per
   year), person will receive a lawyer free of charge; if they do not exceed the second
   level of financing (3475 EUR + 1304 EUR for every dependent per year), 50 per cent
   of the costs will be reimbursed by the state.


                                        4. FLA providers
   Primary FLA providers are civil servants, employees of the municipality
administration, advocates or specialists from public institutions with whom the
municipality has signed an agreement and NGOs. There are 60 municipalities in
Lithuania which have organized primary FLA.
   Secondary legal aid is provided by lawyers, who have agreements with one of five
State founded Legal Aid Services on provision of legal aid. Agreements specify in civil,
administrative or criminal cases the lawyer shall provide SLA.
   There are two types of lawyers: 1. those who continuously provide secondary legal
aid only to the persons eligible for it; 2. those who provide secondary legal aid in case of
necessity (they can deal with private clients).


                                           5. Funding
       Budget for FLA Amount (in €) 3,906,105.


                             State budget allocated to the SLA (EUR)




                                                                                          39
                  Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                   State budget allocated to the PLA (EUR)




                                                  6. Supervision
        Legal Aid Services, besides other:
              Co-ordinate provision of PLA (analyses activities, submit proposals).
              Coordinate provision of legal aid in criminal cases.
              Control the provision of secondary legal aid (on the basis of agreements
                 concluded with lawyers).
        Ministry of Justice: implements policy created by the Government creates Drafts
     of the acts related to FLA and monitors implementation of existing Acts on FLA;
        Coordination Council conducts analysis of the work of Municipalities and
     proposals for improvement of FLA. It consists of representatives of:
         The Committees on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of Lithuanian Parliament
         The Ministry of Justice
         The Ministry of Finance
         The Association of Local Authorities in Lithuania
         The Lithuanian Bar
         Other institutions and associations whose activities are related to the
             provision of legal aid or to the protection of human rights
     Lawyers’ Association of Lithuania controls the quality of FLA provided by lawyers.31



31
  Free Legal Aid System in the Republic Of Lithuania, ppt made jointly by Ministry of Justice of Republic of
Croatia, Kaunas Service of legal aid guaranteed by the State of the Republic of Lithuania and the Ministry of
Justice of the Republic of Lithuania

                                                                                                                40
             Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                    II IMPLEMENTATION OF FREE LEGAL AID


Number of persons granted Primary Legal Aid




   Budget for Primary Legal Aid (EUR)




                                                                               41
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




   Number or cases when legal aid was granted by decision of the State-guaranteed
legal aid service (civil, criminal and administrative cases) – 16536 cases:
    civil cases – 13595;
    administrative cases – 786;
    criminal cases – 2146;




                  FLA granted by State legal aid service
   16000

   14000

   12000

   10000

    8000
                                                                                 Series 1
    6000

    4000

    2000

       0
                 civil cases       administrative cases     criminal cases


                                                                                            42
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




   Number or cases when legal aid was granted by decision of a pre-trial investigation
officer, prosecutor or the court (only criminal cases in which the presence of the defense
lawyer is mandatory) – 33165 cases.




                                                                                       43
                 Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                          BRCKO DISTRICT


         I GENERAL INFORMATION ON FREE LEGAL AID LEGAL FRAMEWORK
        Bosnia and Herzegovina has not enacted any comprehensive legislation
that specifically regulates the provision of free legal aid to citizens. However, there
are a number of constitutional provisions and legislative enactments which govern or
impact the provision of information and assistance services to citizens.
        The Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina (Article II) provides that the rights
and freedoms set forth in the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR) and its Protocols are to apply directly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and are to have priority over all other laws. Article 6 of the ECHR
guarantees the right to a fair trial. It also specifically secures the right to free legal aid in
cases when a person who is charged with a criminal offence is unable to afford legal
assistance and when this is required in the interest of justice. Over time, the case law of
the European Court for Human Rights has also recognized the right to legal aid in civil
cases. As a consequence, Bosnia and Herzegovina is under an obligation to provide free
legal aid to its citizens in criminal, civil and other disputes involving “the determination
of his civil rights and obligations”.
        The constitutional obligation to provide legal aid has been further recognized in
the Justice Sector Reform Strategy (JSRS) for BiH which has noted that“[t]he lack of a
comprehensive legal aid system for criminal and civil cases must be rectified in order to
ensure that economic status does not inhibit the capacity of citizens to pursue their rights
before the law.”32 The Strategy also identifies several measures that would ensure
creation of a harmonized system of free legal aid in civic, criminal and administrative
cases across the country. Despite this strategic commitment, most of these measures
have so far not been implemented.
        Regrettably, a national framework law on free legal aid has so far not been
adopted. Although the country does not currently have a national law on legal aid,
separate legal frameworks exist in its two constitutive entities Republika Srpska, the


32Ministry of Justice, “The Justice Sector Reform Strategy of Bosnia and Herzegovina” 2008, accessible
online:
http://www.mpr.gov.ba/dokumenti/projekti/Default.aspx?id=913

                                                                                                         44
                Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as in Brcko District, and several cantons
in the second entity Federation BH adopted their own legislation on free legal aid.
       The European Commission has emphasized the issue in its progress report on
Bosnia and Herzegovina for 2012 and expressed the concern that “[t]he system of free
legal aid in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains fragmented and unregulated in some
Cantons of the Federation” and noted that the Framework Law on Free Legal Aid had not
yet been adopted.33
       In its progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina for 2013, European
Commission repeated “Concerning access to justice in civil and administrative trials,
wide access to the web-based free legal aid providers’ network has been provided. Free
legal aid offices have been set up in three more Cantons of the Federation, bringing the
total to seven. The system of free legal aid remains fragmented and unregulated in three
Cantons. The adoption of a State-level Law on Free Legal Aid remains pending. Free legal
aid in civil cases continues to be provided, mainly by privately-funded NGOs. Free legal
aid in administrative cases remains insufficient.”34
       In the Brcko District, which has 87,332 inhabitants situation is most favorable,
where free legal aid is regulated and fully established 2002nd since when function
smoothly.
       At the level of the Brcko District of Bosnia and Herzegovina was adopted the Law
on the Legal Aid Office Brcko District of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which established the
Legal Aid Office of Brcko District (hereinafter "the Office of BD"), with the aim of
providing legal assistance to indigent citizens in certain proceedings in the District. The
law was passed because the arbitrary decision of 5th March, 1999. year , which
established Brcko District of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a single administrative unit of
local government under the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Arbitration
Tribunal explicitly predicted, among other things, reform of the judiciary, which includes
the establishment of justice District, consisting of the Judicial Commission, Appellate
Court, Basic Court, Public Prosecutor's Office and the Legal Aid Office. BD's Office

33 European Commission, “Bosnia and Herzegovina 2012 Progress Report. Enlargement Strategy and Main
Challenges 2012-2013” SWD(2012) 335 final, Brussels, 10 October 2012, p.16:
http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/pdf/key_documents/2012/package/ba_rapport_2012_en.pdf.
34 European Commission, “Bosnia and Herzegovina 2013 Progress Report. Enlargement Strategy and Main

Challenges 2013-2014” SWD(2013) 415 final, Brussels, 16 October 2013, p.13:
http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/pdf/key_documents/2013/package/ba_rapport_2013.pdf

                                                                                                45
                  Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




provides legal advice and represents the citizens of the District indigent in the District,
in front of the Basic Court of Brcko District of BiH, the Appellate Court of Brcko District
of BiH and the Brcko District Prosecution Office.


                                           1. Beneficiaries
          FLA is limited only to the proceedings before the institutions of the District.35
          In Brcko District FLA is being provided to the citizens of the District with low
income exclusively. The Law on Office for legal aid of Brcko District excludes citizens
with residence outside of the District from being eligible for FLA. It is absurd to have
them excluded, although they may have obvious legal interest and fulfill all other
criteria. At the same time despite the fact that problems related to status of refugees,
IDPs and returnees are numerous, these categories are not recognized as free legal aid
beneficiaries.
          BD Office provides free legal assistance to customers who meet the cumulative
conditions and that they do not have enough money for a lawyer and the costs of legal
representation and meet the financial criteria for representation. The right to legal
assistance of financial criteria are : ( 1 ) persons who receive social assistance, ( 2 )
unemployed with no regular income or other income, (3 ) a person who is indigent, ( 4 )
children without parental care, ( 5 ) a person of bad health condition with no income.
          The basis for determining the right to legal aid for indigent includes total income
and assets that are not considered as income, and that the applicant and members of the
family do not pay taxes. When determining the right to legal aid based on financial
criteria do not take into account the income and assets of family members of those who
are opposing party claimant.
          District law provides that no person is considered indigent is a person who lives
in the same household with an adult member of his family, and that is such a financial
state that is able to bear the costs of legal services to persons with him living in the same
household.




35   http://www.kppbd.ba/

                                                                                          46
                  Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                       2. The procedure for the approving of free legal aid
       In the Brcko District request for eligibility for legal aid shall be submitted to the
President of the Basic Court of Brcko District of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the
attached evidence of meeting the financial criteria for representation in all procedures
that are seeking representation without compensation, except the mandatory defense in
criminal cases.
       Decision on engagement of the Office for representing in the criminal proceeding
before the Prosecutor’s Office or the Court is being made by the President of the Basic
Court, a judge or the panel, in accordance with the Law on Criminal Procedure of
Brcko District BiH, whereas such a decision for civil and other cases is being made by the
President of the Basic Court in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the law
or special regulation.
       Director of the Office is making a decision on providing legal aid in
administrative cases, upon a request of the party.
       Against the decision of the President and the Director of the Office rejecting the
application for legal aid, the applicant has the right to appeal within 15 days to the
Judicial Commission.


                                            3. Types of FLA
       Law on Office for legal aid makes no distinction between primary and secondary
       legal aid. Article 10 defines following types of legal aid to be obtained:
    Oral advices on all rights and obligations;
    Assistance in completing forms;
    Legal assistance in completing all kinds of writings;
    Representation before the administrative body;
    Representation before the court;
    Drafting the appeal;
    Legal assistance in mediation.


                         4. Eligible procedure/matters for granting FLA
       The Office represents indigent citizens in the following cases/proceedings:
    criminal
                                                                                         47
                  Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




    civil
    non-contentious
    enforcement
    misdemeanor
    administrative
    other cases, as prescribed by the law.
   The Office also provides verbal legal counseling on all rights and obligations assists
in filling in the forms and provides legal assistance in filling in all writs.


                                           5. FLA providers
        Due to its exceptional status within Bosnia and Herzegovina and its limited
number of citizens it has a centralized FLA system, which is being provided by the
Legal Aid Office of Brcko District BiH established in accordance to the Law passed in
2007.
        Legal Aid Office of Brcko District BiH, pursuant to the Section V in the Statute of
Brcko District BiH, is an independent institution tasked with providing legal
counseling and representing indigent citizens of Brcko District BiH in litigations and
criminal proceedings.
        BD office is located in the building of the Court of Brcko District and is
transparent to all users of free legal aid. As part of the judiciary district, it has the same
spatial and material conditions as well as other judicial authorities and the prosecution
and the courts.
        Competencies of the Office have been prescribed in the Article 7 of the Law on
Legal Aid Office, which states that the Office is responsible for providing legal counseling
and representing indigent citizens of Brcko District BiH, as well as for undertaking all
actions before the Brcko District of BiH Basic Court, Brcko District Appellate Court and
Prosecutor’s Office of Brcko District. The Office is undertaking all actions and
participates in all phases of the proceedings until final termination of the case.
        Office has 11 full-time employees. 6 of them (Director and 5 lawyers) provide
free legal aid.




                                                                                           48
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




   Training for providers in Brcko District
       In order to improve the quality of services provided by the Legal Aid Office, as
well as continuous monitoring of new regulations and modification of existing ones and
monitoring of case law, legal representative of the Office continuously improves
professionally by attending seminars in different areas of law .
       Attorneys have attended seminars organized by the Center for Education of RS
and FBiH and Brcko District Judicial Commission in Criminal and Civil Matters.
       To keep up with this program orientation, in order to improve the quality of
services provided by the Office, as well as continuous monitoring of the new
amendments to the existing regulations and monitoring of case law, legal
representatives will attend compulsory education in criminal justice and civic
consultations organized by the Judicial Commission of Brcko District, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Centers for Education of RS. In addition to further educate, they
will also attend the seminars organized specifically for providers of free legal aid, and
other appropriate seminars.
      In a short time the attorneys of the Legal Aid Office will be able to access the
database of all providers of legal aid, which are part of the Network of Providers of Free
Legal Aid (Center for Legal Assistance of the Republic of Serbian, the Cantonal Institute
for Legal Assistance Tuzla, Cantonal Office of Legal Aid Zenica, the County Office of Legal
Aid Odžak, County Office of Legal Aid Siroki Brijeg, Human Rights Centre Mostar, Your
Rights Association BiH). This will have major influence on improving the quality of
services provided by the Office.
                                             6.      Funding
       District provides necessary financial and any other support in order to ensure
undisrupted and regular Office functioning. The Office is clearly mentioned and
presented share of the budget within the District budget. In the procedure of budget
preparation and adoption, Office Director submits the Office budget draft to the Judicial
Commission for the sake of determining the final budget draft of the Office. Director is
responsible for execution of the Office budget.




                                                                                        49
                      Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




Funding of the Legal Aid Office Brcko District of BiH - amount in euro36

Gross wages and benefits                                                                               216,895.
                                                                                                       18
Allowances for employees and Parliamentary representative                                              2,045.19
Employer contributions                                                                                 8,675.80
Travel expenses                                                                                        1,022.59
Expenses for utilities                                                                                 3,067.79
Procurement of materials and small tools                                                               3,323.44
Expenses for transportation services and fuel                                                          766.94
Expenditures for maintenance                                                                           1,533.89
Expenses for insurance, banking services and payment services                                          1,022.59
Contractual services                                                                                   2,556.49
Procurement of equipment                                                                               10,225.9
                                                                                                       9

                         1% 0% 1%
                     1% 0%
                                           Funding of the Legal Aid Office Brcko District of BiH
                      1%       4%
                  1%                                                                 Gross salaries and benefits
                 1%
                         4%                                                          Allowances for employees and
                                                                                     Parliamentary representative
                                                                                     Employer contribution

                                                                                     Travel expenses

                                                                                     Expenses for utilities

                                                                                     Procurement of materials and small
                                                                                     tools
                                                                                     Expenses for transportation services
                                                                                     and fuel
                                                                                     Expenditures for maintenance

                                                                                     Expenses for insurance, banking and
                                                   86%                               payment services
                                                                                     Contracted services

Total                                                                                                  251,135.
                                                                                                       97




36   According to the official exchange rate of the Central Bank of BiH on date 31.12.2012.

                                                                                                              50
                      Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                    Funding of the Legal Aid Office Brcko District of BiH - amount in euro37
                              Monthly     gross   Period        of   Number           of
                                                                                              Total resources
                              salary              engagement         employees
Director                      2,749.23            12                 1                        32,990.79
Lawyer                        2,320.48            12                 5                        139,228.96
Head                  of
                              1,035.81            12                 1                        12,429.79
administration
An investigator               729.11              12                 1                        8,749.36
Secretary              –
                              713.26              12                 1                        8,559.15
assistant
Operator                 –
                              649.86              12                 1                        7,798.34
assistant
Letter messenger –
                              530.98              12                 1                        6,371.81
the driver - janitor
Salary supplement             0.00                -                  -                        766.94
Contributions paid
                              0.00                12                 -                        8,675.80
by employers
Total                                                                                         225,570.68



                             Funding
                                0%
                                     of the Legal Aid Office Brcko District of BiH
                  3%
                                         4%
                                                       15%                          Director
                               3%
                         4%                                                         Lawyer
                    4%
                                                                                    Head of administration

               5%                                                                   An investigator

                                                                                    Secretary – assistant

                                                                                    Operator – assistant

                                                                                    Letter messanger – the driver -
                                                                                    janitor
                                                                                    Salary supplement

                                                  62%                               Contributions paid by employers




37   According to the official exchange rate of the Central Bank of BiH on date 31.12.2012.

                                                                                                                51
                      Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                                  7. Supervision
       According to the Article 47 of the Law on Office for legal aid38 prescribes that the
Office for FLA reports to the Judicial Commission, which evaluates it and gives
suggestions without undermining the independence of the institution of the Office for
FLA. This report may be afterwards sent before the Parliament of the District.


                             II IMPLEMENTATION OF FREE LEGAL AID
During the reporting period (01.01. – 31.12.2012. 2012) the Office has 1685 active
cases:
       -   criminal                                       321
       -   civil                                          388
       -   non-contentious                                51
       -   enforcement                                    78
       -   cases of the Panel for Display39               752
       -   misdemeanor                                    95
Chart 1 – Active cases in 2012


                               6%
                                            19%
                                                                         criminal

                                                                         civil

                                                                         non-contentious

                44%                                                      enforcement
                                                  23%

                                                                         panel for display

                                                                         misdemeanor
                                     5%
                                           3%




38Law on Office for legal aid No.19/07 http://skupstinabd.ba/ba/zakoni/ba/zakon-o-kancelariji-za-
pravnu-pomo.html

39   Panel for Display of Data on Real Estate

                                                                                                    52
                    Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




Chart 2 – Cases opened during 2012.




                             9%
                                                                     criminal
                                          25%
                                                                     civil

                                                                     non-contentious
              35%
                                                                     enforcement

                                           25%                       panel for display

                              4%                                     misdemeanor
                        2%

Table 1 – Report on number of cases
                      Backlog      from   Cases   opened   Active     cases     Cases    closed
                      previous years      during 2012.     during 2012.         during 2012.
Criminal cases
                      157                 164              321                  131


Misdemeanor           35                  60               95                   61


Civil cases           219                 169              388                  138
Non-contentious
                      21                  30               51                   27
Enforcement
cases                 64                  14               78                   21
Panel for Display
                      519                 233              752                  226


TOTAL                 1.015               670              1.685                604
Verbal counseling
                                                           2.488




                                                                                                  53
                   Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




          During the period January 01 – December 31, 2012 the Office received 164 new
criminal cases, in addition to another 157 backlogged cases. In the above-mention
period, the Office had a total of 321 active criminal cases.
          131 cases were closed during 2012.
          The Office represented clients in 388 cases, 169 of which have been started
during the year 2012 and the remaining 219 were backlogged cases.
          138 cases were closed during 2012.
   Legal basis                                       Representation in cases    Representation        in
                                                     started in 2012            backlogged cases
division of marital property                         5                         8
alimony                                              1                         9
change of child custody decision                     5                         3
child custody                                        10                        5
divorce                                              21                        16
divorce with child custody                           19                        8
divorce with child custody and alimony               21                        15
divorce with spousal support                                                   4
annulment of marriage                                1
determining marital property                         4                         8
paternity                                            6                         3
handing over possession of the property              1                         6
recognition of property rights                                                 11
affirmation                                          2                         5
regulating land dispute                                                        2
usage crossing the property                          1                         5
trespass                                             2                         5
gaining no basis                                     2                         3
contract termination                                 1                         5
recall of the deed of gift                           1
compensation for damage                              10                        13
the return of property or payment                    1                         2
payment                                                                        5
debt                                                 44                        64
collection of claims                                 2
enforcement of action                                                          1



                                                                                                 54
                 Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




eviction                                                                     1
labor dispute                                      6                         3
denial a necessary part of succession                                        2
annulment of the decision                          3                         7
                                                   169                       219




    MISDEMEANOR
       During the reporting period the Office represented clients in 95 misdemeanor
cases. 60 such cases were started during 2012, and there were also 35 backlogged cases
form previous years.
       61misdemeanor cases were closed during 2012.




    NON-CONTENTIOUS CASES
       During the reporting period the Office represented clients in 51 non-contentious
cases. 30 such cases were started during 2012, and there were also 21 backlogged cases
form previous years.
       27 non-contentious cases were closed during 2012.


    ENFORCEMENT CASES
       During the reporting period the Office represented clients in 78 enforcement
cases. 14 such cases were started during 2012, and there were also 64 backlogged cases
form previous years.
       21 enforcement cases were closed during 2012.


    PANEL FOR DISPLAY OF PROPERTY DATA CASES
       At the time when the Panel for Display of Property Data started working, the
Office was engaged pursuant to the Article 233, paragraph 1 in the Law on Land Registry
and Property Rights of Brcko District BiH, because persons whose address of permanent
or temporary residence is unknown and when such persons do not report to the Court
for the purposes of participation in the process, they are awarded an Office lawyer to


                                                                                    55
               Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




temporary represent them. During 2012 the Office was engaged in 752 cases, 233 of
which were started in 2012 and remaining 519 in previous years.
        226 cases related to the Panel for Display of Property Data was finalized during
2012.


    VERBAL COUNSELING
        During 2012, lawyers of the Office have provided 2,488 verbal advices. Most of
those were related to property issues, signing a contract, divorces, division of property
acquired during marriage, alimony, inheritance-related problems, trespassing,
complaints to the enforcement decisions, as well as to issues related to all other areas of
law.




Office lawyers appeared before the court 1.584 times. Average number of working
days per year is 250, which means that lawyers had approximately 6.3 court
appearances and average of 9.9 verbal counseling cases per day.




                                                                                        56
Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




      COMPARATIVE OVERVIEW




                                                                  57
                                                 Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences



            Country/entity         Population     Number of          Number of           Annual public        Annual FLA       Annual          GDP per capita
                                        40        FLA                cases to which      budget               budget per       public          in euros44
                                                  beneficiaries      FLA was             allocation to        inhabitant in    budget per
                                                  in 201241          granted in          FLA system in        2012 in          case to
                                                                     201242              2012 in              euros            which FLA
                                                                                         euros43                               was
                                                                                                                               granted in
                                                                                                                               euros
            Croatia                4 456 096      5875                5 877/597045        167 365.26                    0.04       28.48       10 688.38
            District of Brcko       103 240        NA                 1 685               240 906.42                    2.33       142.97       3 508.12
            Lithuania              3 043 429      94096              49 701              3 906 105.00                   1.28       236.22      10 920.92
            Montenegro              625 266        367                 304                  15 570.00                   0.03         51.21      5 421.58
            Slovenia               2 055 496       NA                 8 380              6 562 466.95                   3.19       783.11      16 940.02




40 Last available data on population, respectively: Croatia: http://www.dzs.hr/ (2011); District of Brcko:
http://www.bhas.ba/publikacijebd/2010/Demografija%20za%202010%20DB.pdf (2010); Lithuania: http://osp.stat.gov.lt/en/2011-m.-surasymas (March 2011);
Montenegro: http://www.monstat.org/userfiles/file/popis2011/saopstenje/saopstenje.pdf (2011); Slovenia: http://pxweb.stat.si/pxweb/Dialog/Saveshow.asp
(2012)
41 Respectively: Croatia: Report on realization of the right on free legal aid and utilization of funds in 2012, Ministry of Jus tice (Izvješće o ostvarivanju prava na

besplatnu pravnu pomoć i utrošku sredstava u 2012. godini); District of Brcko : Report on work of Office for legal aid of District of Brcko BH in period 01.01 –
12.31.2012, No Ku-47/13, issued on March 7th 2013 (Izvještaj o radu Kancelarije za pravnu pomoć Brčko distrikta BiH za period 01.01. - 31.12.2012. godine);
Lithuania: ; Montenegro: Research of FLA system in Montenegro – creation of effective and sustainable FLA system conducted jointly by Center for Democracy and
Human Rights and Civic Alliance with support of UNDP Office in Montenegro, September 2013 (Istraživanje sistema besplatne pravne pomoći u Crnoj Gori –
kreiranje efektivnog i održivog sistema pružanja besplatne pravne pomoći); Slovenia: Judicial Statistics of Ministry of Justi ce of Republic of Slovenia (Sodna
statistika 2012 ISSN 1318-4326)
42 ibid
43 ibid
44 GDP per capita source: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.C ; US dollar to Euro average exchange rate in 2012 source:

http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/exchange/eurofxref/html/eurofxref-graph-usd.en.html
45 Official Report on realization of the right on free legal aid and utilization of funds in 2012 of Ministry of Justice of Republic of Croatia stated 5 877. Yet, in response

to our Free access to Information request Ministry stated that 5970 was the number of cases to which FLA was granted in 2012. In further calculations number from
Official report was used.
                                                                                                                                                                           58
                                        Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




                                                        CONCLUSIONS / SUMMARY
By comparison of the results of the analysis of free legal aid systems, following conclusions could be drawn:
      First, in countries where FLA system has been functioned for many years, there is a tendency of budget cuts for FLA (Slovenia,
       Lithuania). This trend is likely caused by saving measures, since the reduction of the budget is not accompanied by a reduction in
       demand for FLA .
      Second, countries with higher GDP allocate more money per case. Thus, Slovenia stands out even 783 euros per case, while
       Lithuania allocates less. However, it was not accompanied by a large number of requests in Slovenia, while Lithuania has the
       highest number of requests that is caused by visibility of clearly developed system.
      Third, registration of providers of primary legal aid affects the increasing visibility of secondary legal aid that becomes accessible
       for relevant beneficiaries (Lithuania, Croatia).
      Fourth, states that have established FLA system lately have not provided sufficient funds for its functioning. From the examined
       countries, Montenegro invests the least sources for the functioning of FLA system. Law has reserved the right to provide FLA only
       for lawyers and has predicted that courts decide on granting FLA. Associates in court are doing administrative tasks. A very small
       number of requests have been received in the first year of implementation of Law on FLA. The system of free legal aid is not
       enough visible to potential beneficiaries. The Law on FLA does not introduce new system in comparison to the system that
       existed before the enactment of the Law, which through procedural laws provided right to free legal aid on the basis of indigent
       right. There is no registration of lawyers by specialty, which reduces quality assurance.
      Fifth, organization of the state Office for FLA that employs lawyers (Brcko) as permanent staff is most cost effective system when
       it comes to organization of secondary legal aid. It provides quality control and supervision of the work of lawyers. On the other



                                                                                                                                           59
                                     Cross Country Comparison of Regional Free Legal Aid Experiences




    hand, it calls into question the fundamentals of the legal profession as freelancers, and when it comes to Serbia, this system is not
    in accordance with the Code of Professional Ethics for Lawyers.


                                                      Basic recommendations
   First, FLA system should predict a larger number of providers with different funding schemes. In this way, among providers
    competition is increased and free legal aid system is becoming more apparent to beneficiaries.
   Second, FLA system should clearly predict cascade system of consulting (legal information, legal advice, and representation). In
    this way, it is possible to reduce the number of potential disputes.
   Third, FLA system with the prediction of different types of providers ensures the quality through emphasizing the specialty of
    various providers.




                                                                                                                                       60
