                          86809 rev




INDIA: COUNTRY SNAPSHOT

March, 2014

                      1
                                   INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Economic Outlook
Growth slowed to a 10-year low of 4.5 percent in FY2012-13 as activity dipped in mining,
construction and manufacturing, while investment shrank as a share of GDP. Despite the more
subdued economy, inflation stayed around 10 percent due to food price pressures, prompting the
central bank to raise interest rates three times since September 2013. However, growth is expected
to pick up slightly this year and to then accelerate, ensuring that India remains one of the fastest
growing economies in the world.

The country also weathered a steep drop in the rupee's value against the dollar between May and
August 2013, as international investors took fright at the prospect of an end to the US Federal
Reserve’s bond buying program and pulled out capital. India’s current account deficit has since
been sharply reduced as a share of GDP and foreign exchange reserves have been reinforced.
Overall, tapering-driven depreciation last summer has likely had a net positive effect as it
stimulated exports, contained import demand, and incentivized long-term investors to come back
looking for bargains.

Poverty Reduction
Despite significant achievements in reducing absolutely poverty over the past 20 years, 400 million
people are still poor and the benefits of rapid growth have not been equally shared. Inequality by
gender, caste and tribe persist, and the country lags on a range of human development indicators.
Life expectancy is five years lower than the world average, and India accounts for a third of the
world’s illiterate people. Many people live on incomes close to the poverty line which makes them
vulnerable to shocks, and much is needed to prevent them slipping back into poverty.

India’s development agenda remains a complex work in progress that cuts across all aspects of the
lives of its 1.2 billion people. The country has a massive infrastructure gap, despite one of the most
extensive transport networks in the world. An estimated 300 million people lack electricity. Only 16
percent of the workforce makes a living on the basis of a regular wage and the country faces a
serious shortage of skilled labor. Urbanization is vital for India’s future but places huge strains on
services and housing, while rural areas also require an intensive focus on development. Rapid
growth pressures the environment and depletes scarce but essential natural resources. Health
indicators are improving but have not kept pace with growth and India’s maternal and child
mortality rates are on a par with much poorer countries.

World Bank Group in India
The World Bank has over 85 current projects in India totaling $28 billion. Net IDA/IBRD
commitments stood at $22.7 billion as of the end February 2014, of which $14.8 billion is
undisbursed. International Finance Corporation also has a very strong program, with a committed
portfolio of $5.3 billion spread across 230 projects at the end of 2013.



                                                  2
                                 INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


World Bank Group support should reach $5 billion a year over the next five years. In addition, the
Bank will work with India to rebalance its portfolio and ensure that 30 percent of all IDA/IBRD
lending is directed to 14 low-income and special category states, which are home to 200 million
poor people. To accelerate poverty reduction and boost shared prosperity, the World Bank Group’s
focus in India concentrates on three broad engagement areas: integration; urban-rural
transformation; and inclusion. Environment, governance and gender cut across all three. Programs
include projects in transportation, energy, agriculture, livelihoods, environment and disaster
management, and increasingly urban development. The portfolio is relatively young, with over a
third of the projects added in the last three years.




                                                3
                                   INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


COUNTRY SNAPSHOT
India’s progress in economic and human development is one of the most significant global
achievements of recent times. Between 2005 and 2010, India’s share of global GDP increased
from 1.8 to 2.7 percent, and 53 million people were lifted out of poverty. India is home to globally
recognized companies in pharmaceuticals, steel, and space technologies, and the country is a leader
in the use of information technologies for e-government, and public service delivery. In line with
these transformations, India is now among the top 10 percentile of fast growing nations and has
become a prominent global voice. Progress on human development has been remarkable: life
expectancy more than doubled from 31 years in 1947 to 65 years in 2012, and adult literacy more
than quadrupled from 18 percent in 1951 to 74 percent in 2011. While India has made significant
progress in reducing absolute poverty, it is still home to one-third of the world’s poor people.
Significant development challenges remain. Helping India address these challenges is central to the
World Bank Group’s goal of reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity.

RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS
In recent times, India’s economic development has been remarkable. In the last decade, India
grew faster than 89 percent of the world’s nations. Real GDP expanded at an average annual rate of
7.9 percent between FY2003-04 and FY2012-13. India also weathered the 2008–09 global crises
relatively well, with GDP growth slowing to 6.7 percent in FY2008–09 and rebounding strongly to
an average of 8.8 percent in the two subsequent years.

Growth has been in double digits for some states—well above the all-India average. Under
the government’s 11th Five-Year Plan (FY2007-2008 to FY2011-2012), some of India’s low-income
states grew at a record pace with Bihar (one of the poorest states) outperforming even the most
advanced states. Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh—all low-income and highly
populous states—have also grown rapidly.           Figure 1
The average annual growth rate in all low-
income states combined was 8.1 percent
during the duration of the 11th Five-Year
Plan, marginally higher than the 8.0 percent
average growth rate attained at the all-India
level.

India’s long run growth potential is high.
The dependency ratio is expected to fall
from 55 percent of the working-age
population in 2010 to 47 percent in 2030,
allowing for a higher output per capita.
Savings rates are likely to rise as the relative
share of the working-age group expands, which could lead to faster capital accumulation. The
average schooling of the population aged 25 years and above is expected to increase from 4.4 years
in 2010 to 6.0 years in 2030. Total factor productivity has grown by around 2.5 percent per year,
and this rate could increase as markets integrate further and workers shift from low- to high-
productivity jobs. While less than 30 percent of the population lived in cities in 2010, that amount is
expected to climb to 40 percent in 2030.

In the past two years, GDP growth has slowed while inflation remained high. In FY2012–13,
the economy slowed to a ten-year low of 4.5 percent, but is expected to rebound to 4.8 percent in
FY2013-14. The slowdown has been most pronounced in mining, construction and manufacturing,

                                                  4
                                  INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


and the investment rate fell below 30 percent of GDP for the first time in nine years. On the other
hand, agriculture has benefitted from a good monsoon and performance in the service sector – the
main engine of growth of the Indian economy – is improving. Despite GDP growth falling below
potential, consumer price inflation has averaged around 10 percent for the past two years due to
pressure from food prices. In response to stickiness in core inflation and high inflationary
expectations, the Reserve Bank of India has signaled greater commitment to inflation targeting and
adopted a tighter monetary policy stance, raising policy rates three times since September 2013.

Budget deficits have narrowed, but the decline in the debt-to-GDP ratio has lost momentum.
The FY2013-14 central government deficit is expected to be contained at 4.6 percent of GDP, an
improvement of 0.3 percentage points from a year ago and nearly two percentage points from the
peak of FY2009/10. However, the deficit remains well above the 3.4 percent of GDP average
recorded in the mid-2000s following the adoption of the Fiscal Responsibility legislation and prior
to countercyclical stimulus in response to the global crisis. Furthermore, the decline in the central
government’s debt-to-GDP ratio – which fell by more than 15 percentage points in the second half
of the 2000s, driven primarily by strong GDP growth – has come to a halt in FY2012-13 and the
debt ratio is expected inch up marginally to 51.5 percent of GDP by the end of FY2013-14.

The exchange rate came under pressure in May – August but has remained stable since,
while the current account balance improved dramatically. Between May and August 2013, the
Indian rupee lost more than 18 percent in value vis-à-vis the dollar as global investors withdrew
$15 billion in portfolio flows from the country on fears of tapering in the US Federal Reserve’s
quantitative easing program. Similar concerns affected other emerging markets’ currencies, and
evidence suggests that outflows were linked more due to India’s large exposure to international
markets than country-specific vulnerabilities including inflation and the fiscal deficit. Since the
summer and even as tapering began, India has substantially reduced its vulnerability to global
market turmoil by containing the current account deficit (from 4.9 percent of GDP in Q1 to 0.9
percent of GDP in Q3 FY2013-14), shoring up reserves (to $294 billion, equivalent to more than 6
months of imports), and tightening monetary policy. India also experienced resurgence in capital
inflows, with the important distinction that volatile portfolio flows are being replaced by more
stable deposits by non-resident Indians while FDI has remained low but stable. Overall, tapering-
driven depreciation last summer has likely had a net positive effect as it stimulated exports,
contained import demand, and incentivized long-term investors to come back looking for bargains.

Despite the slowdown in growth and important downside risks, India is likely to remain one
of the fastest-growing economies in the world. Growth is expected to accelerate to 5.7 percent
in FY2014-15, and could improve further to
6.5 percent in FY2015-16. The authorities’
commitment to fiscal consolidation, stronger
focus on inflation by the central bank,
continued steps to reduce the diesel subsidy
burden, and additional opening of the
domestic market to foreign investors are
likely to lead to further improvements in the
investment climate. Strengthening economic
recovery in the US and the Eurozone – which
together account for nearly a third of India’s
merchandise exports – and a more
competitive exchange rate following the
summer’s bout of depreciation, are likely to

                                                 5
                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


continue to support strong export performance and boost growth.

POVERTY AND SHARED PROSPERITY
India has made significant progress in reducing absolute poverty during the last two
decades. It has already achieved the first Millennium Development Goal by halving the proportion
of people whose income is less than $1.25 a day.1 The less well-off are increasingly reaping the
benefits of shared prosperity, with a narrowing of the gap between average consumption growth
and growth of the bottom 40 percent. Most notably, rural poverty has decreased sharply since the
early 1990s with a faster pace of decline after 2004-05 (Figure).2 The rate of decline increased
between 2009-10 and 2011-12 in several low-income states such as Bihar, Uttar Pradesh,
Rajasthan, and Chhattisgarh.

Figure 3. Rural, Urban Population below the National Poverty Line, percent

                                 60
                                        50.1
                                 50
                                                       41.8
                                 40                                     33.8
                                            31.8
                                 30                        25.7                      25.7
                                                                              20.9
                                 20                                                      13.7
                                 10

                                  0
                                         1993-94        2004-05         2009-10      2011-12

                                                          Rural       Urban


Despite these gains, the absolute number of poor is large. In 2009-10, nearly 400 million
Indians still lived in poverty. Yet a preliminary assessment of 2011-12 data suggests that the pace
of poverty reduction stepped up in the subsequent two years, with over a 100 million people
moving above the $1.25 a day poverty line.3 Poverty rates also vary significantly across and within
states. Each of the seven low-income states has poverty rates that are two to three times higher
than those of the more advanced states. 4 Poverty rates—as well as a range of human development
indicators—in the poorest states (which are also the most populous) are comparable to those of
low-income countries in other parts of the world.




1
  Preliminary estimates based on the recently released household survey for 2011-12 suggest that 23 percent of people live on
$1.25 or less per day in PPP terms. This is down from 53.6 percent of the population in 1993-94.
2
  Based on national poverty lines and mixed recall period consumption aggregates.
3
  A significant decline between the two years is seen partly because 2009-10 was a drought year, whereas 2011-12 was a year
with record food-grain production.
4
  Low-Income States: Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh.

                                                                  6
                                              INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


Figure 4. Comparison of select Indian States and low and lower-middle income countries
(Poverty Head Count Ratio (HCR))




India’s rapid growth in the last decade has not benefited everyone uniformly. India’s
consumption inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient is 0.32, with widening disparities
between urban and rural areas. Despite accelerated social mobility and urbanization, Indian society
remains highly segmented, and income inequality alone does not reflect the depth and range of
social inequities. Structural and persistent inequalities by gender, caste, and tribe persist, and
indicators of poverty and human development for these groups lag behind those of the general
population. Poverty rates have declined substantially for scheduled castes (29.4 percent in 2011-12
from 40.6 percent in 2009-10), but they remain stubbornly high among scheduled tribes (43
percent in 2011-12).

On a range of human development indicators, India lags behind world averages. The country
ranks 134 out of 187 on the United Nation’s 2011 Human Development Index. At 65.4 years, life
expectancy is more than five years lower than the world average, and persistently high rates of
malnutrition contribute to other health problems and undermine productivity. At 4.4 years,
educational attainment is low, and India still accounts for one-third of the globe’s illiterate people.
Gender inequality remains high, with the ratio of girls to boys decreasing steadily over the last 50
years.5

Lifting people out of poverty is not enough. Even above the threshold for the World Bank’s
global indicator of shared prosperity (defined as consumption growth of the bottom 40 percent of
the population), a large number of people, especially in rural areas, have consumption levels that
are very close to the poverty line. These vulnerable people live on more than $1.25 and less than
$2.50 per day, or between one and two official poverty lines.6 Minor shocks—illness, poor crop
yields, indebtedness, high inflation—can easily push them below the poverty line. Poverty
reduction efforts need to be accompanied by social protection initiatives to protect people from
falling back into poverty. The end goal is to increase shared prosperity—that is, to increase the
number of people who are not poor, who are socially included, and who are reasonably secure.



5
  The so-called child sex ratio measures the number of girls per 1,000 boys aged 0 –6. In India the ratio has decreased steadily
over the last three decades, from 962 in 1981 to 914 in the 2011 census.
6
  The official poverty line for India (currently under revision) is set at the equivalent of $1.17 per person per day in PPP terms.
The unofficial lower bound of prosperity is set at two poverty lines.

                                                                  7
                                   INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


DEVELOPMENT PROGRESS, CHALLENGES AND WBG CONTRIBUTIONS
Despite significant development progress and poverty reduction, India’s development
agenda remains a complex work in progress. As detailed in the government’s 12th Five-Year
Plan, the challenges are many, cutting across all sectors, all 35 union states and territories, across
rural and urban areas, and impacting the lives of its 1.2 billion people. Regional disparities persist,
with the seven poorest states accounting for half of India’s 400 million poor people.

The WBG partnership with India is strong and enduring, spanning nearly six decades. Since
its first IBRD loan to Indian Railways in 1949, World Bank Group’s (WBG) financing, analytical
work, and advisory services have contributed to the country’s development. WBG-supported
activities, for example, have had a considerable impact on universalizing primary education,
empowering rural communities through a series of rural livelihoods projects, revolutionizing
agriculture through support of the Green—and more recently White (milk)—Revolutions, and
improving health outcomes by helping to combat polio, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS.

The new joint WBG Country Partnership Strategy (FY2013-17) (CPS) presents a program of
support that aims to help India reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity. The CPS presents
two long-term scenarios—a vision for India in 2030—that indicate what could be accomplished
with continued strong focus on economic development and inclusive growth. For example, the
number of global poor could decrease by 191 million. To help realize this vision, in the medium
term, WBG support to India will focus on three broad engagement areas: 1. Integration; 2. Urban-
rural Transformation; and 3. Inclusion. The environment, governance, and gender cut across all
three areas. Over the next five years, the India program is expected to make two major strategic
shifts: a more pronounced engagement in India’s low-income and special category states, and a
focus on rural-urban transformation, particularly on urbanization.

Integration
Enhanced efforts to increase India’s market integration can significantly boost the country’s
economic growth. Better integration – connecting India’s diverse regions and sectors – will result in
a more balanced growth among Indian states, helping low-income states converge more quickly
with their faster-growing neighbors.
The challenges in this area of engagement, and the WBG’s program to help the government of India
address them include:
Addressing India’s massive infrastructure gap. Although India’s transport network is one of the
most extensive in the world, accessibility and connectivity are limited. Only 20 percent of the
national highway network (which carries 40 percent of traffic) is four-lane, and one-third of the
rural population lacks access to an all-weather road. Ports and airports have inadequate capacity
and often poor transport connectivity. Owing to poor maintenance, trains move very slowly, and
the entire railway system is grappling with issues of financial sustainability.

Key WBG contributions: Support for the transport sector will focus on the reform and development of
railways, highways, and rural roads, and on improving road safety and ensuring asset sustainability.
Support builds on lessons learned from ongoing transformative projects and from state level
interventions. Over the next five years, WBG projects will aim to improve transport connectivity by
upgrading and maintaining 9,000 km of state highways and significantly increasing rail transport
capacity on the Eastern Freight Corridor.




                                                  8
                                         INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


Further strengthen India’s energy sector to improve availability and reliability of power for
economic development. Over the past decade, India has nearly doubled its installed generation
capacity, becoming a global leader in renewable energy, improved its transmission network,
developed electricity exchanges, and enacted major energy-related legislation. Despite these
achievements, an estimated 300 million people
and 40 percent of rural households do not have
access to electricity, while those who are
connected to the grid must cope with an
unreliable supply. Rural poor households also
rely heavily on traditional sources of fuel which,
over time, have a negative impact on health
outcomes.

Challenges include: an energy demand that far
outstrips supply; below market pricing of
electricity; constraints on the coal and gas
supply that force generation stations to operate
below capacity; and high rates of loss in
distribution.    At the state level, the power
sector faces especially acute financial
difficulties; accumulated losses in the state
distribution sector amount to 1.5 percent of
India’s GDP. A new financial restructuring plan,
approved in September 2012, is expected to put
state electricity boards on a more financially
sustainable footing.
                                                               The long-term partnership between the WBG and POWERGRID
Key WBG contributions: Interventions at the has               not only contributed to the improvement in technical
                                                         standards and implementation of state-of-the-art technology, but
national and state levels will focus on ensuring also supports POWERGRID in its institutional strengthening
financially sustainable access to electricity by: (i) through safeguards and fiduciary dialogue, enabling it to become
                                                         a globally recognized transmission utility.
increasing access to modern energy, especially in
India’s low-income states; (ii) increasing the
availability of power to underpin growth while balancing sustainability and climate change concerns;
and (iii) strengthening institutions and the financial sustainability of the sector. Support will aim to
improve inter-regional power transmission connectivity by increasing the power exchange between
regions and states by 23 percent over the next five years. An additional 300,000 poor households are
expected to have access to electricity as a result of the Northeast Power Transmission project.

Improving and maintaining a healthy investment climate—with an eye to increasing private
investment. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, India’s gross domestic savings rate
declined significantly to 32 percent of GDP, constraining much-needed investment to address the
infrastructure gap, alleviate capacity constraints, and raise potential output. The reduced
availability of domestic financing sources, combined with the need to maintain high investment
rates, highlights the importance of a healthy investment climate that creates opportunities for
domestic and foreign investors. Policies that distort key markets are detrimental to India’s
investment climate.

Key contributions include IFC’s efforts to expand state-level partnership programs with Rajasthan,
Odisha, and other states where IFC serves as advisor to the government to improve the investment
climate, and to simplify and modernize tax regimes. Overall, IFC has helped generate $309 million of


                                                           9
                                              INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


private sector investment in FY2011-13 through investment climate programs with state
governments.

Job creation as an important component of poverty reduction and a cornerstone of
development. Over the last two decades, eight million people annually entered the labor force in
India. Job creation, which has remained relatively flat over a long period, will continue to be a
tremendous development challenge as India grapples with how best to provide opportunities to its
burgeoning young workforce. At present, only 16 percent of the workforce derives its income from
regular wage employment, and more than half are engaged in agriculture. At 29 percent, the female
labor force remains small.7

WBG contributions: Manufacturing will need to be the key driver of jobs growth (the government’s
ambitious targets are to create 100 million jobs by 2025). The Bank has provided sustained support to
the Planning Commission over eighteen months, providing input to the Manufacturing Plan, and
helping to conceive and launch the India Backbone Implementation Network (IbIn) to facilitate its
implementation (the “how” being a more substantial constraint than ideas for the “what” in this
sector). With this support, IbIn has, for
instance, launched a stakeholder dialogue
in the pharmaceutical sector to identify
collaborative solutions aimed at affordable
medicines. Support has been provided for a
policy dialogue between the centre and
states on the regulatory environment, as
well as the specific sectors of textiles,
electronics, and logistics. This work is
feeding into state-level multi-sector policy
dialogues, as in Bihar and Odisha.

Ongoing support to rural-livelihood
projects across 16 states under the
National Rural Livelihood Project (NRLP),
as well as state projects in Bihar, Madhya 30 million poor households from 90,000 villages organized into 1.2 million
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, and four self-help groups.
Northeastern states, help enhance rural
livelihoods by: (i) improving existing livelihoods (working with farmers to help them diversify
products, lower cost of production, and identify stable markets for their goods); (ii) identifying self-
employment opportunities and providing both access to credit and technical assistance for business
development; and (iii) developing skills that are better matched to the needs of the market. Livelihoods
will continue to be a main source of off-farm job creation in rural India. By 2017, it is expected that
the income of an additional half a billion poor households will increase by 20 percent as a result of
these Bank-supported interventions.

Meeting demands for more skilled workers across many sectors, higher rates of
employment, and higher wages. The country now faces a massive shortage of skilled labor, which
stymies productivity. Less than 10 percent of the working population has completed secondary
education or above, and too many secondary graduates have skills and knowledge that are poorly
matched to labor market needs. To sustain high economic growth and make it inclusive, India
urgently needs to expand both the extent and quality of higher education opportunities.

7
    International Labor Organization, 2010.

                                                         10
                                    INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


Empowering youth, especially in rural areas, with skills that are better matched to the demands of
the labor market—informal or formal—will also help facilitate migration to city centers where
wage jobs are more readily available.

The WBG will contribute to the 12th Plan target of providing vocational training to 500 million
workers by 2022 by focusing on interventions that improve demand-driven skills for productive
employment. Through the ongoing Vocational Training Improvement project, graduates of Industrial
Training Institutes will have an easier time finding employment, and a job training component under
the Bank-supported rural livelihoods projects will help youth (more than 50 percent of them young
women) find appropriate employment, often in small and medium-sized cities. An important input will
be IFC’s work with the National Institute of Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development to
develop and deliver a country-wide program to train trainers.

India and its neighbors have not fully realized their potential for growth through further
regional and global integration. Although some progress has been made, South Asia remains one
of the least integrated regions in the world with regard to policy, trade, and infrastructure. This lack
of integration directly affects India’s economic development and hampers management of shared
natural resources, such as cross-boundary river basins. It aggravates the isolation of the
underdeveloped northeastern states from trade and transit routes and limits access to necessary
energy resources, such as oil and power. The government’s regional integration goal is focused on
seizing opportunities for increased trade and investment in South Asia, but also in emerging East
Asian economies.

The WBG will promote regional integration, especially in: (i) the integrated management of natural
resources and regional public goods; (ii) the pooling of power resources; (iii) trade and transport
regional facilitation; and (iv) business dialogue. A new Nepal-India Power Transmission and Trade
Project will finance construction of a cross-border transmission line to increase the trade of electricity
(up to 150 MW) between these two neighboring countries. Analytical work will continue to underpin
dialogue on critical regional issues. On the Buddhist Circuit Program, IFC is working closely with the
Ministry of Tourism and the governments of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar in developing an integrated
Buddhist tourism trail across two states in India and Nepal.

Rural-Urban Transformation
India is undergoing a massive rural-urban transformation—one of the largest of the 21st
century. For the first time since Independence, India has seen a greater absolute growth in urban
population. The number of towns increased from about 5,000 in 2001 to 8,000 in 2011, and some
53 cities now have a population exceeding one million. Today, 31.1 percent of the population lives
in cities, and the share is expected to rise to 50 percent in the next 20 years. Accelerating
urbanization is central to India’s growth, development, and poverty reduction, but it cannot be
done without an equally pronounced focus on rural development in a sustainable manner. Rural
areas are often poorly connected to cities, resulting in weak value chains for agricultural products
and slow rates of off-farm job creation.

Accommodating the needs of an additional 10 million urban dwellers each year will be a
strategic policy issue for many years to come. Providing them with adequate services such as
water, sewerage, drainage, and transportation, and creating opportunities for further economic
development will be a challenge. The needs are particularly dire in India’s growing slums.
Investments—both public and private—have not kept up with demand. Weak urban planning,
ineffective regulations governing land management and use, and distorted land markets hinder the
development of vibrant, livable cities. Urban governance is a major issue across all states and cities,

                                                   11
                                     INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


and urban service delivery institutions have limited autonomy, accountability, and incentives or
client orientation.

Key WBG contributions to urban development will focus on supporting efforts at the national level, as
well as state and city government efforts to improve the management and livability of second-tier
(medium-sized) cities across India. Support will be in three broad areas: institutional capacity
strengthening of urban government, urban
                                                   Box 1: World Bank Institute’s Capacity Building for
transport, and water and sanitation. A series
                                                   Urban Development Over the last three years, WBI has
of state-level urban and municipal been providing focused capacity development support for
development lending operations will help at sustainable urban development, including support to the
least 220 cities develop and implement new Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Housing and
and/or updated urban management systems Urban Poverty Alleviation (MoHUPA) as well as training
that will improve the service delivery. The institutes and think tanks. WBI will deepen its engagement
Karnataka Municipal Reform Project will help to support national and sub-national governments in
another 230 cities across the state implement formulating and implementing an urban capacity
a new e-governance and/or GIS mapping development program; build capacity for urban planning
                                                   and slum rehabilitation; and scale-up training/e-learning
system to drastically improve service delivery. and peer-to-peer knowledge exchanges in partnership with
Analytical and advisory work on urban- in-country institutions. WBI has been playing an active role
related issues is expected to figure to support the IBSA Human Settlement Working Group for
prominently in the program, and will peer exchanges, as well as dialogues on issues of informal
underpin future lending operations.           A human settlements. A new initiative to enhance capacity
recently completed study on the social for developing and implementing metropolitan strategic
dimension of urbanization is meant to              plans will start in FY14.
contribute to policy dialogue on the role social
protection systems and safety nets can play in a country with a growing urban poor population.

Faster economic growth has accelerated degradation of the environment and depletion of
scarce natural resources that are essential for sustaining growth and eliminating poverty.
India’s long-term growth is predicated on its ability to address environmental problems such as soil
erosion, water and air pollution, growing water scarcity, and the declining quality of forests. In
Northern India, the aquifers are receding by an alarming four cm annually. The challenge is further
exacerbated by environmental stresses resulting from urbanization processes that are often
chaotic, and from private sector development. The cost of environmental degradation in India was
estimated in 2009 to be 6.6 percent of GDP.8

Key Bank contributions will be in environmental protection and biodiversity conservation. Work will
focus on developing effective systems and institutions to enable more efficient environmental
management and reduction of resource degradation, including interventions in three areas: (i) coastal
management; (ii) industrial pollution management; and (iii) natural resources (particularly water),
ecosystems and biodiversity. Efforts will intensify to integrate sustainability considerations and lower
carbon approaches in project design across sectors, but especially in infrastructure. On coastal
management, the Bank will support the simultaneous economic development of India’s extensive coast
line and preservation of its fragile ecosystems with pilots in Gujarat, Odisha, and West Bengal. The new
coastal disaster risk reduction project in Puducherry and Tamil Nadu will also pilot improvements to
marine fisheries, particularly in inshore coastal areas. On pollution management, the Bank’s ongoing
Ganga Basin Project will help build the National Ganga River Basin Authority’s capacity to pilot
wastewater collection and treatment, and adopt river conservation measures. By 2017, this should
prevent at least 160 million liters per day of untreated wastewater from entering India’s iconic river.

8
    World Bank estimates, 2009.

                                                    12
                                    INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


The Capacity Building for Industrial Pollution project is helping deploy technologies and management
practices for cleaning up toxic legacy sites.

Stepped-up efforts to develop agriculture are slowly yielding results, but these are still
below government targets. Since 2004/05 agriculture shows a marked and widespread return to
annual growth of 3.5 percent, although still below the 4.0 percent target for the last two five-year
plans. Stressed natural resources, poor rural infrastructure, inadequate technology, limited access
to credit, underdeveloped extension and marketing services, and insufficient agricultural planning
at the local level contribute to the lackluster performance. Ongoing global food security concerns,
pronounced food-price volatility, and concerns about climate change all highlight the urgency of
boosting India’s agriculture productivity. Agriculture remains the main source of livelihoods f or
half the population.

Key WBG contributions will focus on
innovative     approaches      and    systems
strengthening. Support to the National
Integrated      Watershed        Management
Program in eight states will contribute to
overall productivity gains in a country where
65 percent of agriculture is rainfed. State-
level irrigation projects will also aim to
improve productivity by promoting water
use efficiency, strengthening water-related
institutions, and building capacity for the
management of irrigation systems and
decentralized management of irrigation
tanks. By 2017, cereal yields in targeted
states are expected to increase by close to 20    Agriculture yields increased by 35-50 percent in areas supported by
percent for paddy, wheat, and sugar as a          Bank projects in water management, while IFC’s advisory support to
                                                  DCM Shriram Consolidated Limited, an Indian sugar company, led to
result of WBG interventions and state-level       substantial productivity gains for sugarcane farmers. The IFC program
agricultural competitiveness projects. These      is now being replicated with six sugarcane companies involving
will help translate increased demand for          200,000 farmers.
agricultural products into higher incomes for
farmers.

Access to adequate water and sanitation is
critical to improving the quality of life and
economic potential of all Indians—in
rural and urban settings alike. Although
the government at the national and state
level spends $4 billion annually on improving
access to rural water supply and sanitation,
only one-third of rural households have
access to piped water and sanitation.9 The       Through WBG interventions in the states of Kerala, Maharashtra,
                                                 Karnataka, Uttarakhand, and Punjab, an additional 24 million rural
already stressed water supply and sanitation     residents have access to improved water supply services, and 17 million
delivery system will have to be revamped to      have benefitted from improved sanitation programs. More than 13,000
respond to the urbanization challenge—an         Nirmal Gram Panchayat (open-defecation free) awards have been
                                                 received by Bank-supported States.
additional 250 million people will migrate to

9
    Indian National Census, 2011.

                                                  13
                                     INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


cities in the next 20 years. Although more than 70 percent of the urban population has access to tap
water and more than 80 percent to basic sanitation, piped water is only available for a few hours
per day and raw sewage often overflows into open drains. The economic impact of inadequate
sanitation in India is estimated at $54 billion or 6.4 percent of GDP in 2006. Most of that cost is
attributed to premature mortality and health-related costs.

Key WBG contributions, spanning two decades and three generations of Rural Water Supply and
Sanitation (RWSS) projects, focus on strengthening governance and institutional arrangements for
water supply and sanitation services; piloting service delivery models that are efficient, accountable,
and customer-oriented; and improving the financial sustainability of providers. Going forward,
engagement in rural areas will include the Maharashtra RWSS Project using the new performance for
results instrument, and a multistate RWSS project focused on low-income states. A successful 24-7
water supply pilot will be scaled up in three cities in Karnataka. IFC will help address efficiency and
conservation issues in municipal, agricultural, and industrial water. A new program, for example, will
focus on water-use efficiency in major water-intensive commodities, and will also help private sector
partners adopt water-efficient technologies. IFC’s Advisory Services is also helping India and more
broadly South Asia to become a global leader in water sustainability in private sector operations. WBG
interventions are expected to result in an additional 34 million people gaining access to improved
water sources and additional 12 million to improved sanitation.

Inclusion
Inclusive growth is a key priority for the government’s 12th Five-Year Plan. Inclusion is about
ensuring that everyone benefits from faster economic growth, regardless of social grouping, age,
gender, or place of residence. This will require significant improvements in the social sectors of
education and health (notably progress toward universal health coverage), better access to safe
water and electrical power, and creating meaningful employment and livelihoods opportunities.
Economic integration and rural-urban transformation can benefit a large share of India’s
population, but only if there is a stronger focus on human development and on policies that help
make growth inclusive. For example, a growth strategy that focuses on labor-intensive sectors,
rather than on skill- and capital-intensive
                                                  Supporting Scalable Models of Public Service Delivery to
ones, and on the development of small and
                                                  Poor in the North East States
medium-size enterprises, will help create The India Development Marketplace (DM) Program
productive employment opportunities for leverages knowledge, skills and social mobilization
India’s poor people and make growth more capacity of the non-state providers to develop and
inclusive.                                        implement innovative and scalable solutions to last-mile
                                                     service delivery challenges. The 2014 India DM will
Although India’s health indicators have support innovative business models for delivering services
continued to improve, progress has not to the poor in the states of Assam, Meghalaya, and
matched the country’s economic growth Mizoram. The competition’s objective is to identify
over the past decade. Maternal and child development solutions that have demonstrated the ability
mortality rates – despite increasing rates of     to create social impact, and have potential to be scaled,
decline – remain on par with those in much replicated or mainstreamed with impact investors,
poorer countries. India faces an unfinished government schemes and/or corporate social responsibility
                                                  programs. The DM program will fund social enterprises
agenda of tackling childhood and infectious
                                                  that can address local basic services delivery challenges:
diseases and malnutrition, as well as an (i) services that meet basic needs (health, nutrition,
emerging and rising burden of non- education, water, sanitation, housing and energy); and (ii)
communicable and chronic diseases (India key enabling services (financial services, transportation
and China vie for the largest number of and ICT) that facilitate access to basic services.
diabetics in the world). Progress on tackling
communicable diseases such as AIDS,
tuberculosis, and polio has been significant, but continued attention is needed to secure the gains.

                                                    14
                                    INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


Poor people are highly vulnerable to health shocks with medical expenses contributing to
household poverty and compromising efforts to improve health outcomes.

Despite the central government’s increased focus on and financial commitment to health
issues, a major challenge is to implement the funding effectively. Although public financing for
health is expected to double under the 12th Plan, increased public funding is not enough; it must be
accompanied by improved effectiveness of spending at all levels, greater access to quality health
care, and more effective delivery of health services. The many systemic constraints include weak
accountability arrangements and incentives for performance, weak quality assurance, a largely
unregulated private health care sector, limited mechanisms for financial protection, and weak
information and surveillance systems, combined with inadequate use of evidence-based planning,
programming, and management. Out-of-pocket health expenses are high (on average accounting for
70 percent of total health spending) and affect poor households disproportionately.

The WBG will contribute to improvements in the health sector (public and private) with interventions,
mostly at the state level, focusing on strengthening institutions and accountability, developing local
systems and capacities, and addressing government and market failures. Financing, advisory services,
and capacity building initiatives will almost double the number of poor and vulnerable households
covered under the Government Sponsored Health Insurance Schemes, and IFC’s investment will allow
close to 10 million patients to have access to private health facilities. A joint World Bank-IFC initiative
will focus on improving poor people’s access to quality health care and reducing out-out-pocket
expenditures in two low-income states.

Improving the nutritional status of India’s children is particularly important. Child
malnutrition remains high, and widespread. India accounts for 40 percent (217 million) of the
world’s malnourished children. Despite India’s impressive economic growth in the past decade,
malnutrition has declined very little. Stunting rates in India are two to seven times higher than
those in other BRICS countries. While nutrition has recently received increased attention with the
restructuring of the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) scheme, there remain very
significant programmatic, institutional, technical, implementation, and capacity constraints.

The Bank’s financial, analytical, and technical support at both the national and state levels will focus
on strengthening the nutrition policy framework as well as systems and capacities to improve
nutrition. Interventions in this area will be mostly through the newly restructured ICDS and
increasingly through multi-sectoral actions, using government and Bank operations as platforms. The
Bank-supported National Rural Livelihoods, for
example, aims to contribute to efforts to combat high
malnutrition by setting up a network of nutrition
centers that cater to pregnant women and children
up to five years of age.

India’s efforts to improve access, equity, and
quality of education at the primary, secondary,
and tertiary levels remains a work in progress.
Now that access to primary education has been
largely universalized, the challenge ahead is to
improve quality, learning outcomes, retention, and         WBG support to Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, the national
access to education by underprivileged children,           Education for All program helped increase enrollment of girls
often in very remote areas. As the success of              in public elementary schools.
elementary education has resulted in demand for

                                                    15
                                        INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


education beyond elementary level, there is increasing focus on improving access to secondary
education. Of those children who finish primary education, 83 percent transition to the next level.
Enrollment rates for grades 9–12 are just 40 percent, and of those enrolled, approximately 15
percent drop out and one-third fail their examinations. While inequities are declining in terms of
access and participation at all levels of education for all socio-economic and ethnic groups, manifold
inequities persist in the type of education facilities and exposure to and availability of modern
education techniques. Girls make up 45.6 percent of secondary students.

Key WBG contribution: The focus will be on improving secondary and tertiary education with greater
emphasis on educational quality. The implementation of the Bank-supported Rashtriya Madhyamik
Shiksha Abhiyan will contribute to the universalization of secondary education. It is expected that
secondary enrollment will increase from 28 million in 2012 to 40 million by 2017. Greater attention
will be paid to teacher training, performance, and accountability—key determinants of quality.
Interventions will also help improve labor market entry for young adults.

Developing an inclusive financial sector remains a key development challenge in India. With
economic slowdown, there is a greater risk that financial inclusion is de-prioritized – as it was in
2008-09. This poses risks for inclusive growth. Although reforms during the last two decades have
improved financial access, over 100 million households (60 percent of the population) still lack
adequate access to financial services, especially in rural areas. Increasing household access to
finance (especially for the very poor) is crucial for economic growth and poverty reduction.
Similarly, access to finance for India’s small and medium enterprises – which account for over 40
percent of the country’s exports and manufacturing output – is critical to provide the working and
long term capital to grow businesses and generate employment, and thus crucial to absorb the
millions transitioning out of agriculture. Low income states (LISs) have historically had lower levels
of access to finance.

India’s efforts to enhance access to deposit services have received a boost through the banking
correspondent channel, which has helped
create over 100 million no-frills accounts.
Finding a viable business volume, however, that
enables easy access for deposits and
withdrawals is proving difficult and transaction
volumes remain extremely low. Although
overall access to credit has increased, a lot
remains to be done. For instance, more than
half of India’s farmers do not have access to
formal credit. The situation is worse with
respect to other financial services. Only 20
percent have access to crop insurance, and
given the high dependence on weather, are
exposed to the vagaries of nature. Efforts to
scale-up new products to support firm
financing, including for India’s SME exporters, In 2013, IFC received the Skoch Financial Inclusion Award for its
such as export finance, receivable finance, and innovative advocacy work to promote responsible finance, risk
factoring products could help support a faster management,       and consumer protection principles in India. Since
                                                   FY08, IFC investments and advisory services to India’s micro, and
recovery from the current slowdown gripping small- and medium-sized enterprises have helped over 48 million
the country.                                       people access to financial services.




                                                        16
                                     INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


Key WBG contribution: The WBG has had substantive engagement supporting projects in agriculture
finance and rural cooperatives, microfinance, livelihoods promotion, and SME financing with a
financial inclusion component of over $2 billion. These projects have had positive impact and
leveraged resources – for example the Bank’s microfinance project-supported partners have financed
and provided life insurance coverage to over 10 million of their clients and, just in low-income states
(LIS), leveraged Bank resources over ten-fold to lend $1.3 billion in FY13. The WBG program promotes
integrated approaches to financial inclusion by facilitating access to credit and other financial services
to farmers and households. Rural livelihoods projects (at the state and national levels), sustainable
and responsible microfinance, low-income housing finance, and agriculture insurance will be central
to the Bank’s response in this area. The Bank will seek to leverage its resources and support new
products (such as insurance) and use of technology (such as Unique Identification-enabled financial
service provision), focusing on LIS. Analytical work that builds on the Bank’s substantive
experience working on inclusion issues in India will help further understanding of key barriers to
financial inclusion, particularly in LIS. IFC’s key objective is to improve the depth and quality of
financial services, through: (i) financial product diversification; (ii) responsible finance (i.e. promoting
financial awareness and literacy among clients and transparent reporting by financial institutions);
and (iii) supporting delivery channels using ICT technology and agents. New approaches to delivery of
financial services will be key in coming years to expand reach. IFC has already begun work in this
regard with Government-to-Person payments, and will continue to work on innovation in payments
systems, alternative delivery channels, remittances, and government payments. In addition, there is a
strong focus on strengthening the financial infrastructure in the country to enable greater access to
finance. This includes developing the collateral registry in India and expanding the use of more easily
available asset types, and supporting the availability of better quality credit information on SMEs and
low income households to facilitate credit expansion to these segments. By 2017, it is expected that an
additional one million households will have access to formal financial services as a result of WBG
interventions, and an additional 20 million loans will be made to micro, small, and medium
enterprises.

With more than 90 percent of India’s labor force in the informal sector, social protection
systems to help people, especially the very poor, absorb and manage economic risks and
shocks are critical to India’s development. Under the 12th Five-Year Plan, the government aims
to overhaul the sector by introducing a direct cash transfer system —the Direct Benefits Transfer
(DBT) initiative—for major subsidies and welfare-related beneficiary payments. Launched at the
beginning of 2013, DBT is expected to reduce India’s welfare program expenditures, prevent
leakages, and decrease corruption. (At two percent of GDP per year, welfare spending on large
centrally-sponsored schemes in India is very high compared to that of its East Asian neighbors,
Indonesia and China.) DBT represents a fundamental shift in Indian welfare policy and is seen by
some as a vehicle to lift millions of people out of poverty. To roll out the program successfully, the
capacity of institutions at the state level has to be strengthened. Social protection coverage
expanded substantially with the recent passing of the National Food Security Act, making access to
food a legal right. The Act entitles two-thirds of the population to subsidized food grains.

Key Bank contributions will focus on enhancing social protection coverage, including for health and
disability insurance, job transition insurance, and protection in old age. As many programs do not
reach all of their intended beneficiaries, particularly in low-income states, the Bank will work with
states to expand coverage. Increased use of ICTs in program delivery and management will form a
cornerstone of this work together with capacity building and enhancement of human resources at
local levels. Ongoing non-lending technical assistance supports the government’s efforts to convert
many in-kind subsidies and support programs to cash assistance through it new Direct Benefits
Transfer initiative. IFC has launched initiatives to build capacity of financial institutions to offer long

                                                    17
                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


term micro insurance and micro pension products to the low income segment, and has begun work on
creating a national service delivery architecture using technology to ensure sustainable access and
scale up of these products.

India is highly vulnerable to climate change because of high levels of poverty, high
population density, heavy reliance on natural resources, and an environment already under
stress. Under a moderate climate change scenario (an increase in mean annual temperatures of 1.1
to 2.3º Celsius), the risk of increased frequency and severity of natural hazards is likely to increase,
and densely populated cities will be at extreme risk. Kolkata is among the six fastest-growing cities
worldwide that are classified to be at extreme risk, whereas Mumbai, Delhi, and Chennai are among
the ten that are classified as high risk. Overall, India is ranked the second most vulnerable country
in the world.10 Institutions and mechanisms for enhanced disaster risk management and climate
resilience, especially in agriculture and water-intensive sectors, are either weak or nonexistent.

The Bank’s key contributions will help build institutional capacity to prepare for and manage the
impact of natural disasters, and help people protect themselves from natural disasters and recover
from them quickly. The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project helps strengthen the capacity of state
disaster-management agencies to mitigate the impact of and respond to cyclones in vulnerable coastal
states. The second phase of the project will focus on states of Gujarat, Kerala, Maharashtra, and West
Bengal. Technical assistance helps build government capacity to conduct risk assessments for
geophysical hazards and vulnerabilities, establish building and planning standards, and pilot
innovative approaches to risk mitigation. To mitigate risks of and vulnerability to natural disasters,
especially in coastal areas, the Bank focuses on access to emergency shelter and on evacuation and
protection against wind storms, flooding, and storm surges in high-risk areas. By 2017, it is expected
that 400 cyclone shelters will be completed in targeted coastal areas and at least three states will have
installed an Early Warning Dissemination System, which in turn will help save lives and livelihoods.
The World Bank, together with the Asian Development Bank, is also supporting emergency
reconstruction and mitigation programs to response to the floods in the state of Uttarakhand.


WORLD BANK GROUP PARTNERSHIP WITH INDIA
The overarching goals of the Country Partnership Strategy for India (FY2013-2017) (CPS) are
accelerating poverty reduction and boosting shared prosperity. To make a meaningful contribution
on both these fronts, especially in India’s low-income states which together account for half of
India’s 400 million poor people, the volume of financing support from the WBG should reach $5
billion per year over the next five years. This includes financing from the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), International Development Association (IDA), and
International Finance Corporation (IFC). Guided by the government of India’s “Innovation Impulse
with Investment” approach toward working with multilaterals, and to respond to India’s many
challenges, the strategy proposes deepening and strengthening WBG engagement in three broad
areas: 1. Integration; 2. Rural-Urban Transformation; and 3. Inclusion.

The CPS calls for a more pronounced engagement in India’s low-income and special category
states. Over the next five years, the Bank will work with the government to rebalance the portfolio,
so that 30 percent of all IBRD/IDA lending will be directed to 14 low-income and special category
states.11 Combined these states are home to 200 million poor people, have gross state domestic
10
   Maplecroft’s Climate Change Risk Atlas, 2011. Available on www.maplecroft.com
11 Low-income and special category states include: Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh, and eight northeast states (Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Sikkim, and Uttarakhand). IFC
also includes West Bengal, but excludes Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand.

                                                             18
                                  INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


products (GSDP) that lag far behind the all India average, and struggle with low human
development indicators that are comparable to some of the poorest countries in the world. As of
end-February, 19.7 percent of total ($ 22.7 billion) the IBRD/IDA commitments are these states.
IFC’s has also intensified its program in LISs; annual commitments have steadily increased, more
than quadrupled over the last five fiscal years, from $60 million in FY09 to $273 million in FY13
(see Figure 7).

The strategy builds on a large current portfolio, which will be the main source of
development results under this CPS. As of end February 2014, the IBRD/IDA portfolio included
net commitments of $22.7 billion across 85 projects. Of that amount, $14.8 billion is undisbursed. It
is a relatively young portfolio with 31 projects (36 percent) added in the last three years,
amounting to $8.9 billion of the total net commitments (39 percent of total). The portfolio supports
a range of sectors (see Figure 5), with transport (25 percent), agriculture and rural development
(19 percent), and energy (16 percent) having the largest shares of commitments. In terms of
engagement areas, $9.6 billion (41 percent) of the current lending portfolio is committed in areas
aimed to increase India’s domestic and regional integration, $7.5 billon (33 percent) to support the
ongoing massive rural urban transition, and $6.0 billion (26 percent) on projects aimed at making
growth more inclusive. It is expected that operations related to urban development will increase
over time.

Figure 5: IBRD/IDA Portfolio by Sector          Figure 6: IBRD/IDA Portfolio by Engagement
                                                Area, in US$ millions (as of June 30, 2013)
                                                  9000    8,365.7
                                                  8000

                                                  7000
                                                                                             5,801.4
                                                  6000

                                                  5000                   4,638.1                       IBRD
                                                                                                       IDA
                                                  4000
                                                                              2,830.1                  Other
                                                  3000

                                                  2000
                                                               1,280
                                                  1000
                                                                                          200.0
                                                      0
                                                           Integration   Transformation    Inclusion


Under the previous Country Strategy, IFC delivered a strong program. At the end of December
2013, IFC’s committed portfolio contained 230 projects amounting to $5.3 billion, including $615
million syndications. In FY2014, as of December 31, 2013, IFC has committed $600 million to 14
projects in India. IFC’s India portfolio is performing well. During FY2009-13, IFC committed $5.8
billion in total financing (including its own account and mobilized funds), with nearly 34 percent
supporting infrastructure. IFC commitments in climate change and low-income states—two
strategic priorities has increased steadily. In FY2013, IFC committed $273 million in investments in
low-income states and $360 million to climate change projects (renewable energy, energy
efficiency, and clean technology).The advisory portfolio has grown from $30 million supporting 42
projects in FY2009 to $58 million supporting 69 projects as of end-December 2013 (Table 8).



                                                 19
                                     INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


Figure 7. IFC’s Annual Commitments,             Figure 8. IFC’s Annual Commitments,
Two Strategic Priorities, US$ million           US$ millions
2000
                                                     2000
1800
                                                     1800
1600
                                                     1600
1400
                                                     1400            808
1200
                                                     1200
1000                                                 1000                                       551
 800                                                                                    127
                                                      800    299     462
 600                                                  600                      170      396
                                                                               148              469      220
 400                                                  400    488
                                                                     533                                 136
 200                                                  200                      436      437
                                                                                                289      242
                                                             148
   0                                                    0



                                                     INFRA   Manufacturing, Agri & Services   Financial Markets
       Total   Climate Change   Low-Income




The WBG’s knowledge portfolio complements and underpins investment operations. The
WBG knowledge agenda under the new CPS will: (i) focus on in-depth analytical work on a few key
cross-sectoral questions; (ii) inform design and implementation of future interventions by drawing
on impact evaluations; (iii) respond quickly and flexibly with demand-driven technical assistance
and just-in-time knowledge support to help reform and implementation; (iv) broker South-South
and across-state knowledge exchanges; (v) develop flexible programmatic approaches to develop
analytic and advisory activities; and (vi) scale-up training capacity. Central to the knowledge
program will be analytical products that aim to inform public debate around key reforms critical to
India’s continued high economic growth, poverty reduction, and increased prosperity. To better
exploit synergies across the whole program, more multi-sectoral analytical advisory activities are
planned to address pressing development challenges including issues related to water, urban
development, service delivery, human development determinants, and public-private partnerships
(PPPs). Continued support to the Development Marketplace will help scale-up and replication
sustainable business models to deliver public services and livelihood opportunities to poor people
in India’s low-incomes states.




                                                20
                                        INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


The Advisory Services program in India aims to increase IFC’s reach and development
impact and works closely with IFC’s investment services. The strategic focus of the advisory
programs in India is aligned with the regional strategy on inclusion (facilitating access to services
for base of pyramid populations, and expanding the private sector’s footprint in low-income states),

 Box 2: IFC Facilitating PPPs to Address India’s Development Challenges

 In health and education, IFC assisted the Government of Andhra Pradesh to improve access to advanced
 diagnostics services by helping to structure a novel PPP for upgrading radiology services at four medical
 teaching hospitals. The project will provide diagnostic radiology services to 100,000, mostly poor patients. In
 Meghalaya, IFC’s support helped attract private sector firms to bid on the construction of a 100-seat medical
 college and 500-bed teaching hospital, benefiting 240,000 low-income patients and training 100 doctors
 annually.

 In social protection, a joint IFC-Bank PPP project supported the government of Meghalaya to expand health
 insurance to the state’s entire population. Support ensured that the new and expanded system builds on the
 state’s existing healthcare system, while strengthening the state’s institutional capacity for healthcare delivery.

 In energy, support to the government of Gujarat on an innovative 5 MW solar rooftop PPP project will help add
 power generating capacity, develop contractual models for other solar projects, and demonstrate the technical
 and economic feasibility of rooftop-based solar power.
 In agriculture, IFC is helping Punjab, India’s leading agricultural state, to improve the capacity and facilities to
 store grain safely, preventing excessive losses due to exposure, deterioration and pests. Support resulted in a
 concession—the first of its kind in India at the state level—that allowed a private firm to build, own and operate
 a 50,000 metric ton storage facility, using modern technology and inventory management methods. The project
 is being replicated on a larger scale in Pakistan.
 In solid waste management, IFC helped the city of Berhampur in the state of Odisha to implement an integrated
 solid waste management project. Some 355,823 residents of Berhampur will benefit from daily door-to-door
 waste pickup services without increasing costs to the municipality. There is a high potential for replication in
 other Indian municipalities. The client is using the bid documents developed under this project for two other
 projects in Odisha.
 In energy efficiency, IFC supported the capital city of Bhubaneswar in the state of Odisha to implement energy
 efficient street lights in the city. This project will provide access to improved services to 80,000 people. It aims
 to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 10,641 tons annually after project completion.

climate change, and global integration. Currently, IFC is working on 71 advisory projects in India,
with over two-third of the projects in the low-income states. As of January FY14, the total portfolio
of advisory projects in India is $61 million (see Figure 9). In FY2013, the annual program size was
$16.3 million, almost tripling from $5.7 million in FY2011. IFC provides advice on designing and
implementing PPPs in India to improve infrastructure and access to basic services such as water,
power, health and education. At the end of January FY14, IFC’s active portfolio included 22 PPP
projects, valued at $7.2 million, across a range of sectors.




                                                         21
                                                                    INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



Figure 9. IFC Advisory Services Portfolio, Funds Managed by IFC, US$ millions

                               70
                                                                                                                                      $61
  Funds Managed by IFC, in $



                               60
                                                                                                                    $51                  7
                                                                                                     $49
                               50                                                                                    6                  11
                                                                                                      9
                                                                                                                     8
          million




                               40                                                                     5
                                            $30                $31
                               30                                                 $27                                                   27
                                            9                  9                                      21             23
                               20           2                  4                  9
                                            7                  6                  3
                               10                                                 8
                                           12                  12                                     14             14                 16
                                                                                  7
                                0
                                         FY09              FY10                 FY11                FY12           FY13            Jan FY14
                               Sustainable Business Advisory        Access To Finance        Investment Climate   Public Private Partnerships



The WBG India program has benefited from trust funds. Trust funds focusing on global
partnerships and public goods have supported many activities in India, most prominently in health.
The Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria has disbursed almost $800 million in India
since its inception in 2003. Two donor trust funds—from DFID and AusAid—have supported
analytical work and capacity building efforts. In 2009, DFID renewed its support, with a
contribution of £20 million, and increased that by £6.5 million in 2012. Funding has helped leverage
the World Bank’s support to improve service delivery, address climate change, and promote
inclusive growth and governance in low income states such as Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, and
Odisha. AusAid is providing US $3.4 million through its South Asia Region Infrastructure for Growth
trust fund to support project preparation. Sixty percent of IFC’s advisory program in India is
supported by donor trust funds. IFC’s donor partners in the region include Austria, Denmark, Italy,
Japan, Netherlands, Norway, the United Kingdom, and the United States and the Gates
Foundation. The US Department of State and government of Italy, for example, contributed a total
of $4 million to the “Lighting Asia India Program.” In an effort to diversify funding sources, IFC
advisory is working to engage with new partners such as the Citi Foundation for improving
financial inclusion.




                                                                                        22
                                                       INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT




INDIA: Andhra Pradesh Community Based Tanks Management Project
Key Dates:
Approved: April 19, 2007
Effective: July 27, 2007
Closing: September 30, 2014

 Financier                           Financing*      Disbursed        Undisbursed
 IBRD                                      94.5             63.8              30.7
 IDA                                       94.5             63.6              33.6
 Government of India                       21.8
 Other – Communities                        7.0
 Total Project Cost                       217.8
 *US$ millions; as of February 28, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: The project supports rehabilitation of selected minor irrigation tanks in the state of Andhra Pradesh. Tanks are small
water reservoirs that store rainwater run-off, primarily from the monsoon. This water is subsequently used for irrigation and other agricultural
activities. The state has a long tradition of tank irrigation with more than 70,000 tanks in the state. Over time, however, largely due to inadequate
maintenance of tank systems, the area irrigated by tanks has declined. This project supports rehabilitation of tanks with the active participation of
water user associations (WUA) from the local community. Similar projects have also been (are being) supported in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and
Odisha.

The project development objective is for selected tank based producers to improve agricultural productivity and help water user associations to
manage tank systems effectively. The project supports investments across four components:
    Institutional strengthening: Focuses on strengthening community-based institutions to enable them to assume greater responsibility for
     managing tank systems;
    Minor irrigation systems improvements: supports rehabilitation of tank systems and also promotes more effective groundwater management
     in selected tanks;
    Agricultural livelihoods support services: In agriculture, horticulture and fisheries; and
    Project management
Activities financed under this project include: (i) rehabilitation of around 2,150 selected tank systems that together irrigate about 255,000 hectares of
crop area; (ii) agricultural intensification and diversification through programs for developing agriculture, horticulture, and fisheries activities in the
tank systems being rehabilitated; (iii) training and capacity building of about 2,150 WUAs to promote self-management in the tank systems being
rehabilitated, and related training and capacity building for public institutions involved in supporting irrigated agriculture; and (iv) project
implementation support, monitoring and evaluation, and project coordination by multi-disciplinary teams at appropriate levels.

Key Results Achieved: Good progress has been made toward achieving the project development objective. Data reported from a sample of project
tanks indicate that:
 Yields of main crops like paddy, maize, and groundnut have increased by 21 percent, 36 percent, and 51 percent respectively
 Cropping intensity has increased by 23 percent from baseline values.
 In tanks where fisheries interventions have been undertaken, fish productivity has increased nearly four times from baseline values.
 Institutional strengthening efforts have also led to improvement in WUA functioning as measured through a number of intermediate outcome
     indicators.

Implementing Agency: Irrigation and Command Area Development Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh.
The Government of India is contributing 25 percent of the Loan/Credit as grant financing to the Government of Andhra Pradesh for the project.




                                                                           23
                                                         INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Andhra Pradesh Municipal Development Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: December 10, 2009
    Effective: March 23, 2010
    Closing: December 31, 2015

 Financier                                Financing*          Disbursed       Undisbursed
 IDA                                           300.0                41.0            259.0
 Government of Andhra Pradesh                   50.0                 7.0             43.0
 Total Project Cost                            350.0                48.0            302.0
 *US$ million, as of January 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: (In the 1980s the Bank funded projects with the Hyderabad Water Board). Andhra Pradesh is among the more urbanized states in
India, with a total population of about 84 million, 34 percent of whom live in urban areas. The state has three cities with a population of over one million,
including its capital, Hyderabad. Like many states across the country, Andhra Pradesh faces fundamental challenges in managing urbanization and providing
for adequate services to a growing urban population: housing, water supply, sewerage, drainage, solid waste management, and transportation.

This project is the Bank’s first recent re-engagement in the urban sector with the state of Andhra Pradesh. The project objective is to help improve urban
services in the state, and build the capacity of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to sustain and expand urban services. Urban service improvements are chosen in a
demand-driven manner and implemented by ULBs, subject to several access and performance criteria, and with necessary technical support. The project
supports improvements in the financial, technical, and management capacities of all ULBs through technical assistance. The project will also support
improvements in the state-level framework that defines ULBs’ autonomy, accountability, and incentives for performance, as well as the government of AP’s
capacity to monitor ULBs’ performances and to provide policy and technical support for their development. The project compone nts are:

      State-Level Policy and Institutional Development Support: To improve the state’s policy and institutional framework to support service delivery and
       capacity building by ULBs.
      Municipal Capacity Enhancement: To enhance the financial and technical capacity, and operating systems of ULBs.
      Urban Infrastructure Investment: To finance sustainable, high-priority investments identified by ULBs to improve urban services or operational
       efficiency.
      Project Management Technical Assistance: To ensure the quality of subproject preparation, implementation, and monitoring.

 Key Achieved and Expected Results:
  About US$340 million of urban sub-projects have been prepared and are being taken up for implementation across 10 participating ULBs;
  Over 1.5 million city residents in cities that currently receive 1-3 hours of water supply (not even daily, in many cases) are expected to benefit from
     improved levels of water supply.
  The National Institute of Urban Management (NIUM) has been set up as a legal entity and has commenced operations from a temporary campus and
     under an Acting Director, while its final campus is about to commence construction.
  GIS mapping and municipal E-governance activities are commencing across about 120 ULBs.
  Training of urban sector staff has started, and over 2000 staff has already received training against a project target of 500.

Implementing Agency: Municipal Administration and Urban Development Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh; Andhra Pradesh Urban Finance and
Infrastructure Development Corporation (APUFIDC).




                                                                            24
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Andhra Pradesh Road Sector Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: October 15, 2009
    Effective: March 23, 2010
    Closing: June 30, 2015
    Financier                                       Financing*       Disbursed       Undisbursed
    IBRD                                                  320               98               222
    Government of Andhra Pradesh                          326
    Total Project Cost                                    646
    *US$ millions; as of January 31, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Andhra Pradesh is one of India’s most progressive states. Its economic, social, health, and education indicators are bette r than
the national average, and on par with its neighboring states of Karnataka, Kerala, and Tamil Nadu. Road transport accounts for more than 80 percent of the
state’s freight and passenger traffic. The government’s Vision 2020 strategy recognizes that an efficient transport system is a necessary foundation for
agricultural and industrial growth, and consequently for achieving its economic growth and poverty reduction goals. The capacity and quality of the state’s
core road network has improved considerably in recent years, and although maintenance spending has increased, it is still not adequate. In 2004-05, the
government spent about Rs.3.7 billion on maintaining existing road assets, significantly short of the Finance Commission’s st andard of Rs.5.68 billion for road
maintenance.

The project development objective is to provide better quality, capacity, and safe roads to users in a sustainable manner by enhancing the institutional
capacity of the Andhra Pradesh government in the road sector. The project consists of four components:

      Road Improvement includes two activities to upgrade and maintain the state’s Core Road Network (CRN).
      PPP Facilitation Support will strengthen the capacity of the government of Andhra Pradesh to develop selected high density traffic corridors under
       Public-Private Partnership arrangement, via toll revenues and viability gap support from the central and state governments.
      Institutional Strengthening will provide technical assistance, training, and advisory services for: (a) operationalization of Andhra Pradesh Road
       Development Corporation (RDC); and (b) project implementation including asset management, Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP), and
       Institutional Strengthening Action Plan (ISAP).
      Road Safety will help the government of Andhra Pradesh develop safer road corridors by initiating measures to reduce road accidents. The Bank will
       help agencies undertake ‘demonstration projects’ on selected core road network corridors; carry out an extended black-spot improvement program
       (geometric improvement of stretches with high incidence of accidents); and implement institutional and policy actions plans f or improving the state’s
       road safety responsibility framework and capacities.

Key Expected Results: Under the project, 429 km of roads will be upgraded and 6,241 km of roads will be maintained under long-term performance-based
maintenance contracts. More specific expected results include:

      Share of the CRN in good condition increased from the baseline of 40 percent (2009) to 56 percent This improvement is attributable, to a substantial
       extent, to the long-term performance based contracts for maintenance - under the Road Improvement component - with 80:20 contribution from the
       government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) and the Bank.
      Utilizing the loan support for engaging transactional advisors, GoAP/APRDC have examined the feasibility of eight roads, for development as PPP
       concessions. Subsequently, two of these roads with a total length of 420 km and an estimated project cost of about $450 million, have been awarded as
       PPP concessions in 2010 and are in advanced stage of construction.
      Expected: (a) further improvement in the share of CRN in good condition (target - 80 percent); (b) full operationalization of the RDC with adequate
       financial and human resources to manage the CRN; (c) in upgraded roads, reduction in vehicle operating cost, travel time, and fatality rates per vehicle
       miles travelled; (d) improvement in road safety in two model/demonstration corridors.

Implementing Agency: Andhra Pradesh Road Development Corporation (APRDC), Government of Andhra Pradesh.




                                                                               25
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: India: Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project
Key Dates:
Approved: August 27,2012
Effective: Signed on June 27, 2013 (not yet effective)
Closing: December 31, 2017

 Financier                                 Financing*      Disbursed          Undisbursed
 IDA                                               84         82,000                 83.9
 Government of Bihar                               36         35000                     -
 Total Project Cost                              120                -
 *US$ millions; as of February 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Bihar is one of the poorest states in India. Per capita income is about one-third of the national average. Out of its 103-million
population, 90 percent live in rural areas. Agriculture and allied activities employ 80 percent of Bihar’s labor force but co ntribute only about 20 percent to the
state Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Its human development indicators are among the lowest in India.

The project seeks to strengthen Bihar’s Panchayati Raj institutions as units of self -governance capable of planning and implementing development schemes,
promoting community life, and generating employment opportunities. The project supports the government of Bihar’s plans for s trengthening the
institutional framework for the functioning of Gram Panchayats, or village councils, and bringing about visible changes in village sanitation, quality of
drinking water, nutritional status of children, and generating employment opportunities through better management of natural resources.

The project’s development objective is to “support Bihar’s capacity to promote and strengthen inclusive, responsive, and acco untable Gram Panchayats in
selected districts across the state.” The project has five components:

     Construction of Panchayat Sarkar Bhawans (Local Self Government Offices);
     Capacity building for Panchayati Raj Institutions;
     Strengthening the state government’s capacity to manage a gradual decentralization and empowerment process;
     Panchayat Performance Grant; and
     Project Management and Coordination.

Key Expected Results:
 Increased number of elected representatives trained to perform their mandated role effectively.
 More villagers from socially disadvantaged groups (Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and women) attending and participating actively in regular
    Gram Sabha meetings in project districts.
 Increased number of Gram Panchayat Standing Committees that meet regularly to discharge their statutory functions and those focusing on planning
    and budgeting of various programs.
 Increased percentage of Gram Panchayat project beneficiaries from socially disadvantaged groups (Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and women).
 Increased number of Gram Panchayats submitting an annual financial statement within four months from the end of fiscal year for external audit.
 Increased percentage of people from all social groups who perceive that the Gram Panchayat is increasingly “inclusive, responsive, and accountable” in
    helping to address their individual and community issues.

Implementing Agency: Bihar Gram Swaraj Yojana Society, Government of Bihar.




                                                                               26
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: June 14, 2007; May 31, 2012 (AF)
 Effective: October 1, 2007; September 5, 2012 (AF)
 Closing: October 31, 2015

 Financier                                Financing*         Disbursed             Undisbursed
 IDA                                            163               81.76                  81.24
 Government of Bihar                              53              18.04                  34.96
 Total Project Cost                             216               99.80                 116.20
 *US$ millions; as of February 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: In Bihar, India’s second poorest state, per capita income was just a quarter of the national average. Almost 90 percent of the
population lives in rural areas with limited opportunities for self-employment, and little access to basic services. Although agriculture was the mainstay of the
economy and employed over 80 percent of the population, the vast majority of farmers survived at or near subsistence levels. Without an adequate banking
network, most poor people had to borrow from extortionist moneylenders, or from relatives and friends to meet family expenses, often pawning tiny plots of
land to repay old debts. Growing landlessness and the lack of livelihood opportunities led to large out-migration from the state. Earlier efforts by the Bihar
government to promote the social and economic mobilization of the poor had been thwarted by entrenched caste identities and the absence of sensitive
support and facilitation. The additional financing supports the geographical expansion of the project to co ver all the state’s blocks in the existing six districts
of the project and support consolidating and scaling up pilot activities undertaken in the parent project. It will also scale up activities to promote greater
social accountability and increase the impact of last mile service delivery approaches using the institutional platform of community based organizations
already formed. The project’s development objective is to enhance social and economic empowerment of the rural poor in Bihar . It has four components:
    Community Institution Development: Builds/strengthens primary and federated social and economic community institutions.
    Community Investment Fund: Involves transferring financial and technical resources to the Community-Based Organizations on a demand-driven basis
     as a catalyst to improve livelihoods.
    Technical Assistance Fund: Will improve quantity and quality of service provision by public, cooperative, community, and private service providers.
     The fund will also be used to improve the supply of key support services for the community organizations and federations in the areas of institution
     building, finance, and livelihoods enhancement.
    Project Management: Will facilitate overall co-ordination, implementation, financial management, and monitoring and learning of the project at state
     and district levels.

Key Expected and Achieved Results:
 Mobilized 1,080,000 poor women into 89,100 self-help groups (SHGs) and 5,700 village organizations. SHGs have saved over US$5.8 million, and made
    US$ 13.9 million in loans to each other, to help create credit histories with commercial banks, and the proje ct has facilitated SHGs’ access to US$ 59
    million in bank credit.
 The project has recently organized the Bihar Innovation Forum II that has identified 67 social enterprises (from around 500 applicants) across eight sub
    sectors ( agriculture, livestock, financial services, rural energy, health services, ICT based solutions, skills & non-farm and entitlements) and 16
    grassroots innovators ( from around 1,700 applicants) for possible partnerships with project through a detailed selection process involving independent
    sectoral experts.
 300,000 farmers have accessed agriculture productivity enhancement interventions, nearly 16,000 households have increased their price realization
    through the project’s dairy intervention, and 15,700 youth have been linked to formal sector jobs.
 102 village organizations are managing a public distribution system (PDS) intervention to ensure access to food entitlements.
 More than 30,000 households have accessed entitlements, such as pensions, health insurance and the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
    Guarantee Act (MGNREGA—a national work guarantee scheme).
 A recent independent impact evaluation based on a survey of 4,000 households shows that the project has increased the savings, reduced high cost
    indebtedness, and led to increased food security and assetisation, and increased women’s empowerment significantly.
 An additional 1 million households will be mobilized into 100,000 SHGs. These households are expected to access nearly US$60 million from the
    Community Investment Fund, and US$60 million from commercial banks.


Implementing Agency: Bihar Rural Livelihood Promotion Society, Government of Bihar.

Key Development Partners: Civil society organizations, such as Action for Social Advancement (ASA) and Professional Assistance for Development Action
(PRADAN), which support pilots and help scale up agriculture sector interventions; private and social enterprises, such as State Bank of India and Punjab
National Bank, which provide credit linkages for poor households; agriculture processors (e.g. SHAKTI SUDHA Pvt. Ltd., EDA Rural Systems, Asian Heritage
Foundation), which enable access to markets; and government departments, such as the Agriculture Department, which helps scale up the system of crop
intensification, the Food and Civil Supplies Department, which enables access to food entitlements, the Social Welfare Department for access to pensions, and
the Labor Department for access to health insurance.




                                                                                27
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



             INDIA: Biodiversity Conservation and Rural Livelihood Improvement Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: May 17, 2011
    Effective: July 13, 2011
    Closing: March 2018

    Financier                                        Financing*        Disbursed    Undisbursed
    IDA                                                   15.36              1.54         13.82
    Government of India & beneficiary                      7.52
    Global Environment Facility (GEF) Grant                8.14              0.82            7.32
    Total Project Cost                                    31.02              2.36           21.14
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report                       Flock of Flamingoes at the Little Rann of Kachchh, Gujarat


Background and Objective: The project supports India’s Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) in piloting new conservation models that look
beyond protected areas, and recognize the need for innovative solutions to biodiversity loss through improved coordination, capacity building, generating
awareness, reskilling, and convergence of actions. Given the pace of land use changes and growing population pressure on protected areas, there is a real
danger that the loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services could reach a tipping point, at which there will be a failure to supply key inputs for sustaining
economic growth. Coupled with this is the fact that over 100 million people are directly dependent on biodiversity resources for subsistence.

The project development objective is to develop and promote new models of conservation at the landscape scale through enhanced capacity and
institution-building for mainstreaming biodiversity conservation outcomes. The project has four components:

      Demonstration of landscape conservation approaches in two pilot sites: Investments in planning, coordination, and convergence through
       innovative microplans at the village level and landscape mapping; includes limited investments in improving habitat quality.
      Strengthening knowledge management and national capacity for landscape conservation: Development of a curriculum for a national-level
       landscape management course; strengthening three Field Learning Centers for translating best practices in conservation management into training
       modules; and carrying out national-level training sessions.
      Scaling-up and replicating successful models of conservation in additional landscape sites: Two new sites will be added this year to further scale-
       up the landscape approach model.
      National coordination for landscape conservation: Supports a Project Management Unit at the MoEF for coordinating amongst all six implementing
       agencies.

Key Expected and Achieved Results: The project’s development outcomes will be measured by the following performance indicators:
 The successful adoption of the landscape approach in two sites;
 Development and adoption of an Institutional and Methodological Framework for Landscape Conservation Approach.
 Improved management of at least 600,000 hectares of protected areas within landscapes.

The project is expected to lead to an increased natural resource base, reduced dependence on protected areas, and improvement in community livelihoods
through the sustainable use of biodiversity resources, as well as converging with other programs. It will support the preparation and implementation of
village microplans and track benefits accrued to beneficiaries, including women.


Implementing Agencies: Ministry of Environment and Forests, State Forest Departments of Gujarat and Uttarakhand, Protected Area Management of
Periyar Tiger Reserve, Gir National Park and Kalakad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve and Wildlife Institute of India.




                                                                              28
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Capacity Building Project for Industrial Pollution Management
    Key Dates:
    Approved: June 3, 2010
    Effective: October 13, 2010
    Closing: September 30, 2015

    Financier                                 Financing*       Disbursed            Undisbursed
    IBRD                                           25.21             0.63                 25.15
    IDA                                            38.94              8.2                 30.06
    Government of India                            11.24
    Total Project Cost                             75.39
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014                                                                      The contaminated pink lake in Andhra Pradesh
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: India generates 4.4 million tons of hazardous waste per year, with a large percentage of it illegally dumped outside industrial
estates, on abandoned public lands, and within privately owned lands. Despite amendment of national legislations, compliance is low and the data is deficient
on illegal dumps and hazardous waste generation and characterization. Demand for land due to rapidly increasing urbanization is resulting in use and
redevelopment of former industrial land or dump sites, which are at the margins of fast expanding cities. Since most of these “brownfield lands” are potentially
contaminated with industrial waste, resulting in chemical pollution of soil, surface, and ground waste, such contaminated waste sites have the potential to pose
significant health risk to communities and exposed individuals, especially poor and marginalized communities who live on the fringes of urban areas. India
needed the support to develop the tools and methodologies for human health risk assessments and the capacity to evaluate technical, economic, legal, social,
and environmental feasibility of remediation of contaminated sites.

The project development objective is: (i) to build tangible human and technical capacity in selected state agencies for undertaking environmentally sound
remediation of polluted sites; (ii) to support the development of a policy, institutional and methodological framework for the establishment of a National
Program for Rehabilitation of Polluted Sites (NPRPS). The project is targeting sites in Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal. Project components cover:

      Strengthening of Environmental Institutions: Building capacity for addressing pollution remediation.
      Investments in Priority Remediation and Environmental Improvements: Rehabilitation of orphan hazardous waste sites and municipal dumpsites.
       Four pilot projects (two each in Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal) will demonstrate sound remediation technologies for Orphan Hazardous Waste and
       Municipal Solid Waste Disposal sites.
      Project Management

Key Expected and Achieved Results:
 National Program for Remediation of Polluted Sites (NPRPS) using risks assessment methodology for prioritizing polluted sites, supported by public
    consultations is developed. The three baseline studies to develop NPRPS (inventory, methodology and policy for remediation) are in the advanced stages
    and are expected to be completed by the end of 2013.
 Guidelines and standards for remediation developed and adopted by participating states and Ministry of Environment.
 Establish Environmental Compliance Assistance Center (ECACs) to promote measures for voluntary industrial compliance business plans for setting up
    the ECACs, procurement in both the states, and capacity building activities are in the final stages of completion.
 Pilots for remediation using area based approach ready for implementation including pollution profiling and mapping, indicators, detailed engineering
    plan, monitoring and after-care program. Project implementing agencies have hired international consultants to develop detailed remedial plans for the
    four pilot sites and the plans for three sites have already been completed.

Implementing Agencies: Ministry of Environment and Forests and the State Pollution Control Boards, Department of Environment of the Government of
West Bengal and Government of Andhra Pradesh




                                                                                   29
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Chiller Energy Efficiency
Key Dates:
Approved: June 30, 2009 and June 9, 2009
Effective: November 23, 2009 and November 26, 2009
Closing: June 30, 2014
Financier                                Financing*        Disbursed       Undisbursed

Global Environment Facility (GEF) Grant           6.3             1.0                5.3
Montreal Protocol Grant                           1.0             0.5                0.5
Total Project Cost                                7.3             1.5                5.8
 *US$ millions; as of February 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report


Background and Objective: India decided to prohibit the production of new Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) as of August 1, 2008. Past experience, however, has
shown that advancements in chiller technology and the resulting energy efficiency gains and potential savings do not accelerate the phase-out of old and
inefficient centrifugal chillers. Appropriate financial arrangements needed to be put in place to accelerate the replacement of old centrifugal chillers to new
non-CFC based energy efficient chillers. India, as a party to both Montreal and Kyoto Protocols, was eligible for financial and technical assistance from the
Multilateral Fund (MLF), the Global Environment Facility (GEF), and the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). The Chiller Energy Efficiency Project (CEEP)
aims to stimulate the accelerated conversion of CFC-based chillers to new non-CFC ones, through the provision of financial incentives to address market and
techno-economic barriers. It is supported by grants from GEF and MLF, with provisions for a future component supported by the CDM. The Project’s
development objective is to accelerate the replacement of centrifugal chillers with efficient non-CFC-based centrifugal chillers in order to promote deployment
of energy efficient technologies and products to reduce GHG emissions, and support the phase-out of CFC demand in India. It includes four components:

     Provision of Incentives for Investment in Energy Efficient Chillers.
     Measurement, Monitoring and Verification using methodology approved by the CDM Executive Board.
     Technical Assistance, focusing on enhancing the awareness in energy conservation measures, the understanding of the impact of the phase-out of
      production of CFCs on the servicing sector, and strengthening the capacity of chiller owners and other stakeholders to monitor the performance of new
      chillers and to undertake refrigerant management.
     Project                                                                                                                                  Management

Key Expected and Achieved Results:

At the end of the Project, 370 CFC based chillers were to be replaced. To date, only 29 have been replaced mainly due to two factors: (a) the phase out of CFC
production in India and banning of imports, resulting in reduced supply of CFCs in the country and rapid replacement by the owners of existing chillers with
low-cost refrigerant alternatives; (b) the complexities of the carbon finance component and reluctance of beneficiaries to access CDM in an uncertain global
scenario. As a result, the project will be restructured to focus on increasing energy efficiency of chillers while also phasing out new generation of ozone-
depleting refrigerant gases (HCFCs). A revolving fund concept is being reintroduced into the program through the super-ESCO, Energy Efficiency Services Ltd,
which will allow sustainability beyond project life. 300 chillers are expected to be targeted under the program achieving energy efficiency of about 10-15
percent.


Implementing Agency: Industrial Development Bank of India Ltd.




                                                                                30
                                                     INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: DCM Shriram Consolidated Limited (DSCL)
Key Date
Committed: 2008

IFC Financing (US$ million)
Instrument                             Amount         Disbursed        Undisbursed
 IFC A Loan DCM                          30.0              30.0                  -
 Consolidated
 IFC A Loan DSCL II                         6.6             6.6
 IFC A Loan Bharuch                        50.0            50.0

About the Client: DCM Shriram Consolidated Limited is an agri-business (fertilizer, seeds and sugar) and chemicals (caustic soda, chlorine, cement
and PVC) company head quartered in Delhi with revenues in excess of $1 billion, EBITDA in excess of $100 million, and net profit of US$37 million
for the year ended March 31, 2013. DSCL's sugar plants are located in the low income state of Uttar Pradesh while its chemical production facilities
are based in Rajasthan and Gujarat. The agri-business segment contributes about 70 percent of the total revenues. DSCL also has a presence in
Philippines and Vietnam and is initiating business operations in Thailand, Indonesia and Bangladesh.

DSCL is an active corporate citizen and has been providing financial support for local school systems, funding for a school lunch program that gives
free lunches to over 23,000 children in more than 450 schools, and employment for local women. The company also partners with nearly 150,000
farmers to facilitate adoption of appropriate products and practices. DSCL has also launched programs to promote judicious use of various agri-
inputs by promoting integrated plant nutrient management and focus on transfer of location specific and need-based farm technology. The
company has won numerous awards for corporate excellence.

Project Description: DSCL has been a repeat client of IFC on both Investments and Advisory Services. IFC has committed a total of $86.6 million
to DSCL across three facilities. IFC also partnered with the company in its social and farmer development initiatives.

IFC’s first investment, a $30 million long-term loan, supported expansion of the company’s chlor -alkali, polyvinyl chloride resin and carbide
production facilities in the low income state of Rajasthan to improve its environmental footprint with energy efficiency and cleaner production
upgrades. A second investment of $6.6 million by IFC is helping DSCL’s sugar division to expand production and setup faciliti es in new areas,
supporting rural development significantly. This investment is also enabling the company improve its waste recovery and energy efficiency
operations. In 2008, IFC committed a third round of investment to DSCL, a $50 million long-term loan to help finance environmental upgrades that
minimize incremental effluent discharges as well as additional capacity expansions for its rapidly growing chemical and sugar operations.

Through its advisory arm, IFC is supporting DSCL in implementing a farmer engagement model to improve sugarcane productivity. IFC’s expertise
helped the company in developing a package of practices based on sugarcane’s specific agro -climatic needs. IFC also trained the company’s
extension workers, who further helped the farmers in seed management, soil improvement, water usage, planting techniques, monitoring, and
reporting.

Key Achievements and Expected Results:

Supported by IFC’s investments, in 2012, DSCL reached 150,000 farmers, provided employment to 4,577 people, and contracted an additional
5,200 people.

IFC’s advisory interventions helped train over 50 DSCL extension workers in improved farm practices who in turn trained over 13,000 farmers. A
quasi-experimental evaluation revealed that in the first year of the project, trained farmers’ productivity increased 23 percent co mpared to
negative (11) percent for farmers who did not receive training. In the second year of the project, the productivity of trained farmers increased by
86 percent, while those who did not receive training recorded an increase of 19 percent.




                                                                        31
                                              INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor Project I
 Key Dates:
 Approved: May 31, 2011
 Effective: December 30, 2011
 Closing: June 30, 2017

 Financier                       Financing*       Disbursed        Undisbursed
 IBRD                                975.00            39.40              935.60
 Government of India                 483.44                 -                  -
 Total Project Cost                 1458.44                 -                  -
 *US$ millions; as of February 28, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Indian Railways (IR) operates a national rail network of about 64,600 route-kilometers. In 2011-12, it carried 8.2
billion passengers and 969 million tonnes of freight. Despite strong growth in its freight business, IR has been losing market share to road
haulage, due partly to insufficient physical capacity and poor service quality exacerbated by the need to fit freight train movements into a busy
passenger service schedule. Without additional rail network capacity, much of the traffic for which rail should have competitive advantage would
be forced to use road haulage or be suppressed, in both cases at a cost to the economy and in the former case at an environmental cost as well.
Over the last decade, IR has successfully adopted many management measures to squeeze more capacity from its existing assets; average
trainload, equipment utilization and railway labor productivity have all been greatly improved. Physical capacity on key corridors is now the
most pressing constraint.
The Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) project is a strategic response to network constraints on critical freight routes in India that form a
quadrilateral, connecting Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, and Kolkata. The rail network between these cities accounts for jus t 16 percent of IR’s route
network by length, but carries more than 60 percent of its freight traffic. With India’s freight traffic projected to grow at more than seven percent
annually, the DFC program will add dedicated freight-only lines, mostly parallel to the existing routes, built at higher loading standards to permit
the operation of larger and heavier axle-load trains. This will not only double the overall rail capacity in the corridors, but also significantly
reduce train operating costs per unit of freight. The current DFC program includes the Western Corridor (Delhi-Mumbai) and the Eastern
Corridor (Ludhiana-Delhi-Kolkata). The Ministry of Railways (MoR) is the designated responsible ministry and the shareholder of the Dedicated
Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL).
The World Bank is supporting implementation of a substantial portion of the Eastern DFC under a three phased Adaptable Program Loan (APL).
The APL-I is for a 343 km section from Khurja to Kanpur, entirely in the state of Uttar Pradesh. APL–II, currently under preparation, will cover
about 390 km from Kanpur to Mughal Sarai, again entirely in Uttar Pradesh. The development objectives of the APL-I are to: (a) provide
additional rail transport capacity, improved service quality, and higher freight throughput on the 343 km Khurja to Kanpur section of the Eastern
rail corridor; and (b) develop the institutional capacity of DFCCIL to build and operate the DFC network. The APL Phase 1 project consists of two
components:
     Design, construction, and commissioning of the Khurja-Kanpur section: supports the construction of 343 km of double track electrified
      railway capable of freight train operation with 25 ton axle loads at 100 km/h.
     Institutional Development: supports (a) institutional strengthening of DFCCIL; and (b) Heavy Haul Freight systems development.

Key Results Expected:
 Additional freight train paths on the DFC will increase by 100 pairs per day.
 Average speed of freight trains on the DFC will increase from a baseline of 25 in 2011 to 60 km per hour by the end of the project.
 Rail transport capacity on the DFC will increase from 18 to 29.5 NTKM bn ton-km.
 DFCCIL institutional capacity will increase with the addition of 9,800 staff, of which 1,210 will be from the Officer Cadre.

Additional targets will be set during the Mid-term Review of this Project and the preparation on Phase I and Phase II.

Key Partners: Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Ltd (DFCCIL), Ministry of Railways (MOR), and Department of Economic Affairs
(DEA).




                                                                  32
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Fifth Power System Development Project
Key Dates:
Approved: September 22, 2009
Effective: January 8, 2010
Closing: June 30, 2015

 Financier                                           Financing*          Disbursed           Undisbursed
 IBRD                                                   1,000.0               450.7                549.3
 POWERGRID                                                562.0                   -                    -
 Total Project Cost                                     1,562.0                   -                    -
 *US millions; as of January 31, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Recurrent and severe electricity shortages (peak power deficit of 9.0 percent and energy deficit of 8.7 percent in 2013) have
imposed high costs on the Indian economy. In addition, the poor technical and commercial performance of most of the state electricity providers has led to a
loss of US$20 billion during 2011-12, according to the India Power Sector Review Study (2013). This bleak scenario is compounded by the fact that more
than 350 million people in India today still lack access to electricity, impeding their ability to fully benefit from a high-growing economy. Furthermore,
India’s power sector also relies heavily on fossil fuels (primarily coal), and the country is currently the world’s fourth la rgest greenhouse gas (GHG) emitter.
To address these issues, the government of India plans to: (i) expand generation by using renewable energy sources whenever feasible and strengthen the
central transmission network to facilitate energy exchange across regions; (ii) improve energy efficiency and performance of institutions in the power sector;
and (iii) expand access for rural and peri-urban populations.


The Fifth Power System Project builds on a successful partnership with Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (POWERGRID), the national electricity
transmission company that is vital to the development of India’s power sector. Not only has the WBG financed POWERGRID’s inves tment programs (through
four direct loans), but it has also supported its ongoing efforts to achieve world class operations and management, and to leverage private participation
(including with IFC financing of the Bhutan-India Tala transmission system). WBG’s support to this project came in the wake of the 2008 global financial
crisis, when both international and domestic credit markets became severely constrained. In India, the cost of debt for domestic investors increased by at
least 20 to 30 percent, and the availability of both debt and risk capital for infrastructure projects decreased. Additional financing to POWERGRID was also
part of broader efforts to scale-up IBRD financing in response to the financial crisis.


The project’s development objective is to strengthen India’s electricity transmission system in the western, northern, and so uthern regions to increase
reliable power exchange between regions and states. Investments under the project will help improve POWERGRID’s service delivery by facil itating more
economic use of generation resources; providing greater grid stability; and facilitating development of a power trading regime within the country and with
India’s neighbors. The government is also encouraging private financing in the sector. To this end, the WBG has been working with POWERGRID to explore
options for leveraging finance from international markets, with the deployment of IFC-syndicated loan instruments (transaction completed in June 2012),
and the possible use of an IBRD Partial Credit Guarantee whereby POWERGRID will access the international loan markets for the first time and on its own
credit.


 Key Achieved and Expected Results:
 Expansion of the inter-regional power transfer across five regional transmission grids to reach 66 billion kilowatt-hours, outperforming end of project
    targets.
 In September 2013, the transmission capacity of the Central Transmission Utility of India has exceeded 102,000 circuit kms, adding more than 30,000
    ckm of new transmission lines compared to 2009, outperforming end of project targets.
 Transformation capacity has doubled to more than 164,000 MVA over the same period, outperforming end of project targets.
 Inter-regional electric power transfer capacity increased from less than 21 to 31 gigawatts since 2008-09, and since January 1, 2014, the entire
    transmission system has been operating as one of the largest synchronous grids in the world.

Key Partners: Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (POWERGRID).




                                                                              33
                                                    INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Financing Energy Efficiency at Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: May 27, 2010
 Effective: September 29, 2010
 Closing: December 31, 2014

 Financier                             Financing*   Disbursed   Undisbursed
 Borrower/Recipient                         0.26       0.11          0.15
 Global Environment Facility (GEF) Grant  11.30        2.28          9.02
 Private Sector Financing                 46.00        8.50 (market driven)
 Total Project Cost                       57.56      10.89
 *US$ million; as of February 2014For more information see the latest
 Implementation Status and Results Report

                                                                                  An example of a typical MSME currently benefiting from the project



Background and Objective: The Indian Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector is facing high and rising energy costs, unlike
other sectors of the economy such as agriculture that benefit from subsidized energy prices. Many Indian MSMEs are energy-intensive,
employing inefficient and outmoded technologies. Investments in cost-effective energy efficiency measures would improve their productivity
and bottom-line profits. MSMEs can benefit from improving energy efficiency. The barriers to adopting energy efficiency measures typically
include access to finance, a gap in understanding between energy auditors and energy efficiency practitioners and local banks, higher
transaction costs for preparing energy efficiency proposals, and imperfect information. MSMEs are also generally unfamiliar with the
performance of readily available efficient equipment. The project development objective is to increase demand for energy efficiency investments
in target MSME clusters, and to build their capacity to access commercial finance. The project has four components, focusing on five MSME
industrial clusters:
 Increasing awareness of Energy Efficiency: through outreach efforts, and dissemination of information about successful projects. Increase
   capacity of energy auditors, financial intermediaries, vendors, and MSMEs.
 Preparation and implementation of 500 Energy Efficiency proposals: through technical assistance for preparing Investment Grade
   Detailed Project Reports, which involves detailed energy audits and preparing financing plans, facilitating loans from banks and financial
   intermediaries, and providing implementation support.
 Broad Programmatic Knowledge Management: for monitoring and evaluation, collection of best practice examples, dissemination, and
   policy development functions, with the goal of ensuring effective implementation and replication of energy efficiency improvement efforts at
   MSMEs.
 Implementation support for the two Project Management Units

Implementing Agencies: Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE), Ministry of Power; and Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI).




                                                                     34
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



India: Fourth Power System Development Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: March 18, 2008
 Effective: May 16, 2008
 Closing: July 31, 2013
 Revised Closing: July 31, 2014

 Financier                                Financing*        Disbursed         Undisbursed
 IBRD                                       1,000.00           907.07               92.30
 POWERGRID                                    602.00                 -                  -
 Other                                        512.00                 -                  -
 Total Project Cost                         2,114.00                 -                  -
 *US$ millions; as of January 31, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Recurrent and severe electricity shortages (peak power deficit of 9.0 percent and energy deficit of 8.7 percent in 2013) have
imposed high costs on the Indian economy. In addition, the poor technical and commercial performance of most of the state electricity providers has led to a
loss of US$20 billion during 2011-12, according to the India Power Sector Review Study (2013). This bleak scenario is compounded by the fact that more than
350 million people in India today still lack access to electricity, impeding their ability to fully benefit from a high-growing economy. Furthermore, India’s power
sector also relies heavily on fossil fuels (primarily coal), and the country is currently the world’s fourth largest greenhouse gas (GHG) emitter. To address these
issues, the government of India plans to: (i) expand generation by using renewable energy sources whenever feasible and strengthen the central transmission
network to facilitate energy exchange across regions; (ii) improve energy efficiency and performance of institutions in the power sector; and (iii) expand access
for rural and peri-urban populations.


In 1989, the World Bank partnered with the government of India to create a Central Transmission Utility, Power Grid Corporation of India Limited
(POWERGRID). Since 1993, the Bank has made three direct loans to POWERGRID, totaling US$1 billion. With the Bank’s technical and financial support,
POWERGRID has evolved into one of the largest transmission utilities in the world, and has made great strides towards achieving world-class operations and
systems management. POWERGRID now generates 50 percent of the total power in the country. The fourth Power System Development Project (PSDP-IV)
supports additional transmission investments initiated under the ongoing PSDP-III project to scale-up the project’s impact and development effectiveness. The
development objective of the project is to strengthen India's electricity transmission system in order to increase reliable power exchange between regions and
states, as well as the efficient operation of one of the largest transmission networks in the world.


Key Achieved And Expected Results: More than US$4 billion of IFC and IBRD financing and capacity building support has helped POWERGRID evolve into the
world’s third largest utility, with an impressive track record of technical innovations. The two ongoing Projects (PSDP -IV and PDSP-V) are expected to result in
reduced transmission losses and lower cost of energy. They will contribute to the clean energy initiative by enabling the transfer of surplus hydro energy from
resource rich regions to power deficit regions in India, and by avoiding building new (and costly) generation facilities. Progress includes:
 Expansion of the inter-regional power transfer across five regional transmission grids to reach 66 billion kilowatt-hours, outperforming end of project
     targets.
 In September 2013, the transmission capacity of the Central Transmission Utility of India has exceeded 102,000 circuit kms, adding more than 30,000 ckm
     of new transmission lines compared to 2009, outperforming end of project targets.
 The transformation capacity has doubled to more than 164,000 MVA over the same period, outperforming end of project targets.
 The inter-regional electric power transfer capacity increased from less than 21 to 31 gigawatts since 2008-09, and since January 1, 2014, the entire
     transmission system has been operating as one of the largest synchronous grids in the world.

In addition to improvements in technical standards and implementation of state-of-the-art technology, the long-lasting partnership with POWERGRID has
helped bolster the institutional capabilities of the company. Best practices achieved include:

    POWERGRID has a fully automated National Load Dispatch Center, a four-tier system that is a complex and globally unique mode of grid operation. It
     minimizes grid disturbances and facilitates quick restoration in case of failures.
    POWERGRID developed a Corporate Social Responsibility Policy and shared it with the Bank.

 Key Partners: Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (POWERGRID).




                                                                               35
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Himachal Pradesh State Roads Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: June 5, 2007
    Effective: October 5, 2007
    Closing: June 30, 2016


    Financier                             Financing*        Disbursed          Undisbursed
    IBRD                                       281.7            149.8                  132
    Government of India                       118.93            64.28                54.65
    Total Project Cost                        400.63
    *US$ million; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Himachal Pradesh is a relatively small state in India both in terms of area and population. The development strategy of the
government of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP) aims to progressively raise the standard of living, correct the fiscal imbalance, and stimulate growth. An efficient
transport system is necessary to allow for the state’s planned growth. With hardly any rail, no waterways and only three smal l domestic airports, the state
relies almost exclusively on its road network for transport. The total road network in the state is about 28,000 km, comprising 2,000 km of national highway
border roads financed by the government of India, 2,160 km of state highways, 2,240 km of major district roads, with the balance being rural roads. But the
quality and extent of this road network is inadequate to meet the social and economic needs of the state: only half of all roads are surfaced, 90 percent of the
highway network is single lane, and fewer than half of all villages are deemed connected. The road sector suffers from low levels of investment. Funding for
maintenance has historically been a problem.

The project development objective is to reduce transport costs and improve traffic flows on priority segments of the core road network of Himachal Pradesh
for the road users in the state. It has two components:

      Core Network Improvement: Upgrading of roads in the Core Road Network, including widening of formation, realignment, new structures, and
       pavement strengthening of about 450 km of roads.
      Core Network Maintenance and Management: Periodic maintenance and minor rehabilitation of about 2,000 km of the Core Road Network, in
       accordance with the agreed environmental measures set forth in the Component 2 environmental management plan; (b) piloting performance-based
       maintenance contracts; (c) accident black spot improvements; (d) pre-investment studies for road network improvement and maintenance; and (e)
       capacity enhancement in road maintenance, financing, and management.

Key Achieved and Expected Results:
 Decrease the percentage of the core network of roads in poor condition from the baseline of 40 percent in 2007 to less than 10 percent by the end of the
    project. At the end January 2014, the value is 33 percent.
 Increase speeds on the World Bank-financed roads by 25 percent. At the end January 2014, average traffic speed has increased by a more than 25
    percent on 298 km of already upgraded roads sections.
 Reduce the fatal accident rate on the core network, which in 2007 was two deaths involved in traffic accidents per 1,000 vehicles. As of January 2013,
    the rate was 0.32 per 1,000 vehicles.
 Level of road user satisfaction on the core network more than doubled (from 1.5 in 2007 to 3.9 in 2013), surpassing the end of project target of 3.0
    (Note: using a 1-5 index)

Implementing Agency: Himachal Pradesh Road and Other Infrastructure Development Corporation.




                                                                               36
                                                   INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Himachal Pradesh Mid-Himalayan Watershed Development Project
Key Dates:
Approved: December 13, 2005
Effective: February 24, 2006
Closing: March 31, 2016

 Financier                               Financing*      Disbursed      Undisbursed
 IDA --Original Credit                        64.0            60.0              4.0
 Additional Financing                         38.0             2.4             35.6
 Government of India                          16.2
 Other(local communities)                       8.1
 Total Project Cost                          126.3
 *US$ millions; as of March 6, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Himachal Pradesh is a mountain state in northern India and a rich repository of biodiversity, forming the
catchment for several major northern Indian rivers. Despite the growing importance of tourism and hydropower, the economy of HP remains
largely agrarian, based on rainfed crops, horticulture, and livestock. Nine out of ten households are rural, and most of these live in small
settlements, typically located in remote valleys and heavily dependent on forests and community lands for their daily requirements of fuel wood,
fodder, and food. Constraints to rural development include rugged topography and poor access to social and economic services, small and
fragmented landholdings, fragile soils, and excessive human and livestock population pressure in a highly fragile mountain eco-system. To meet
the challenges of poverty reduction and sustainable natural resource management, an integrated approach to watershed development is needed
to ensure that land and water resources are sustainably managed and the livelihoods of rural inhabitants enhanced.


The World Bank has had a long history with watershed development in the state and the current project aims to scale up the successes of earlier
interventions by entrusting a large share of project implementation responsibilities to local governments i.e., Gram Panchayats (GPs). This will
help mainstream policies that promote cost-sharing, participation, and effective local governance into state-wide watershed development efforts.
The primary objective of the proposed project is to reverse the process of degradation of the natural resource base, and improve the productive
potential of natural resources and incomes of the rural households in the project areas. The secondary objective is to support policy and
institutional development to harmonize watershed development projects and policies across the State, in accordance with best practices. There
are three project components:

    Institutional Strengthening: building capacity of communities and local governments to effectively manage watershed development in a
     participatory, transparent, and demand-driven manner.
    Watershed Development and Management: financing of soil and water conservation, non-arable land treatments, crop and livestock
     production, and rural infrastructure.
    Enhancing Mountain Livelihoods: promotion of value added in agriculture and income-generating activities, particularly for tribal and
     vulnerable groups.


Key Results Expected:
 20 percent increase in real incomes over baseline for households in project area.
 50 percent increase in production and coverage of grasses, bushes, and trees.
 50 percent increase in yields of milk, paddy, wheat, maize, and horticulture.


Implementing Agency: Integrated Watershed Development Project, Solan.




                                                                      37
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Haryana Power System Improvement Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: August 4, 2009
 Effective: October 15, 2009
 Closing: December 31, 2014

 Financier                               Financing*          Disbursed        Undisbursed
 IBRD                                        330.00             168.71             161.29
 Government of Haryana                        80.00              32.18              47.82
 Total Project Cost                          410.00             200.89             209.11
 *US$ millions; as January 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report



 Background and Objective: The major remaining obstacles to making India’s power sector responsive to the demands of consumers and a modernizing
 economy are at the state level, predominantly in electricity distribution and transmission. By using investment lending to alleviate the infrastructure deficit
 in a rapidly growing state that also has pockets of poverty, the World Bank is drawing on global experience in institutional reform to support electricity
 improvements in the north Indian state of Haryana.


 The project development objective is to improve the availability, efficiency, and accountability of electricity supply in the state of Haryana through
 strengthening the transmission and distribution systems. The project supports HVPN, a transmission company, and DHBVN, a distribution company. It has
 three components:

    Transmission System Strengthening involves priority investments in sub-stations together with transmission lines for system augmentation.
    Urban Distribution System Strengthening focuses on improving operational efficiency and enhanced customer service.
    Technical Assistance and Capacity Building of transmission and distribution companies.


  Key Expected and Achieved Results:

  The transmission company’s (HVPN) transformation capacity has increased from baseline 9,700 mVA to about 18,580 mVA, beyond the project end
   target of 16,000 mVA.
  Under the project, the corporate governance and financial accountability (CGFA) action plan is modeled on best practice in financial management for
   public sector undertakings in India. The CGFA covers accounting, auditing, internal control, budgeting, and reporting, and is currently under
   implementation in both companies.
  Building overall capacity of the government of Haryana to develop and implement its institutional building agenda—one that focuses on internal
   transformation through process improvements, use of technology, and organizational change —is the most critical part of this project. The
   implementation strategy aims to increase accountability at all levels of government, and increase efficiency and performance through the formulation
   of Key Performance Indicators and a new Performance Management System.
  More than 60 percent of the distribution company’s (DHBVN) revenue comes from 3.75 percent (90,623) of consumers who have loa ds of more than
   10kW. The project provides Automated Meter Readings to 87,000 of these consumers. Automatic Meter Readings will ensure better revenue and helps
   detect tampering and theft.
  Consultancy support to the Haryana Electricity Regulatory Commission (HERC) has helped mainstream safeguard policies and introduced the use of
   third-party quality assurance consultants, resulting in improved flow of information on good practices in project management, as well as supporting
   accountability and transparency in transactions.

Implementing Agencies: Regulatory Commission, government of Haryana, and state utilities




                                                                             38
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: ICDS System Strengthening and Nutrition Improvement Project
Key Dates:
Approved: September 6, 2012
Effective: November 26, 2012
Closing: December 31, 2015

    Financier                           Financing*      Disbursed      Undisbursed
    IDA                                      102.3              0            101.8
    Government of India                         44              0               44
    Total Project Cost                       146.3            0.5            145.8
    *US$ millions; as of March 3, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: India has one of the highest malnutrition rates in the world. One third of India’s children are born with low birth weight; 43
percent of those under five are underweight; 48 percent are stunted; 20 percent wasted; 70 percent anemic; and 57 percent vitamin A deficient.
Undernourished children have higher rates of mortality; lower cognitive and school performance; are more likely to drop out of school; and are less productive
later in life, with an estimated 10 percent potential reduction in individual lifetime earnings and a 2-3 percent loss in GDP. Much of undernourishment occurs
during pregnancy and in the first two years of life (called the 'window of opportunity' to improve nutrition), when, without appropriate interventions, the
damage to brain development, future economic productivity, and consequently human development, is largely irreversible.

The government of India’s flagship program, the Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS), is designed to facilitate the hol istic development of children by
providing supplementary nutrition, and health and child care services to pregnant and lactating women and children less than 6 years of age. As implemented,
however, it is overly focused on supplemental food distribution; does not preferentially target children under two and pregnant-nursing mothers (the ‘window
of opportunity’ for improving nutrition); and has not focused enough on effective nutrition interventions such as promoting a ppropriate feeding and caring
practices, thus limiting its impact on malnutrition despite several decades of implementation. Recognizing the need for change, the government of India has
recently restructured the ICDS to strengthen its focus on 0-3 year olds and on behavior change for nutrition, and is designing a multi-sectoral program in high-
burden districts to address the multi-causal nature of malnutrition. World Bank support, through a two-phased project, will help the government build the
necessary capacity and systems to implement this reformed approach, as well as test innovations and pilots to improve implementation, including multi-
sectoral nutrition actions across eight high-burden states in their efforts to reduce malnutrition.

The overarching program goal of the two-phased project is to improve nutritional outcomes for children in India. The development objective of the three-year
first phase is to support the government of India and participating states to: (i) strengthen the ICDS policy framework, systems, and capacities, and facilitate
community engagement, to ensure greater focus on children less than three years of age; and (ii) strengthen convergent actions for improved nutrition
outcomes. The project has four components:

      ICDS institutional and systems strengthening. This will support strategic interventions/improvements to enhance the effectiveness of the ICDS
       program.
      Community mobilization and behavior change communication. This will strengthen the supply- and demand-side interface of the ICDS program,
       especially at the point of delivery of nutrition services, and rigorously monitor and evaluate it.
      Convergent nutrition action. This will support the government of India’s efforts to initiate and subsequently expand a comprehensive convergent
       nutrition response to complement the ICDS, in order to address the multiple determinants of malnutrition.
      Project management, monitoring, and evaluation. This will support effective project management.

Key Results Achieved and Expected: The project was launched in May 2013 and is in the early implementation phase. Expected results for phase I include:
 80 percent of project ICDS blocks will be reporting information using the revised ICDS management information system;
 70 percent of project districts will have implemented an “incremental capacity building” system;
 Six project states will have implemented and evaluated at least one community engagement pilot;
 70 percent of anganwadi centers under the project will have implemented the interpersonal communication activities focused on infant and young child
    feeding practices, as defined in the state behavior change communication plans; and
 Six project states will have piloted and implemented “convergent nutrition actions” in at least one dist rict.

Implementing Agency: Ministry of Women and Child Development; Departments of Women and Child Development of the State Governments of Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.


Key Development Partners: Department of International Development, Government of United Kingdom; United Nations Children’s Fund; International Food
Policy Research Institute; CARE India




                                                                                   39
                                              INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: IDFC Climate Change Loan

Key Date
Committed: June 25, 2010

IFC Financing (US$ million)
Instrument             Amount          Disbursed         Undisbursed
IFC A Loan                   75.0            75.0                    -

Project Description and Objectives: IFC provided a rupee loan equivalent to $75 million to IDFC Ltd (earlier known as
Infrastructure Development Finance Company Limited). The loan was provided for making investments in renewable energy and
cleaner production/energy efficiency projects. The investment is in line with IFC’s strategic priority to address climate cha nge
impacts.

The objective of the long-term loan was to help IDFC balance its structural liquidity. At the time, long term funding was crucial to help
IDFC expand its lending to renewable energy projects, which typically have long repayment periods.

Key Achievements and Expected Results:

The purpose of the investment was to help IDFC scale up its capacity to assess renewable energy/ energy efficiency projects by
leveraging IFC’s experience and knowledge of these sectors globally.

Through this project, IDFC and IFC built on each other’s strengths—IDFC’s client reach in the local market and IFC’s expertise in
climate change projects—to achieve wider scale and impact on climate change investments in India.

Importantly, the fact that a leading finanvcial institution like IDFC is expanding into climate friendly projects helped encourage other
financial institutions to invest more in these sectors.




                                                                  40
                                                INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Financing Public Private Partnerships in Infrastructure Through Supporting the India
Infrastructure Finance Company (IIFCL) Project
Key Dates:
Approved: September 22, 2009 and December 12, 2013 (restructured)
Effective: November 55, 2009
Closing: September 30, 2015

 Financier                           Financing*      Disbursed           Undisbursed
 IBRD                                      195               36                  159
 Total Project Cost                        195               36                  159
 *As of December 31, 2013
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: India has large infrastructure financing needs: the government of India’s estimate for the 12th Five Year Plan
(2012-2017) alone is US$1 trillion, half of which is expected to be raised from private sources. The project’s objective is to strengthen IIFCL’s
capacity for infrastructure public-private partnership (PPP) financing through piloting new instruments and implementation approaches to
increase the availability of long-term financing for infrastructure PPP projects in India. The coverage of the project is intended to be national.

Key Results Expected: Project progress had been very slow and consequently the project was restructured recently (December 2013) to
appropriately size the project allocation, allow for innovative financial products that build IIFCL’s financial capacity and use new
implementation approaches that rely more substantively on IIFCL’s operational capacity which has evolved substantively over the last few
years. Disbursement so far is US$36 million, out of an allocation of US$195 million for one power transmission project and one solar power
project. Other roads and port terminal projects are in the pipeline. The capacity building component of the project has made better progress
and additional resources have been allocated recently, to support implementation of the restructured project and scale up capacity building
efforts.

Implementing Agency: India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd (IIFCL)

Key Development Partners: United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID) funding part of capacity building
component. Asian Development Bank and KfW, both of which have parallel lines of credit to IIFCL.




                                                                   41
                                                     INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project
Key Dates:
Approved: June 15, 2010
Effective: September 22, 2010
Closing: December 31, 2015

    Financier                          Financing*   Disbursed     Undisbursed
    IDA                                221.96        49.11          172.85
    Government of India (and States)    63.74        14.09           49.65
    Total Project Cost                 285.67        59.84          222.47
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results
    Report
Background and Objective: India has 63 million people living in low-elevation coastal areas, endowed with significant ecological and economic
resources. These coastal areas are unable to ensure balanced development due to the increasing threat of hazards on economic and livelihood
security; fragmented and weak institutional frameworks; and lack of appropriate knowledge-based decision-making. As a result, coastal and
marine resources are depleted and degraded. Unless these resources are conserved as part of overall economic development plans, there will be
further impacts on the livelihood, health, and well-being of the coastal population. In 2006, the government of India adopted the Integrated
Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) approach (a shift from a purely regulatory to a management approach) that would, with people’s
participation, promote livelihood security of the coastal communities, protect the ecosystems, and promote sustainable development. In 2007,
the government of India requested the Bank’s fina ncing to create the initial institutional and knowledge bases to support its long-term reform
agenda, and to pilot activities that would inform larger future projects and programs. The Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project is the
largest ever Bank financing in coastal zone projects, and one of the largest ever for knowledge outputs.

The project development objective is to assist the government in building national capacity to implement a comprehensive coastal management
approach, and to pilot the ICZM approach in the states of Gujarat, Orissa, and West Bengal. Project components cover:

       National ICZM Capacity Building: Aims to establish and support an appropriate national institutional structure for guiding and
        coordinating coastal zone management. It includes: (a) hazard line and coastal sediment cell mapping; (b) mapping and management of
        ecologically sensitive areas; (c) establishing a new national institute for sustainable coastal zone management; and (d) national-level
        capacity building.
       Development and Implementation of ICZM in the states of Gujarat, Orissa and West Bengal: Aims to develop and empower state-level
        authorities to adopt appropriate ICZM approaches consistent with national strategies. It includes: (a) preparation and adoption of ICZM
        plans; (b) institutional strengthening of state-level coastal zone authorities; (c) pilot investments consistent with local ICZM priorities
        around three themes of coastal resource conservation/ protection; pollution management; and community livelihood enhancement,
        adapting to threats from sea-level rise.

Key Expected and Achieved Results: By project end, it is expected that India will have established an appropriate national institutional
structure for guiding and coordinating implementation of the ICZM approach. It is expected that the various knowledge products produced
under this project (i.e. 10 “Knowledge Benchmarks” as well as the 8 pilot ICZM activities) will provide useful lessons and guidance for the
development of the overall structure as well as future ICZM interventions.

The project’s intermediate outcomes include:
     9,000 ha mangrove planted with community involvement;
     78,000 km2 of aerial photography completed;
     Several village-level micro projects completed, in particular in sanitation, solar power, power connection, and livelihood improvement;
     First successful “technology-agnostic” bid for sewage treatment plant in India with 15 years DBO contract;
     Large real-time lake water monitoring system installed in Odisha;
     Over 100,000 turtles protected, more than 10,000 hatched and released into the sea;
     First regional coastal process study in South Asia - detailed marine bathymetry completed (Odisha);
     40,000 new non-culturable microbes discovered and meta-gene mapping complete (West Bengal);
     About 35,000 people (6,500 households in 20 of the fishing villages in Odisha) are now free of debt and have almost all risen above the
      subsistence level of net income. (Target - 250,000 people to be free of poverty and debt by 2016).

    Key Partners: Ministry of Environment and Forests, Society for Integrated Coastal Management, National Centre for Sustainable Coastal
    Management, Survey of India, Government of Gujarat, Government of Odisha, Government of West Bengal.




                                                                            42
                                                         INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: INOX Rajasthan
Key date:
Committed: August 31, 2012

IFC Financing (US$ million)
Instrument                                 Amount         Disbursed         Undisbursed
IFC A Loan                                   50.0              50.0                   -

Project Description and Objectives:
Incorporated in 2010, INOX Renewables Limited houses the wind power generation business of the INOX Group. An independent renewable energy producer,
INOX Renewables has a significant presence in wind energy generation and aims to become a leading wind farm developer in India.

IFC provided a loan of $50 million (equivalent to Indian Rupees 2,619 million) in FY13 to Inox Renewables (Jaisalmer) Limited, a wholly owned subsidiary of
Inox Renewables. The loan will support the construction of a 64 MW wind farm project in Rajasthan, a low income state.

Key Achievements and Expected Results:

The project will have a strong development impact:

    Increased generation of renewable power: INOX Renewables will set up new renewable energy-based generation capacity to meet the increasing
     demand for power in the country, and in the process help reduce the intensity of greenhouse gas emissions in the Indian power sector;
    Private sector development in renewable energy: The project will help a mid-tier renewable energy company to develop its business at an early stage,
     resulting in a signaling effect in the market for other businesses;
    Generate employment in the region: The project will create 25 new direct jobs (seven of which are for women) during operations and maintenance of
     the plants, but more importantly is expected to create significant temporary jobs (during construction) and indirect and induced jobs over the life of the
     project.

By 2017, the project is expected to provide power to 92,000 residential customers and help reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 0.12 million metric tons of
CO2 equivalent per year.




                                                                             43
                                                 INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Karnataka Health System Development and Reform Project
Key Dates:
Approved: August 22, 2006, August 27, 2012 (AF)
Effective: January 11, 2007, January 22, 2013 (AF)
Closing: March 31, 2012, March 31, 2016 (AF)

 Financier              Financing*   Disbursed    Undisbursed
 IDA                        220.83       141.7             78.6
 Government of               99.65       64.65           35.00
 Karnataka
 Total Project Cost         311.48      206.85          113.60
 *US$ millions; as of February 28. 2014, includes Original and
 Additional Financing (AF)
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and
 Results Report

Background and Objectives: Karnataka, a state in the south of India, has a population of 61 million with higher per capita income and better
health indicators than all-India averages, although there are significant socio-economic disparities within the state. As government health
spending has substantially increased in recent years, basic investments and operations of health services have largely been assured from
domestic funds. Nevertheless, system-level challenges persist, the quality and responsiveness of health services continue to require
improvement, significant gaps remain in access to services, and the state is confronting new health challenges, notably the growing burden of
non-communicable diseases (NCD). In this context, the Karnataka Health System Development and Reform Project has focused on supporting
policy change, institutional development, new strategies and innovations, and filling gaps.

The project development objective is to improve health service delivery, public-private collaboration, and financing, particularly for
underserved and vulnerable groups in Karnataka. The project has three components:

    Strengthening Existing Government Health Programs: supports policy change, institutional capacity development at the state and
     district levels, and health service quality improvement.
    Innovations in Service Delivery and Health Financing: supports investments in health service delivery capacity (i.e. round-the-clock
     health centers to improve maternal care); service-delivery contracts with NGOs; environmental health and regulation; a pilot for the
     prevention and control of non-communicable disease; and a pilot road safety program (coordinated with an IDA-financed transport
     project). This component also supports institutional development of a government health insurance scheme financing hospital services for
     the poor.
    Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation: supports overall project oversight and implementation.

Key Results Achieved and Expected:
  An assessment of organizational development needs has been done and training implemented, district health administration and planning
    has been strengthened, management and clinical guidelines have been developed, procurement reform has been implemented, and
    monitoring and evaluation have been strengthened.
  The project has financed construction and renovation of 305 health facilities, 13 drug warehouses, and 27 training centers, while 111
    mobile health clinics and 19 citizens’ help desks in hospitals are ru n by contracted NGOs. The institutional capacity of the government
    health insurance scheme has been strengthened. A needs assessment and technical design for the planned NCD and road safety activities
    have commenced.
  Performance indicators have shown significant progress: the proportion of births delivered in a health facility has risen from 65 percent in
    2005-06 to 86 percent in 2009 (with an end-project target of 90 percent); 111 mobile health clinics are operational (against the end-
    project target of 125); and the number of claims paid by the health insurance pilot program benefiting poor households exceeds 32,000
    (compared to the end-project target of 45,000).

Implementing Agency: Department of Health and Family Welfare, government of Karnataka.

Key Development Partners: Local institutions such as the Institute of Public Health and the Indian Institute of Technology-Bangalore.




                                                                    44
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Karnataka Municipal Reform Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: March 14, 2006
 Effective: June 30, 2006
 Closing: March 31, 2015

 Financier                                     Financing*          Disbursed          Undisbursed

 IBRD                                               216.0                151                    65

 Government of Karnataka                             94.0                 66                    28
 Total Project Cost                                310.0                 217                    94
 *US$ million, as of January 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Karnataka is among the more urbanized states in India, with a total population of about 61 million and an urbanization rate of
39 percent. The capital city of Bangalore, with a population of over 8 million, is one of India’s important IT hubs. Karnatak a faces fundamental challenges in
managing urbanization and providing for adequate public housing and urban services such as water supply, sewerage, drainage, solid waste management,
and transport to meet the demands of a fast-growing urban population.
The project development objective is to help improve the delivery of urban services by enhancing the quality of urban infrastructure, and strengthening the
institutional and financial frameworks for urban services at the Urban Local Body (ULB) and state levels. The project components are:

    Institutional Development: Finances institutional capacity building activities aimed at better transparency and accountability in basic urban and
     management functions at the ULB.
    Municipal Investment Support: Will provide performance-based investment support to about 30 ULBs outside Bangalore for urban services.
    Bangalore Development: Provides financing support to rehabilitate the road network and improve sewerage services in Bangalore.
    Project Management: Supports managing project activities, including assisting ULBs to formulate, design, and implement technically and financially
     sound projects.

 Key Results Achieved:
  1,637 km of sewer lines have been laid, and over 130,000 sewer connections provided against the target of 120,000;
  About 125 km of city roads have been rehabilitated in Bangalore;
  Over 160 ULBs have implemented new municipal e-governance systems covering functions such as accounting, budgeting, property tax management,
     grievance redressal, and new websites—all resulting in enhanced citizen interface and accountability. This is considered a best practice in India;
  Over 18,165 urban sector staff trained against the target of 8,700 staff; and
  About 31 ULBs have accessed performance-based investment support.
Implementing Agency: Urban Development Department, Government of Karnataka; Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation
(KUIDFC).




                                                                             45
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Karnataka Panchayat Strengthening Project
Key Dates:
Approved: June 29, 2006
Effective: October 4, 2006
Closing: March 30, 2014

    Financier                              Financing*        Disbursed      Undisbursed
    IDA                                      126.90**            125.50            1.38
    Government of Karnataka                     13.33
    Total Project Cost                         140.23
    *US$ millions, as of February 19, 2014
    ** IDA amounts reflect SDR exchange rate as of February 19, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: India opted for decentralization to increase the accountability of government, improve services and public spending, and
reach out to poor people. The central government sees rural governments as the key mechanism for delivering core services to rural poor, and one of its
priorities was to make this approach work in some states to serve as an example and a model for the rest of the country. Karnataka was the ideal
candidate for using the model of decentralized service delivery to set an example for the rest of India. The poorest parts of Karnataka have many features
typical of more northern states, with a high incidence of poverty, difficult access, and severe resource constraints. But Karnataka also has a long history of
rural governments, more than any other state in India. The project covers 39 of the ‘most backward’ blocks (taluks) and 1,341 Gram Panchayats, to build
capacity of the Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs), provide a formula-based grant, revamp financial management and procurement systems, and improve
the effectiveness of service delivery across a range of core basic services devolved under the Karnataka Panchayat Raj Act, 1993.
The development objective of the project is to improve the effectiveness of service delivery by Karnataka Gram Panchayats (GPs or village governments),
particularly with respect to the management of public resources and the delivery of relevant services as prioritized by the rural people. The project has
four components:

      Block grants to GPs: Formula-based untied grants.
      Information systems for constituents: Increases the ability of poor people to voice their demands to, and elicit responses from, local governments,
       in particular the poorest and excluded groups;
      Building the capacity of panchayats: Increasing the capacity of all three levels of Panchayats in managing resources, collecting revenues, and
       delivering services; and
      Building the capacity of the state: Putting in place systems at the state level to enable it to oversee, facilitate, and manage the Panchayat system.

1A three-tiered rural local government structure in India: Zilla Panchayats at the district level (avg. pop. of two million), Taluk Panchayats at the block level
(avg. pop. 250 thousand), and Gram Panchayat at the village level (avg. pop. of 5,000).

Key Achieved Results:
  The number of Gram Sabhas has risen from a low base of about 4,300 to over 7,050 with an increase in local representation, and plans reflecting
     community needs (participatory planning).
  The collection rate of own source revenue increased from 31 percent in 2009/10 to 38.5 percent in 2012/13, allowing for improvement in own source
     revenue generation in the project GPs.
  Panchatantra, a state-wide accounting system supported by the project, has helped in strengthening of the financial management system at the GP
     level.
  175 Smarthya Soudhas (Taluk Resource Centers) have been constructed at the Taluk (block) level to serve as local residential training centres which
     are close to the Gram Panchayats and require less time to travel, unlike the district headquarters.
  One hundred thousand PRI functionaries/government officials were trained in various areas including issues of roles and responsibilities,
     accounting/auditing, transparency in contracting, procurement and environmental safeguards in the project.
  Fully functional satellite and communication (SATCOM) facilities were established in five sub-centers allowing functionaries to participate in meetings
     and hold discussions on various issues with experts located at district headquarters.
  The 2013 post-procurement review indicates:
    o    Improvement in participation of bidders in tendering, bidding outcomes, and implementation of a GP-level Procurement Monitoring tool.
    o    All works were completed and are being used by the beneficiaries, indicating that the general public appreciates the assets created at the GP level,
         and villagers are using the facilities/works created through participatory planning.
    o    Continued improvement in documenting procurement, payments, and completion certificates of work.




                                                                              46
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Karnataka State Highway Improvement Project II
Key Dates:
Approved: March 24, 2011
Effective: July 19, 2011
Closing: December 31, 2016

    Financier                           Financing*      Disbursed       Undisbursed
    IBRD                                      350             49.3             300.7
    Government of Karnataka                   155
    Private Sector Developer                  500
    Total Project Cost                       1005
    *US$ millions; as of January 31, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Karnataka, located in the southwest of India, is the eighth largest state in the country, with a population of about 61
million. With 34 percent of the people living in urban centers, Karnataka is the fifth most urbanized state in India. Although considered to be a middle-
income state and growing at or above the all-India economic rate of growth, Karnataka has wide regional development disparities, posing risks for
sustaining high growth and making it more inclusive. Improving infrastructure, including road transport, is a key component of the government of
Karnataka’s development strategy to sustain growth and bridge regional disparities. Within the state’s relatively extensive r oad network of 208,262 km,
the Department of Public Works, Ports, and Inland Water Transport is responsible for managing 22,078 km of state highways and 50,037 km of major
district roads. The department faces two notable challenges: a significant paucity of resources for improving the quality and standards of transport
infrastructure, and worsening road safety (in 2009, the state accounted for 10 percent of road accidents and 7 percent of road fatalities in all of India).
The Bank-supported Karnataka State Highway Improvement Project aims to support the government of Karnataka in two areas of highway
development: (a) achieving more diversified sector financing, building upon India’s experience in extensive use of public -private partnerships (PPPs) for
the development of national highways; and (b) improving road safety design, management, and enforcement to reduce road fatalities and major injuries.

The project development objective is to accelerate the development of the Core Road Network through leveraging public sector outlays with private
sector financing and improving the institutional effectiveness of the road sector agencies to deliver effective and safe roads to users. The project has four
components:

      Road Improvement Works supports capital improvement and maintenance works of Core Road Network through a combination of traditional
       contracts and PPP concessions.
      Highway Financing Modernization assists the Karnataka Road Development Corporation Limited in implementing the concept of co-financing
       with private financial institutions through technical assistance and pilot transactions.
      Road Safety Improvement helps the government of Karnataka respond to the growing road safety problems in the state with comprehensive
       strategic and institutional measures, consistent with the main thrusts of the 2007 Sundar Committee report and the findings of the road safety
       management capacity review.
      Road Sector Policy and Institutional Development support implementation of a new medium-term Institutional Development and Strengthening
       Action Plan for 2010-2016.

Key Expected Results:
 The government of Karnataka is expected to generate at least US$500 million in new private sector capital for Core Road Network improvement
    and management by 2016.
 Share of Core Road Network in good condition increases from 50 to 65 percent by 2016.
 Vehicle operating costs are targeted to decrease by 15 percent, and travel time cost on project corridors is targeted to decrease by 25 percent by
    2016.
 Road accident-related fatalities on safe corridor pilots should decrease by 30 percent by 2016.

Implementing Agency: Department of Public Work, Ports, and Inland Waterways, Government of Karnataka, in partnership with the Karnataka Road
Development Corporation Limited.




                                                                             47
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Karnataka Watershed Development 2
    Key Dates:
    Approved: September 6, 2012
    Effective: April 23, 2013
    Closing: December 31, 2018

    Financier                                 Financing           Disbursed*        Undisbursed
    IDA                                            60.0                0.190             59.810
    Government of India                            25.7
    Total Project Cost                             85.7

    *US$ millions; as of January 31, 2014.
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Approximately 60 percent of India’s population depends on rainfed agriculture for their primary livelihood. Thirteen states,
including Karnataka, account for about 75 percent of the total rainfed area in India, and have low agricultural productivity and are susceptible to drought,
deepening environmental stress and degradation. The government of India is helping states address these issues through the National Integrated Watershed
Management Program (IWMP) supplemented by the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS). Yet IWMP, which finances soil and water
conservation activities in arid, rainfed areas, has not achieved desired results. The Karnataka Watershed Development Project-II (KWDP-II) is a new approach
for watershed management in India. The design builds on the earlier Bank-supported Karnataka Watershed Development Project-I (KWDP-I), which is seen
as one of the World Bank’s most successful watershed projects, winning five prestigious national and three major internationa l awards. KWDP-I generated a
substantial number of positive lessons and best practices around integrated watershed management, agricultural intensification, rural livelihoods, monitoring
and evaluation, and building resilience to climate change. The Bank is providing mainly technical support to help the IWMP achieve better results and
improve convergence with NREGS.

The Project Development Objective is to demonstrate more effective watershed management through greater integration of programs related to rainfed
agriculture, innovative and science-based approaches, and strengthened institutions and capacities.

      Improved Program Integration in Rainfed Areas: will demonstrate the successful integration of programs in watershed development, using a science-
       based approach in project areas.
      Research, Development and Innovation: will establish a coordinated research approach to provide practical knowledge and tools to support integrated
       watershed management.
      Institutional Strengthening: will strengthen the institutions and human resources of key stakeholders to improve effective delivery of services for
       integrated watershed management.
      Strengthening Horticulture in Rainfed Areas: will strengthen the knowledge base regarding horticulture potential in rainfed areas, and demonstrate
       and build the capacity of institutions and communities to improve production and value addition of horticulture in project areas.
      Project Management and Coordination: will ensure effective and efficient project management.

Key Expected Results: Under the project, new science-based approaches and tools will be adopted into wider IWMP watershed operations, such as improved
hydrological inputs as part of landscape scale watershed assessments, and decision-support models used for site selection. Up to 70 percent of micro-
watersheds will have improved convergence and integration with other programs such as NREGS. Agricultural and horticultural productivity in IWMP project
areas for selected crops is expected to increase.

Implementing Agencies: Karnataka Watershed Development Department and the Department of Horticulture, in partnership with the National Bureau of
Soil Survey and Land-Use Planning, Karnataka State Remote Sensing Application Center, Indian Institute of Science, Karnataka University of Agricultural
Science, and Karnataka University of Horticultural Science.




                                                                               48
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Kerala Local Government and Service Delivery Project
Key Dates:
Approved: March 29, 2011
Effective: September 2011
Closing: December 31, 2015
 Financier                         Financing* Disbursed        Undisbursed
 IDA                                      200     84.46             115.54
 Government of Kerala                      60        20                 40
 Total Project Cost                       260    104.46             155.54
 *US$ millions; as of February 28, 2014 For more information see the latest
 Implementation Status and Results Report                                                               Fish Market: Income Enhancement Local Government Systems



Background and Objectives: Kerala is considered a front runner in India’s decentralization reforms. Local governments in Kerala are in a unique
situation - taking on more devolved responsibilities and with a greater degree of local autonomy. Kerala is undertaking a second generation of
decentralization reforms, which focus, in a practical and incremental manner, on expanding local expenditure autonomy, strengthening local government
institutional capacity, and enhancing the state government’s ability to manage and oversee the intergovernmental fiscal sy stem. The Kerala Local
Government and Service Delivery Project contributes to the government of Kerala (GoK)’s second generation decentralization re forms through support to
enhance governance and improve service delivery. At the national level, the project supports the overall process of decentralization as mandated under
the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments of the government of India. The project development objective is to enhance and strengthen the institutional
capacity of the local government system in Kerala to deliver services and undertake basic administrative and governance functions more effectively and
sustainably. The project supports 978 Gram Panchayats (GPs) and 60 municipalities across the state. The project has four components:
     Performance Grants. Provides GPs and municipalities with additional discretionary funds, based on a formula, to expand local investment in the
      creation, maintenance, and operation of capital assets, as an incentive for strengthening institutional capacity.
     Capacity Building. Provides inputs to strengthen and supplement the existing systems and human resources of GPs and municipalities, to enhance
      their institutional performance.
     Performance Monitoring: Supports strengthening the system of performance monitoring GPs and municipalities across the state.
     Support the Project Management Unit: within the Local Self Government (LSG) Department in overall coordination, implementation, and
      monitoring and evaluation of the project.
Key Achieved and Expected Results:
 99 percent of 1,038 LSGs qualified for performance grants based on fulfilling the two minimum mandatory conditions: clean external audits and passing the
     annual budget. Contributed to cleaning-up audit backlogs in LSGs.
 77 percent of LSGs have qualified for enhanced performance grants for boosting service delivery. Through the project, the government of Kerala has
     completed the first annual performance evaluation process of LSGs, demonstrating a strong commitment to improving systems and processes of local
     public administration.
 The government of Kerala’s contribution to financing the transfer system increased more than envisaged at project design.
 Provide support to Information Kerala Mission to roll-out various e-governance systems in all LSGs for enabling enhanced service delivery, transparency and
     accountability. For example, LSGs have migrated from maintenance of manual bookkeeping and accounting to computerized double entry accounting, as
     well as online planning and budgeting systems.
 Sub-projects include e-governance enhancements (e.g. enabling citizens to get birth, death and marriage certificates on time), connective infrastructure
     (e.g. roads), social services (e.g. education, health and anganwadi centers), income generation (street lights, bus stands, bus parks, markets), water supply
     and sanitation, solid and liquid waste management, energy projects, and LSGs’ front office modernization and computerization.
 So far project has benefited 20 million people, against an end of project target of 29.5 million. More than 50 percent are women.
 Provided training to LSGs’ elected representatives and functionaries, and contributed to modernization of GoK’s focal institu tes for local government
     capacity building, namely Kerala Institute of Local Administration and the State Institute for Rural Development.
 Greater awareness and adherence to fiduciary and social safeguard policies.


Implementing Agency: Local Self Government Department (LSGD), Government of Kerala (GoK)




                                                                               49
                                                       INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


      INDIA: Kerala State Transport Project II
    Key Dates:
    Approved: May 14, 2013
    Effective: Not yet effective
    Closing: April 30, 2019

    Financier                      Financing*      Disbursed      Undisbursed

    IBRD                                 216             5.18           210.82

    Government of Kerala                  229
    Total Project Cost                    445
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results                 A road completed under the first Kerala State Roads Project
    Report

Background and Objectives: Kerala has the highest human development outcomes in India, with 99 percent literacy, the highest life expectancy,
and the lowest rates of infant mortality. Despite India’s recent economic slowdown as a result of the global downturn, Kerala’s economy
preformed much better than expected (GSDP USD 59.4 billion: FY 11-12). Nonetheless, Kerala has not been spared from the global slowdown; low
capital investment in economic infrastructure has been an unfortunate consequence of fiscal constraints and high revenue exp enditures. Kerala’s
draft Road Development Policy estimates that improving existing roads to match the economic aspirations of the state will require an annual
investment of $885 million over the next 10 years.

The main goal of the Kerala State Transport Project II (KSTP II), which follows the first KSTP which ended in 2010, is to support the state in
upgrading the most critical and strategically important state highways and building sustainable institutions. On a pilot basis, a Public-Private
Partnership (PPP) between the State’s Public Works Department and a private concessionaire—one of the first of its kind in India—will be
established to deliver a specific road section. The Bank’s technical assistance is aimed at helping the state attract much ne eded private sector
investment and innovation to the road sector. The project also seeks to support efforts by the government to reverse the trend in road accidents
and deaths. While the number of road crashes in Kerala declined by 17 percent between 2005 and 2011, the number of traffic fatalities has
increased by 27 percent during the same period, from 3,200 to 4,100. The project will pilot the concept of road safety demonstration corridors
and increase local participation through a ‘road safety challenge fund’.


The Project’s development objective is to improve conditions, traffic flow, and road safety, with a focus on vulnerable road users, on selected
roads in Kerala. The Project has three components:

      Road Network Upgrading and Safety Improvement: includes upgrading (widening to full two-lane standard) 363 km of strategically
       important state highways to complete network connectivity in the state.
      Road Safety Management: supports the strengthening of the road safety management systems in Kerala with the objective of arresting the
       increase of crash fatalities in the state, with a particular focus on vulnerable road users (pedestrians, cyclists, and motorcyclists).
      Institutional Strengthening: improves the sustainability of Kerala’s state road network with respect to its functional adequacy, financial
       viability, and capacity of key state road sector institutions to deliver road infrastructure and services that are responsive to road user needs.

Key Expected Results: The project will enhance connectivity between key socio-economic centers and reduce travel times between the main
engines of economic activity in the state. Improved roads under the project will impact the lives of countless people. It is expected that the
project will reach 13.4 million direct beneficiaries, more than half of whom are women. Travel time on the improved roads should decrease by 20
percent. Approximately 350 km of improved roads will have significantly improved capacity and smoothness. The road safety emphasis of the
projects should help reduce the number of fatalities by 20 percent on the safe road demonstration corridors.


Implementing Agency: Public Works Department, Government of Kerala.




                                                                            50
                                                         INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Low-Income Housing Finance Project
Key Dates:
Approved: May 14, 2013
Effective: November 20, 2013
Closing: December 31, 2018


 Financier                       Financing*         Disbursed            Undisbursed
 IDA                                 100                 0                    100
 Total Project Cost                  100                 0                    100
 *US$ millions; as of February 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report


Background and Objectives: Housing shortages in India, with a growing urban population, are the result of complex supply and demand factors.
Inappropriate land use policies and building norms artificially restrict the supply of housing. There is a lack of land serviced by utilities with appropriate
zoning and formal property rights. Demand is constrained by lack of formal housing finance, especially for lower income households (incomes below Rs
16,666 per month). More than 90 percent of the housing shortage is faced by these lower income households, which have traditionally not been a
commercial target for mainstream financial institutions. Only 31 percent of these households with housing loans obtained their mortgages from the two
cheapest sources of credit (banks and government programs). Microfinance, if available, is restricted to small loan sizes with high interest rates. Lower
income households face high borrowing costs due to, among other things, the informality of their income (no documentation of income) and the informality
of their dwelling (no clear mortgageable title to the property).

The main objective of the Low-Income Housing Finance Project for India is to provide access to sustainable housing finance for low-income households to
purchase, build, or upgrade their dwellings. The project aims to address market failures by giving the necessary capacity building and implementation
support and incentives to the National Housing Bank (NHB) - the apex level financial institution for housing finance in India - intermediary institutions, and
primary lending institutions to expand lending to lower income groups. The project also provides finance for NHB to refinance low-income housing loans
made by primary lenders.

Key Expected Results: :
 Increase in the number of primary lenders active in the low-income segments.
 Increase in volume of lending to lower income borrowers.
 Increase in the number of borrowers in these segments.

Financing under the project aims to create incentives for lenders to focus on lower income households. The project also aims to deliver on its stated
objective of reaching a higher proportion of lower income households while maintaining portfolio quality standards. The project expects to develop prudent
lending standards to serve the more vulnerable, lower income households, expand the coverage of credit bureaus to include informal income borrowers,
develop consumer information and disclosure norms for the project’s target groups, enhance the appraisal capacity of the lend ers, as well as pilot new
policies and products to overcome the challenges of dwelling informality.

Implementing Agency: National Housing Bank (NHB).

Development Partners: International Finance Corporation (IFC), KfW, the German government-owned development bank, and the United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development (DFID).




                                                                             51
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project
Key Dates:
Approved: September 28, 2010
Effective: December 20, 2010
Closing: December 31, 2016

    Financier                             Financing*       Disbursed         Undisbursed
    IDA                                       100.07            20.43              81.37
    Government of Maharashtra                  11.00
    Other (Beneficiaries)                      42.00
    Total Project Cost                        153.07
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Farmers in the state of Maharashtra have severely limited choices in accessing markets. They continue to rely on regulated
wholesale markets –known as mandi, or Agriculture Produce Marketing Committee “APMC” markets – which are mandatory for the wholesale trading of many
agricultural products. The relatively small number of licensed traders and commission agents in these markets has not only l imited farmers’ choices, but also
resulted in strong political economy interests to preserve this system, and under-investment in physical infrastructure. The challenge for Maharashtra is to
create an environment that enables the farming community to acquire the technical capacity necessary to access market opportunities that result in higher
returns and better farm incomes. The government of Maharashtra’s long -term development plan for improving agriculture productivity and competitiveness
includes working through the Bank-supported Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project (MACP) to implement a three-pronged approach that: (a)
promotes the development of alternative marketing options; (b) supports the top tier of regulated wholesale markets in the state to reform, invest, and
provide better services; and (c) gradually undertakes regulatory reforms. Regulatory change, investments in physical infrastructure, strengthened capacity,
and improved governance, as well as the participation of all stakeholders (farmers, traders, commission agents, processors, and consumers) is expected to
improve competitiveness. Over time, the rest of the agriculture marketing system in Maharashtra is expected to become more efficient.

The development objective of the MACP is to increase the productivity, profitability, and market access of the farming community in Maharashtra. Project
activities are grouped into three components:

      Intensification and Diversification of Market-led Production: Supports agriculture technology transfer, facilitates networking amongst farmers and
       agribusinesses on emerging marketing opportunities, provides market intelligence using information and communications technology-based
       applications and other means, and strengthens livestock support services in the state.
      Improving Farmer Access to Markets: Promotes alternative market opportunities by establishing farmer groups and a warehouse receipts system,
       upgrading local rural markets, piloting e-trading platforms, and modernizing existing wholesale markets and livestock yards.
      Project Management, Learning, and Adjusting: Undertakes project coordination and management, and monitoring and evaluation.

Key Achieved and Expected Results: Progress under agriculture marketing reforms, such as allowing the establishment of private agriculture wholesale
markets, contract farming, direct purchase from producers by agribusinesses, and removal of minimum distance criteria, are leading to the emergence of
alternative market arrangements outside the regulated markets.
 Steady increase in the emergence of the alternative marking arrangement outside the traditional marketing system. Alternative markets turnover (for
     FY 2012-13) accounts for 8 percent of the state's recorded turnover;
 Model by-laws and uniform accounting standards rolled out across the state; and innovative e-trading pilots to improve the transparency of business
     processes underway;
 3300 commodity groups mobilized; project collaborating with large number of private sector input suppliers and output buyers;
 Agribusiness Promotion Facility (ABPF) setup under the project has been rolled out in Phase 1 district. Through a structured approach and working
     with close to 28 financial institutions, ABPF facilitates access of entrepreneurs to commercial loans and grants, under various government of India and
     government of Maharashtra schemes. ABPF has mobilized Rs 81.50 million of agribusiness investments in the state;
 Warehouse Receipts Development: With a focused extension and tie-up with commercial banks, there has seen a steady increase in farmers opting for
     scientific storage and accessing working capital finance from commercial banks.

Implementing Agency: Government of Maharashtra and Maharashtra State Agriculture Marketing Board.




                                                                              52
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Maharashtra Water Sector Improvement Project
Key Dates:
Approved: June 23, 2005
Effective: September 29, 2005
Closing: March 28, 2014

    Financier                                Financing*         Disbursed          Undisbursed
    IBRD                                         325.00             290.77               34.23
    Government of Maharashtra                     61.15
    Other                                          7.62
    Total Project Cost                           393.77
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: The water sector in Maharashtra faces critical challenges, including increased competition among different sectors, poor quality
irrigation service delivery, limited cost recovery, and a fragmented approach in planning and management of water resources. To address these issues, the
government of Maharashtra (GoM) has taken a number of bold and path-breaking actions, including a state-level Water Policy (2003), and passed legislation
to create a Water Regulator and allow the management of irrigation systems by farmers. The Bank-supported project seeks to help GoM implement these
water sector reform initiatives.

The project development objectives are to strengthen the state’s capacity for multi -sectoral planning, development, and sustainable management of the water
resources; and to improve irrigation service delivery and productivity of irrigated agriculture. The project’s four componen ts provide support for
institutional reforms and capacity building in water resources management, as well as irrigation service delivery and complementary investments in
improving and modernizing physical assets They are:

       Water Sector Institutional Restructuring and Capacity Building: Supports the establishment and operationalization of the Maharashtra Water
        Resources Regulatory Authority; restructuring of the existing Maharashtra Krishna Valley Development Corporation into the Maharashtra Krishna Valley
        Water Resources Corporation as a river basin agency, and its capacity building; restructuring and capacity building of the Water Resources Department;
        strengthening and capacity building of the Water and Land Management Institute; and the establishment of an integrated computerized information
        system.
       Improving Irrigation Service Delivery and Management: Supports participatory rehabilitation and modernization of about 286 selected irrigation
        schemes covering about 670,000 hectares of Culturable Command Area; enhancement of the safety of 291 dams; formation and capacity building of
        Water Users’ Associations in 286 selected irrigation schemes; implementation of improved water management practices and instruments in six selected
        irrigation schemes; strengthening of agriculture support services; and implementation of a social and environmental management plan.
       Innovative Pilots: Supports four pilots of user-centered aquifer level groundwater management, and four pilots of innovative irrigated agriculture.
       Project Management: Supports the state level Project Preparation and Management Unit; monitoring and evaluation; and an information, education,
        and communication campaign to create awareness about the project initiatives.

Key Results Achieved:
 The state Water Resources Regulatory Authority has been established and is operational, and the Water Resources Department has been restructured.
 Water User Organizations have been established in selected projects.
 Water use efficiency has increased by 37.5 percent against targeted 30 percent.
 Net increase in agriculture income has increased by 29.5 percent against targeted 20 percent.
 Water entitlement has been issued to 69 percent of Water Users’ Associations under the project, and canal distribution system s have been transferred to
    63 percent of the water user organizations for further irrigation management.

Implementing Agency: Water Resources Department, Government of Maharashtra, Mantralaya, Mumbai, and Maharashtra.




                                                                               53
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Madhya Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project
Key Dates:
Approved: August 7, 2004
Effective: January 11, 2005
Closing: June 30, 2015

Financier                             Financing*     Disbursed      Undisbursed
IBRD                                       387.4         259.5             128
Government of Madhya Pradesh                47.0
Total Project Cost                         434.4
 *US$ millions; as of January 31, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: It is vital to improve the performance of irrigation systems and reform India’s irrigation sector, since irrigation is an essential
input for a successful and profitable agriculture sector. In Madhya Pradesh, one of India’s low -income states, irrigated agriculture uses about 90 percent of
water resources, which are increasingly under stress from population growth and competing demands from other - non-agricultural - users. Climate change
may also negatively impact water availability and distribution. There is a large gap between the irrigated area developed in Madhya Pradesh and the actual
area under irrigation, as many systems are deteriorated. Considering these issues and constraints, there needs to be an increased focus on integrated water
resources management and irrigation system modernization, including provision of a central role for water user associations (WUAs). Developing effective
associations that are technically and financially sustainable and able to manage sections of irrigation system, is a long-term activity requiring lots of support
and capacity building.

The Madhya Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project addresses these issues, and focuses on: (i) overall water resources management and irrigation
sector reform; (ii) reform of the Water Resources Department (WRD) to be able to not just focus on irrigation scheme planning and development, but also on
scheme water management and WUA development; (iii) rehabilitation and modernization of medium- and large-scale irrigation schemes, including the
lower order systems; and (iv) support by selective line agencies, agriculture, horticulture, and fisheries, to maximize the benefits of the improved irrigation
systems.

The project’s development objective is to improve productivity of water for sustainable growth and poverty reduction in selected focus river basins
(Chambal, Sindh, Betwa, Ken, and Tons) of Madhya Pradesh. The project has three major components:

•    Water Resources Management - Institutions and Instruments: sets up the institutions for integrated water resources management and river basin
     planning;
•    Service Delivery - Irrigation and Drainage Institutions: transforms the department into a modern and efficient organization, including through
     separation of irrigation management from irrigation development, adoption of modern technologies for irrigation management, and support to WUAs;
     and
•    Improving Productivity of Selected Existing Irrigation and Drainage Assets: rehabilitates and modernizes about 290 schemes with a command area
     of around 500,000 hectares, and extension and advisory support to increase agricultural, horticultural, and fisheries production.

Key Results Achieved: As a result of the project interventions (in particular, rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and improvement in water
management):
 122,000 ha in 71 schemes have been provided with operational irrigation and drainage services;
 Productivity of water for wheat has increased from about 0.3 kg per cubic meter of water before the project to over 0.6 kg per cubic meter of water
    (determined for sample of schemes);
 Fish production has increased from 10-20 kg/ha of water spread area to 40-50 kg/ha of water spread area; and
 Average farm income of project beneficiaries has doubled from about Rs 16,000 per ha to over Rs 30,000 per ha.

Implementing Agency: Madhya Pradesh Water Resources Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh.




                                                                              54
                                                   INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Mumbai Urban Transport Project- 2A
    Key Dates:
    Approved: June 29,2010
    Effective: October 8, 2010
    Closing: June 15, 2015

    Financier                        Financing*     Disbursed        Undisbursed
    IBRD                                   385            72.3               312.7
    Government of India                   540.5          123.7               416.8
    Total Project Cost                    925.5          196.0               729.5
    *US$ millions; as of January 31, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Like other fast-growing urban centers in India, the Mumbai region faces enormous challenges, including an
acute inadequacy of transport infrastructure. The suburban rail system is the lifeline of Mumbai, carrying about 7.4 million passengers daily
and 2.7 billion annually. In the early 2000s, the Bank supported the government of Maharashtra and Indian Railways’ efforts t o ease
transport constraints in the megalopolis through the first Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP). TranSforM, a comprehensive transport
study for the Mumbai region, carried out under the MUTP, recommended further investment in the suburban rail system as a priority, in
recognition of suburban rail’s dominant role in the region’s transport network. MUTP-2A is the follow-up investment in the rail sector,
aimed at helping the government respond to continued growing demand for suburban rail transport in the Mumbai metropolitan area.

The project development objective is to improve the passenger carrying capacity, operational efficiency, level of comfort of, and the
institutional capacity of entities involved in the suburban rail system of Mumbai metropolitan area. The project has four components:

      EMU Rolling Stock Fleet Increase: 864 additional EMU (electric multiple unit) cars will be procured, increasing the fleet to 3,124.
      Conversion of Power Supply from Direct Current (DC) to Alternating Current (AC): Includes improvements to signals and telecoms
       in three sections of the Mumbai railway network.
      EMU Maintenance Facilities and Stabling Lines: New stabling lines will be built to accommodate the fleet increase.
      Capacity Strengthening and Technical Assistance: Strategic and tactical studies will be carried out, as well as capacity building and
       training.

The over-stretched Mumbai suburban rail system also suffers from a poor safety record. A demonstration component has been added by
restructuring the project to address safety-related issues and increase safety awareness.

Key Achievements and Expected Results:
 The project will increase the number of train services in peak hour (presently varying from 14.4 to 17 trains per hour) to 18 trains per
    hour on all lines.
 Trains currently comprise 9 or 12 cars each, and these will be converted to 12 cars each, resulting in increased carrying capacity.
 Improved system efficiency will result in reduced journey time varying from about 2.5 percent to 8 percent on different lines.
 The new trains being procured are more energy efficient, with a regenerative braking system, resulting in reduction of energy
    consumption by about 30 percent from conventional trains.
 Technical assistance studies under the project are helping the implementing agency to build capacity and plan a more efficient
    suburban rail system.

Implementing Agency: Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation Limited, a jointly owned company of the Ministry of Railways and government
of Maharashtra.

Key Development Partners: Ministry of Railways, government of Maharashtra, various agencies of Ministry of Railways, Mumbai
Metropolitan Region Development Authority.




                                                                      55
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: National Agricultural Innovation Project
Key Dates:
Approved: April 18, 2006
Effective: September 18, 2006
Closing: June 30, 2014

    Financier                                Financing*       Disbursed        Undisbursed
    IDA                                           190.0           179.1               22.2
    Government of India                            50.0
    Total Project Cost                            240.0
    *US$ millions; Revised, as of Jan 31, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Indian agriculture needs a paradigm shift from resource- and input-based growth to knowledge- and science-based growth.
With limited scope for area expansion the main sources of agricultural growth in the future will be enhanced productivity, profitability, and competitiveness.
In this, agricultural R&D will be vital and the flow of knowledge and innovation critical. Against this, the project supports development and implementation of
innovations through collaboration among farmers, the private sector, civil society, and public sector organizations. The project is the fourth part of a long-
lasting engagement between the Bank and the government of India to support the development of the national agricultural research system.

The project’s development objective is to contribute to the sustainable transformation of the Indian agricultural sector, from one with a primary focus on food
self-sufficiency to one in which a market orientation is equally important for poverty alleviation and income generation. The specific objective is to accelerate
the collaborative development and application of agricultural innovations between public research organizations, farmers, the private sector, and other
stakeholders. Project components cover:

      Management of Change in the Indian National Agricultural Research System: supports the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) to evolve
       into an “agent for change” in the national agricultural research system. This includes support to strengthen information, co mmunication, and
       dissemination systems; business planning and development; policy analysis and visioning; and remodeling financial management systems.
      Research: on production to consumption system; sustainable livelihood security; and frontier areas of agricultural research.

Key Results Achieved:
 A total of 188 sub-projects, including 91 public-private partnerships involving 174 private sector organizations, have been established for carrying out
    agricultural innovations. This is the first time private organizations from outside ICAR and the State Agricultural University system have been involved
    as partners in carrying out publicly-funded agricultural research in the country.
 Research and development activities are yielding some promising results: 59 patents and/or intellectual property protection applications were
    submitted; 247 research papers were published in high-impact peer-reviewed journals; 63 technologies and products were commercially transferred to
    private entrepreneurs; 10 business planning and development units were established in selected ICAR institutions and State Agricultural Universities;
    and 50 new rural industries were piloted.
 The project is also helping establish high-performance computing facilities as part of a national agricultural bio-informatics grid, developing a financial
    management and management information system to connect all ICAR institutions on a real-time basis, and has greatly improved access to e-resources
    for agricultural research to scientists across the country. Encouraged by initial success, during the next five years ICAR plans to allocate their own funds
    to further scale-up and mainstream a number of activities piloted under the project.

Implementing Agency: Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Ministry of Agriculture, government of India.

Key Development Partners: 41 State Agricultural Universities from all the main Indian states are also directly involved with project implementation.




                                                                              56
                                                  INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: National Aids Control Support Project
Key Dates:
Approved: May 1, 2013
Effective: Not yet effective
Closing: December 31, 2017

    Financier                              Financing*         Disbursed      Undisbursed
    IDA                                          255              16.48           238.52
    Government of India                          255              16.48           238.52
    Total Project Cost                           510              32.96           477.04
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: India launched the first National AIDS Control Program (NACP I) in 1992, focusing on blood safety,
prevention among high risk groups, raising awareness among the general population, and improving surveillance. In the second phase
(NACP II, 1999-2006), India continued to expand the program at the state level, with greater emphasis on targeted interventions and
involving NGOs. In the third phase (NACP III, 2007-2012), India has scaled up targeted HIV prevention interventions for most at risk
population groups and further expanded the surveillance system. The World Bank supported all three phases of the NACP.

The goals of the fourth phase of the NACP are to accelerate reversal of the HIV epidemic and integrate responses. The National AIDS
Control Support Project will support the fourth phase of NACP (2012–2017), with a focus on HIV prevention and targeted interventions.
The project will contribute to three components of the NACP IV: (i) prevention; (ii) behavior change; and (iii) institutional strengthening.
Two other components of NACP IV - provision of care, treatment and support to people living with HIV and AIDS; and strategic
information systems, including disease surveillance - will be supported by the national budget, with technical and financial support from
other donors.

The project development objective is to increase safe behavior among high-risk groups in order to contribute to the national goal of
reversing the HIV epidemic by 2017. The project has three components:

      Scaling Up Targeted Prevention Interventions: Will support scaling up targeted interventions, with the aim of reaching hard-to-
       reach population groups which do not yet access and use the prevention services of the program, and saturating coverage of such
       population groups. This component will also support the state training resource center in capacity building for preventive
       interventions at the state level, and will focus on the bridge population, i.e. migrants and truckers.
      Behavior Change Communications: Will include: (i) communication programs and campaigns for risk reduction and safe behavior,
       advocacy, social mobilization and behavior change communication (BCC) to integrate people living with HIV and AIDS, and hard-to-
       reach groups, into society, and encourage changes in social attitudes to reduce the stigma and discrimination that they face,
       particularly at health facilities; as well as increase demand for and effective use of testing and counseling services; (ii) financing a
       research and evaluation agency to assess the cost-effectiveness and program impact of BCC activities; and (iii) establishing and
       evaluating a helpline at the national and state level to further increase access to information and services.
      Institutional Strengthening: Will support innovations to enhance performance management, including fiduciary management;
       strengthen procurement and supply chain management; strengthening Technical Support Units over a three to four year period to
       ensure quality of targeted interventions; supporting the services of an agent to procure opioid substitution therapy; disseminating
       best practices; and financing the necessary audits.

Key Results Expected: The project aims to achieve the following key results:
 Increase safe behavior among high-risk groups. Indicated by 85 percent of female sex workers, and 65 percent of men having sex
    with men, reporting using a condom;
 Maintain/increase access to targeted interventions to prevent HIV among populations at highest risk. Indicated by targeted
    interventions reaching 90 percent of female sex workers, and 80 percent of high-risk men having sex with men, in 2017;
 Scale-up prevention interventions for bridge population groups. Indicated by 90 percent of planned prevention interventions for
    migrants and truckers implemented by 2017;
 Strengthen the institutional capacity and program management of the national program. Indicated by 90 percent of states
    submitting completed audit reports to the Department of AIDS Control within agreed time limits, and 80 percent of NGOs
    contracted as per the States AIDS Control societies, by 2017; and
 Increase demand for HIV services through behavior change communications. Indicated by 80 percent of high burden districts
    implementing BCC strategy and plan, with focus on demand generation and stigma reduction, by 2017.

Implementing Agency: Department of AIDS Control, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, government of India.

Key Development Partners: United Nations AIDS, United Nations Development Program, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.




                                                                      57
                                                        INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



                           INDIA: National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (APL I)
Key Dates:
Approved: June 22, 2010
Effective: March 30, 2011
Closing: October 31, 2015


    Financier                                  Financing*    Disbursed       Undisbursed
    IDA                                           255           72.9            199
    Governments of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh       65
    Total Project Cost                            320
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report


Background and Objectives: India is highly vulnerable to natural hazards, particularly cyclones, floods, earthquakes, and landslides.
Approximately 5,700 km of the total 7,500 km of coastline is exposed to severe cyclones, and an estimated 40 percent of India ’s 1.2 billion people
live within 100 km of the coast. Between 1980 and 2000, on average 370 million people were exposed to cyclones. Up to half of all tropical
cyclones affecting South Asia hit the Indian coastline, which is particularly susceptible to storm surges due to a shallow coastal shelf and particular
tidal characteristics. The economic impact is also considerable; studies indicate natural disaster losses of as much as 2 percent of India’s Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) and as much as 12 percent of federal government revenues. Low-lying terrain, high population density, and limited
community awareness make the population in India’s coastal states and union territories extremely vulnerable. As climate cha nge and weather
variability become more pronounced, hazard events are likely to increase. The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project supports the government
of India in its efforts to mitigate cyclone-related risk and integrate disaster mitigation into the long-term national development process.

The development objectives of the project are to reduce vulnerability of coastal communities living in the vulnerable coastal states and Union
Territories of India to cyclone and other hydro-meteorological hazards. The project is the first phase of a proposed three-phased adaptable
program loan. The first phase of the project covers the states of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh. The project has four components:

       Early Warning System and Capacity building for Coastal Communities: aims to reduce the vulnerability of coastal communities by
        addressing the existing gaps in disseminating warnings to communities, and in piloting and using new technology.
       Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure: aims to improve access to emergency shelters, evacuation, and protection against cyclones and
        other hydro-meteorological hazards such as wind storms, flooding, and storm surge in high risk areas.
       Technical Assistance for National and State Level Capacity Building and Knowledge Creation: aims to help understand risk and
        vulnerabilities better, and prepare key institutions to address them effectively, across India. Activities include studies, assessments, training
        and capacity building activities related to risk and damage assessments, development of training modules and action plans and implementing
        them through identified partner agencies.
       Project Management and Implementation Support: provides support for project management by financing incremental operating costs for
        the project management unit and implementation units, nodal units in line departments and the National Institute of Disaster Management
        (NIDM), office equipment, training and exposure visits, and consulting services for specialist activities.

Key Results Achieve and Expected:
 About 36 cyclone shelters, 190 roads, and 11 bridges have been completed. By 2015, 297 shelters, 1,050 km of roads, and 160 kilometres of
    embankment strengthening work will have been completed.
 By the end of the project 60 percent of the coastal population will have access to cyclone shelters, up from 30 percent at the start of the
    project.

    Key Development Partners: The Bank team is working closely with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), National Disaster Management
    Authority (NDMA), National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM), Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA), and the
    Department of Revenue and Disaster Management in Andhra Pradesh.




                                                                            58
                                                         INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: National Dairy Support Project
Key Dates:
Approved: March 15, 2012
Effective: June 12, 2012
Closing: December 31, 2017

 Financier                            Financing1           Disbursed          Undisbursed2
 IDA                                     240.7                 5.1               235.6
 Government of India                     39.1
 Other (Communities)                     62.8
 Total Project Cost                      342.6
 1US$ millions; as of March 1, 2014.
 2US$97 million cancelled as of Feb 26, 2014 due to exchange rate fluctuation

 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Milk is the single largest agricultural commodity in the country in terms of value of output. Almost half of rural households
depend on dairy for their livelihood. About 80 percent of farmers are small and marginal, typically owning one to three milk-producing animals. But
average milk yield is low compared to international standards, and the growth rate of domestic milk production has slowed in recent years while domestic
demand continues to grow as incomes increase and food preferences shift. The gap between supply and demand has translated into higher milk prices,
which is of concern in a country with a large vegetarian population for whom milk and milk products are an important part of food and nutritional security.

This project supports the National Dairy Plan (NDP) prepared by India’s National Dairy Development Board. The NDP is a multi -state initiative to improve
milk animal productivity, strengthen and expand infrastructure for milk procurement at the village level, and enhance milk processing capacity and
marketing over a fifteen-year horizon. With this project, the Bank is re-engaging in dairy development at the national level in India by supporting the first
phase of the NDP through investments designed to enhance animal productivity and improve farmer access to organized milk marketing channels.
Improving productivity in the Indian dairy sector can potentially contribute to improved food security and stability of national - and global - milk prices, as
well as to improved incomes of millions of smallholder milk producers.

The project development objective is to increase the productivity of milk-producing animals and improve market access of milk producers in project areas.
The project finances three main components:
    Productivity Enhancement: Aims to increase bovine productivity through support for improved animal breeding and nutrition services;
    Milk Collection and Bulking: Aims to increase market access of milk producers by investing in village-level milk collection and bulking facilities; and
    Project Management and Learning: Supports management, coordination, monitoring, learning, and evaluation efforts related to the project.

Key Expected Results:
Expected results include an increase in milk production per animal, the proportion of ‘in -milk’ female animals to adult female animals, and the share of milk
sold to the organized milk processing sector. The project targets production of 2,500 genetically improved bulls; production of an additional 55 million
doses of high quality semen; coverage of 2.7 million animals under a ration balancing program; and organizing an additional 1.2 million dairy farmers into
milk producer organizations.

Implementing Agency: National Dairy Development Board.

Key Development Partners: Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture, government of India.




                                                                             59
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: National Ganga River Basin Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: May 31, 2011
    Effective: August 18, 2011
    Closing: December 31, 2019

    Financier                           Financing*          Disbursed            Undisbursed
    IBRD                                    801                 2                    799
    IDA                                    199*                 45                   154
    Borrower/Recipient                      556
    Total Project Cost                     1,156
    *US$ millions; As of end-February 2014; IDA credit is US$ 188.88 million (exchange adjusted)

Background and Objective: The Ganga river, despite being highly revered and the primary water resource for the heartland of India, is seriously polluted
and under extreme environmental stress. The river suffers from high levels of organic and bacterial pollution, resulting in a wide range of negative impacts,
including on human health, agriculture, urban services, and the environment. The pollution in the Ganga is primarily a result of inadequate infrastructure, the
weak capacity of local water and wastewater utilities in the basin, and the poor state of environmental monitoring and regulation. In 2009, the government of
India developed a new vision for clean-up and conservation of the Ganga, leading to the establishment of the National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA)
with the mandate to develop and implement a multi-sector program. The World Bank’s National Ganga River Basin Project provides upstream support to the
NGRBA for institutional development, program design, and early investments. This is a flagship project of the World Bank and the government of India, and
has high priority in India due to the scale of the challenge, and the religious, historical, and cultural importance of the Ganga River in India.

The project development objectives are to support the NGRBA in: (a) building the capacity of its nascent operational-level institutions so they can manage the
long-term Ganga clean-up and conservation program; and (b) implementing a diverse set of demonstrative investments for reducing point-source pollution
loads in a sustainable manner at priority locations on the Ganga. Project components cover:

      Institutional Development: Including operationalization of the new NGRBA, communications campaigns for river cleaning, and technical assistance for
       city service providers and environmental regulators.
      Infrastructure investments in four sectors: Wastewater collection and treatment; industrial pollution control; solid waste management; and riverfront
       development, with investments to be selected according to a framework approach.

The project supports activities in the center and in the five states through which the mainstream of the river runs: Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
Jharkhand, and West Bengal. Three of these are low-income and one is special category. The project is currently being restructured.

Key Expected Results: Progress towards achieving the project’s development objective is measured by three outcome indicators:
 Average rating of NGRBA-related institutions;
 Volume of untreated wastewater prevented from entering the Ganga due to project interventions;
 Improvements in river water quality at targeted locations with significant investments.

A clean river would mean the conservation of a cultural icon in India and abroad and the economic lifeline of hundreds of millions of people, and a huge
savings in health costs by reducing the burden of disease associated with inadequate sanitation.

Implementing Agencies: At the center: the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) in the Ministry of Environment and Forests, and the Central Pollution
Control Board. In the states: new State Program Management Groups (SPMGs) in Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, and West Bengal. Below the
SPMGs are multiple executing agencies, mostly large parastatals such as the Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam (UPJN) in UP, and the Bihar Urban Infrastructure
Development Corporation (BUIDCO) in Bihar.

Key Development Partners: AusAID, DFID and Norway have supported the project through trust funds. AusAID has supported an important industrial
pollution control project in Kanpur and plans to support a proposed study tour to Australia.




                                                                                60
                                                         INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: National Highway Authority of India Technical Assistance Project
Key Dates:
Approved: November 30, 2010
Effective: March 21, 2011
Closing: July 31, 2016

 Financier                             Financing*         Disbursed           Undisbursed
 IBRD                                      45                4.6                 40.4
 Government of India                       10
 Total Project Cost                        55
 *US$ millions, as of February 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: The total road network in India is about 3.3 million km, of which about 2 percent are national highways and expressways
carrying about 40 percent of total road traffic. Recognizing that the poor condition of national highways could impede high economic growth, in 2000 the
government of India launched the National Highway Development Project (NHDP), the largest highway project ever undertaken in the country. The
responsibility for implementation was entrusted to the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI). The prime objective of the NHDP was to undertake
widening of strategic NH corridors. Prior to implementation of NHDP, the road sector faced persistent underfunding and grappled with poor institutional
capacity to manage its network and programs. The existing network was neglected and the sector experienced a trend of “build-neglect-re-build”. With the
launch of NHDP, the road sector could attract considerable private financing in addition to public funding through levying additional taxes on fuel. However,
in recent times there have been difficulties in attracting private financing and new areas of concerns have emerged: weaknesses in project preparation; delays
in land acquisition; large variations during construction; ineffective contract administration resulting in high numbers of contractual disputes; human
resource constraints; and lack of safety awareness. The government of India is keen to address these challenges by improving NHAI’s program management
and operational efficiency.


The project development objective is to assist NHAI in adopting appropriate practices that would enhance its program management and operational
efficiency. The project focuses on Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of NHAI through technical assistance in project preparation and
management, research, training and capacity building, asset management and resource planning, Public Private Partnerships (PPP), socioeconomic and
environment impact evaluation, safety, HIV/AIDS prevention, and governance by adopting appropriate approaches and practices.


Key Achieved and Expected Results:
 Implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) to computerize NHAI portfolio - the bidding process to engage System Integrator is ongoing.
 Strengthening Design Review Process - consultants have been engaged.
 System of third party quality audit established in NHAI - consultants to review the current system and propose new system are on board.
 Implementation of Asset Management System - NHAI is in the process of engaging consultants.
 Corporate Governance Assessment of NHAI is being carried out by a consultant.
 NHAI is in the process of engaging a Road Safety Advisor.
 NHAI is in the process of establishing a performance monitoring system for its developers, contractors and consultants.

Implementing Agency: National Highways Authority of India.




                                                                             61
                                                    INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: National Highways Interconnectivity Improvement Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: October 29, 2013
    Effective: not yet effective
    Closing: June 30, 2019

    Financier                      Financing     Disbursed     Undisbursed
    IBRD                              500                0           500
    Government of India             646.05
    Total Project Cost             1146.05



Background and Objectives: Government of India (GoI) is keen to sustain its achievements in economic growth, which has been at 8 percent
per annum in recent years. Improving the level and quality of infrastructure services will be critical for this goal. National highways, at 82,755
km, represents only 1.9 percent of the total road length in the country, but carry over 40 percent of the total road traffic. While the
government invested significantly in the core national highways under the National Highway Development Program, the remaining 43 percent
of the national highway network have not received adequate funding until recently. Considerable stretches of the non-NHDP network require
strengthening and upgrading, and suffer from major connectivity gaps. In recent years, there has been an increasing recognition of the
importance of the non-NHDP network. It holds the key to ease poverty and share prosperity, and for achieving the government’s objective of
equitable and inclusive growth, as it often serves as the primary or sole link with remote, economically lagging or other challenged regions.
The government of India has identified a portion of non-NHDP roads for priority development through external financing and budgetary
allocations.

The project development objective is to improve national highway network connectivity to less developed areas and low-income states, and
enhance the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) to better manage the highway network. The
project consists of three components:

      Road Improvement and Maintenance Component: will upgrade and maintain national highways in three low-income states (Bihar,
       Orissa and Rajasthan) and less developed regions in two middle-income states (Karnataka and West Bengal).
      Institutional Development Component: will enhance the institutional capacity of MoRTH to better manage its highway network through
       supporting specific interventions in the areas of process improvements; network monitoring and management; financing; governance
       and accountability; and training.
      Road Safety Component: will aim to improve road safety through updating Indian standards and regulations related to road safety;
       improving road accident data collection and analysis at the central level and in project states; strengthening road safety capacity at the
       central level, and social marketing and awareness campaigns along project roads.

Key Expected Results: Under the project, about 1,120 km of existing single/intermediate lane roads will be upgraded to two-lane standard,
and maintained for five years after construction. More specific expected results include:

       Increase in the length of non-NHDP national highways in good and fair condition from 65 percent to 68.25 percent;
       On project roads, percent reduction in average travel time and average vehicle operating cost; and no increase in fatalities in road
        crashes.
       Improved accident data management system and asset management system developed and implemented in at least 3 states.

Implementing Agency: Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH), government of India.




                                                                       62
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: National Rural Livelihoods Project
Key Dates:
Approved: July 5, 2011
Effective: July 18, 2011
Restructured: May 24,2013
Closing: December 31, 2017
 Financier                               Financing*         Disbursed         Undisbursed
 IDA                                           500              45.98              454.02
 Government of India                           150              15.32              134.68
 Total Project Cost                            650              61.30              588.70
 *US$ millions; as of February 2014.
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: Despite high GDP growth rate over the past decade, over 250 million rural people in India (45 million households) remain
locked in poverty, living on less than US$1 per day. One of the key challenges facing India today is how to successfully translate high economic growth into
inclusive growth that leads to significant and accelerated rural poverty reduction. Rural livelihoods programs are designed to help tackle this immense
development challenge.


The Bank’s engagement on rural livelihood programs dates back to a series of projects in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and Rajasthan
started in 2000. Since then, the Bank has invested more than a US$1 billion in eleven livelihood projects at the state level. Thirty million rural poor have been
mobilized to form their own institutions, enabling them to access livelihood opportunities and build social, financial, and economic capital. The rural poor
have been empowered socially and economically, enabling them to build linkages with state and market institutions. They have higher savings, more access to
credit, livelihoods and public services, and households and communities benefit from increased public and private investment. The most vulnerable groups
(women, Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled Tribes) have been socially empowered, enabling them to build social and financial capital and increase access to
growth opportunities. One of the main lessons learned from this decade-long engagement is that significant investment in building the institutional platforms
of rural poor households is a critical foundation for sustainable poverty reduction. The National Rural Livelihoods Project s upports the government of India’s
efforts to scale up these state-level interventions to the national level through support to the National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM)—Aajeevika. Bank
financing supports the program in 13 high poverty (also mostly low-income) states.


The project’s development objective is to establish efficient and effective institutional platforms for the rural poor that enable them to increase household
income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial and selected public services. Project components cover:

    Institutional and Human Capacity Development: Aims to transform the role of the Ministry of Rural Development into that of providing high quality
     technical assistance in the field of rural livelihoods promotion.
    State Livelihood Support: Aims to support state governments in establishing necessary institutional structures and mechanisms to implement NRLM
     activities from the state- to the block-level, including support to forming institutions for the rural poor.
    Innovation and Partnership Support: Aims to create an institutional mechanism to identify, nurture, and support innovative ideas from across the
     country to address the livelihood needs of the rural poor.
    Project Implementation Support: Aims to strengthen the National Mission Management Unit for effective project management at the national level to
     develop key systems and processes to coordinate and manage the project and the NRLM.


Key results (achieved & expected) :
 All the thirteen participating states have set up the institutional architecture of the State Missions.
 The program is intensively working with nearly 1.9 million households and 166,000 Self Help Groups. These SHGs have saved US$19 million so far and
     nearly US$88 million worth of credit has been leveraged cumulatively from the commercial banks
 It is expected that about 6 million identified rural poor households will be mobilized into community institutions, US$100 million in cumulative savings
     would be made by rural poor households through thrift, $500 million in bank credit would be leveraged by rural poor households from the formal
     financial sector, one million rural poor households would have improved farm productivity, livestock productivity, and market access, and 500,000 new
     jobs would be created for the poor.

Key Development Partners: The project recognizes partnerships as key implementation arrangements and encourages the states to directly access technical
and knowledge support from reputed resource organizations, especially in the following areas:
  Partnerships with home grown models like IFAD/DFID/EAP, sharing the same ethos. Some of the ready candidates include MAVIM, OTELP, JTELP, WDC,
     and NGOs with track records.
  Knowledge Partners for programmatic verticals like BIRD (Financial Services), PRADAN (Agriculture and Ecological Services), BAIF (Livestock), Landesa
     (Land Access), FAO (Agriculture and Livestock).




                                                                              63
                                                         INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: North East Rural Livelihoods Project
Key Dates:
Approved: December 20, 2011
Effective: March 12, 2012
Closing: March 31, 2017

 Financier                            Financing*       Disbursed         Undisbursed
 IDA                                           130                4              120.6
 Government of India                             14
 Total Project Cost                            144
 *US$ millions; as of Jan 31, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report


Background and Objective: More than 44 million people live in the North East region of India, 85 percent of whom live in rural areas, and 35 percent of
whom are below the poverty line. Despite its rich natural resources and relatively good human development indicators, the region lags behind the rest of
India in economic growth. The development challenge in the North East is compounded by geo-political isolation, protracted insurgency in some areas, and
recurring natural disaster. Agriculture remains the backbone of the economy, contributing close to 30 percent of regional GDP and providing employment to
over 75 percent of the people. The traditional jhum (shifting) cultivation - the predominant agriculture production method in the region - is no longer
economically and environmentally viable due to increasing population pressure and shorter fallow periods, which have led to reduced soil fertility and lower
productivity. Despite the relatively high literacy rate, the region also suffers from an alarmingly high youth unemployment rate of 14 percent, mainly as a
result of high drop-out rates and a lack of skills.

Since 2000, the World Bank in India has supported empowerment and livelihood enhancement through seven state level projects, which have mobilized over
30 million rural poor to enable them to access livelihood opportunities and build social, financial, and economic capital. The programs have resulted in
increased savings, improved access to credit, livelihoods, and public services, and have contributed to the social empowerment of the excluded castes and
indigenous people. Experience from these projects, and from an International Fund for Agriculture and Development (IFAD)-financed project in three north
east states (Assam, Meghalaya, and Manipur), identified the need for: (i) effective skill development for youth; (ii) linking community-based organizations
with wider markets; (iii) improving communities’ access to credit and other financial services by forming sustainable institu tions for the poor; and iv)
convergence with other government programs. The North East Rural Livelihoods Project (NERLP) aims to empower the rural poor and improve their
livelihoods in the states of Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, and Tripura.

The development objective is to improve rural livelihoods, especially for women, unemployed youths, and the most disadvantaged, in the participating north
eastern states. The project has four components:

     Social Empowerment: empowers the rural communities and creates sustainable institutions so they manage common activities around microfinance,
      livelihoods, and natural resource management.
     Economic Empowerment: develops the capacity of rural communities to plan and manage funds for economic initiatives.
     Partnership Development: with various service providers, resource institutions, and public and private sector organizations to bring finance,
      technology, and marketing support, so that the community groups are able to improve their livelihoods.
     Project Management: facilitates implementation, coordination, learning, and quality enhancement.

Key Expected and Achieved Results: By project end, it is expected that:
 60 percent of female Self-Help Group (SHG) members will increase their incomes by 30 percent.
 30 percent of project-benefited unemployed youths will be employed.
 50 percent of the most disadvantaged households will achieve a minimum of 30 percent improvement in livelihood indices.
 70 percent of the SHGs formed and supported by the project are institutionally sustainable.

Implementing Agency: North East Livelihood Promotion Society (NELPS), which was set up by the Ministry of Development of North East Region,
government of India.

Key Development Partners: North Eastern Region Community Resource Management Project (NERCOMP) financed by IFAD
North East Council, Ministry of Development of North East Region, government of India.




                                                                            64
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Orissa Community Tanks Management Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: September 30, 2007
    Effective: March 17, 2009
    Closing: June 30, 2016

    Financier                              Financing*       Disbursed          Undisbursed
    IBRD                                     38.47             7.6               30.87
    IDA                                      28.47             7.5               20.97
    Government of India                       7.9
    Water User Associations                    3
    Total cost                               77.84
    *US$ millions; as of March, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: The project combines rehabilitating community water tanks with strengthening water user associations and agricultural
development in a single package in order to maximize the economic returns from scarce water resources. In addition to developing tested practices and
processes that can be used to support development of tank-based livelihoods, the project will establish a nucleus of ‘good practice’ water users associations
which could then be used as learning and training centers at other tanks. The project provides integrated support to tank-based livelihoods and advances the
concept of participatory water management. All successful practices developed and tested by the project will be embedded in the government's own work at
other tanks.

The development objective is to help tank-based producers to improve agricultural productivity, and help water user associations to manage tank systems
effectively. The project covers 324 community tanks with a total command area of about 60,000 hectares, and expects to benefit over 150,000 farmers.
Activities at each tank include the establishment and support to water users associations, rehabilitation and modernization of tanks and respective irrigation
systems, and general support to agriculture development. The project’s three components are:

      Institutional strengthening: enables community-based institutions – water users associations, fishing cooperative societies, farmer interest groups—
       to assume greater responsibility for tank system management and improving tank-based agricultural livelihoods.
      Tanks systems and irrigation improvements: improves the physical and operational performance of tank systems, ensure safe operation of tank
       structures, and improve reliability of irrigation water supply by rehabilitating and modernizing tank systems that cover areas ranging from 40 to 2,000
       hectares.
      Agricultural livelihoods support services: complements irrigation system rehabilitation works with the objective of enhancing the productivity of
       irrigated lands and increasing water use efficiency and/or cropping intensity.

Results:
Rehabilitation of about 61 tanks (18 percent) has been completed. Works on remaining tanks are under implementation. The main expected results at project
completion are an increase in area irrigated, improved water availability for poor tail-end farmers, and an increase in value of output per unit of water. The
district cluster teams have organized awareness campaigns, completed training modules and identified and trained 471 community resource persons. The
training approach has been innovative, with the master trainers carrying out practical, hands-on training for each executive committee in their villages. An
agricultural water management unit has been established and a detailed study carried out to understand how water is currently managed by WUAs. The
project is supporting improved marketing initiatives, and has supported a banana and papaya value chain on 50 acres out of 300 acres owned, planted, and
monitored exclusively by women groups. Similarly, an onion value chain is being implemented in 1,500 acres across two districts through small and marginal
farmers. On the livestock front, about 439 women have been trained as poultry vaccinators and work for the concerned line department for vaccination and
de-worming. The project has also shown encouraging progress is conducting demonstrations in improved fish production practices.

Implementing Agency: Orissa Community Tank Development and Management Society, Department of Water Resources, government of Orissa.




                                                                              65
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: OCL II India Ltd
Key Date:
Committed: February 6, 2013

IFC Financing (US$ million)
Instrument                             Amount            Disbursed         Undisbursed
 IFC A Loan                              40.0               20.0              20.0

Background and Objectives: OCL India Limited is one of the leading cement producers in eastern India. It is the second largest slag cement producer in
India, has a production capacity of 3.8 million tons per annum and a market share of about 25 percent in Odisha, a low-income state in India. OCL is building a
greenfield cement grinding plant with a capacity of 1.35 million tons per annum in West Bengal. In FY13, IFC committed a $40 million loan for a $102 million
cement grinding unit in West Bengal. Once this project is completed, OCL’s cement capacity is expected to increase to 5.15 mi llion tons per annum.

The project will help OCL: (i) integrate its clinker operations in Odisha and the grinding operations in West Bengal; (ii) reduce total delivered cost of cement
to end consumers in West Bengal; and (iii) help OCL maintain market share in all its existing markets, including Odisha.

In 2007, IFC provided a loan in Indian Rupee equivalent to US$50 million to help finance expansion of 1.32 million tons per annum clinker capacity and a
greenfield cement grinding capacity of 0.9 million tons per annum in Odisha. This project was completed in 2009.

IFC’s value addition stems from its ability to engage strategically with the company in the long -term. IFC’s support and valuable inputs to this project on
sustainability in a challenging location in eastern India have had significant positive social impact.

Key Achievements and Expected Results:
The project is expected to have substantial development impacts, including:
 Direct and indirect employment creation;
 Contribution to overall economic development through local supply linkages;
 Adoption of superior energy efficient technology; and
 Positive climate change impact through substitution of clinker with blast furnace slag in cement production, avoiding greenhouse gas emissions.

The project is expected to encourage other private investors to invest in India’s frontier states. By supporting companies li ke OCL in traditional capital
intensive sectors such as cement, IFC supports the urgent agenda of job creation, particularly in low-income states.

An evaluation conducted in March-April 2012 to assess the impact of IFC’s previous investment in OCL found that in addition to creating 300 direct jobs, the
project also created more than 7,000 new indirect jobs. Abo ut 70 percent of these were for the unskilled, directly reaching the poor in the state. With IFC’s
investment in FY13, the project will create 150 direct and 1,500 indirect permanent jobs.




                                                                              66
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Orissa Rural Livelihoods Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: July 31, 2008
    Effective: March 31, 2009
    Closing: June 30, 2015

    Financier                              Financing*       Disbursed              Undisbursed
    IDA                                         78.14            39.66                   38.47
    Total Project Cost                          75.84            39.66                   38.47
    *US$ millions; as of March 6, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report                                Master Book-Keeper Training Program

Background and Objective: Orissa’s economy has witnessed consistent and high growth rates during the last decade, above the national average, and in
2012-2013 impressively withstood the continuing slowdown of previous years in economic growth. Poverty has declined from 57.2 percent in 2004-2005, to
37 percent in 2009-2010. In terms of real per capita income, however, the state has lagged behind the national average ever since independence. There has
been a transformation in the state’s economy, from agriculture -based to an industry- and service-led economy. The performance of the agriculture sector
continues to be highly volatile, mainly due to the adverse impact of natural shocks such as cyclones, droughts, and floods. T he state’s unemployment rate is
higher than the national rate of unemployment. The cost of living in rural Orissa is one of the lowest in the country. The state is predominately rural, with
more than 85 percent of the population residing in rural areas; this includes high percentages of tribal households. Out of the 30 districts, 19 are Maoist-
affected districts. Access to social, financial, and economic services are below the national averages in the rural areas. The rural areas are relatively under-
serviced by both the public and private sector, and the intensity of this is more prevalent in the tribal districts.

The project development objective is to enhance the socio-economic status of the poor, especially women and disadvantaged groups, in selected blocks of 10
districts in the state of Orissa. The project will help build the capacity of Community Based Organizations of the poor and vulnerable to better manage their
own institutions and livelihood initiatives, and the capacity of households to help them plan and meet credit demand for household and investment needs.
The project has four components:

      Institution Building: Includes (a) community-level institution building; and (b) developing project staff capacity to implement the project effectively.
      Community Investment Fund (CIF): The Fund will transfer financial and technical resources to Panchayat-level and block-level federations of Self Help
       Groups (SHG). CIF grants finance micro investment plans in the areas of institution building, leverage micro-finance, and livelihoods enhancement.
      Livelihood Promotion Fund: This Fund is to increase the share of SHG households in the value chain of key commodities or products. The component is
       primarily focused on enhancing livelihoods by strategic investments in a value-chain.
      Project Management, Knowledge Management, and Replication: To ensure the smooth implementation of project activities, monitoring of project
       implementation progress and outputs/outcomes achieved, and best practice/knowledge sharing from project experience, to be scaled up to other
       districts.

Key Expected and Achieved Results:
 700,000 rural households mobilized into SHGs accessing financial and livelihoods services.
 72 percent of identified poor and extremely poor households included and benefiting from direct project inputs or through linkages.
 US$50 million internal savings mobilized.
 Cumulative US$60 million mobilized from commercial bank linkage.
 70,000 households benefiting from agriculture-based livelihoods.
 2000 producer groups mobilized for benefits from aggregation and market linkage.
 8000 community professionals developed for servicing the poor households in a predictable and sustainable manner.
 50 percent of participating households reported reduced dependency from high cost debt.

Implementing Agency: Odisha Livelihood Mission - TRIPTI established by the Department of Panchayati Raj, Government of Odisha.

Key Development Partners: Banks, NGOs, Mission Shakti, Department of Agriculture, and other line departments.




                                                                               67
                                                INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Orissa State Roads
Key Dates:
Approved: September 30, 2008
Effective: April 15, 2009
Closing: June 30, 2016

Financier                    Financing*      Disbursed           Undisbursed
IBRD                             196           50.90               145.10
Government of India               69
Total Project Cost               265
*US$ millions; as of March 03, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: Orissa’s 239,000 km road network is second only to Uttar Pradesh in terms of length. However, in terms of
quality, Orissa’s road network ranks among the lowest - only 22 percent is paved, significantly below India’s average of 58 percent. The
rationale for Bank support in Orissa’s road sector is a logical extension of the Bank’s earlier engagement in the state under the Orissa
Socioeconomic Development Program (OSEDP), as well as the Bank’s continued support to modernize India’s road sector. The refo rms
implemented under the OSEDP have created substantial fiscal space for the state to undertake productive investments in social and
infrastructure sectors. However, despite the improved fiscal space, Orissa has not been able to meet its own targets for increasing capital
investment to three percent (currently hovering around two percent) of Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP). The project aims to assist
Orissa in meeting the capital investment goals in a sector that is crucial for the state’s overall economic growth and pover ty reduction
objectives. In addition, the project would support the state government in implementing institutional and governance reforms in the road
sector, thus enhancing the efficacy of public sector expenditure.

The project development objective is to remove transport bottlenecks in targeted transport corridors for greater investment and
economic and social development activities in the state of Orissa. The project was restructured to rationalize the project scope due to
delayed implementation - about 150 km roads were dropped from the scope and an amount of US$54 million was cancelled from the
original loan size of US$250 million.

The project has two components:
    Road Corridor Improvement: supports the widening, strengthening, and selective realignment of 310 km of existing roads to
     double-lane standards.
    Sector Policy and Institutional Development, and Implementation Support: assists the government of Orissa in modernizing the
     Orissa Works Department (OWD) organization and capacity; improving the policy, institutional and legal framework of the state
     road sector; and implementing and monitoring the project.

Key Expected Results: By project completion, businesses and households in project areas will enjoy a significant reduction in generalized
transport cost, and the OWD will improve its capacity and efficiency to provide sustainable road infrastructure service to users. The
outcome will be monitored by the following indicators:
    Vehicle operating costs in project corridors to reduce.
    Vehicle speed in project corridors to increase.
    Favorable survey response by businesses and road users indicating that conditions of the transport corridors improved.

Due to termination of all phase-I contracts and implementation delays, achievement of these results has been delayed but is likely.

It is expected that the efficiency and transparency of the OWD - the implementing agency for this project - will improve as soon as the
operation and maintenance arrangement for the Core Road Network is put in place; the core business functions are fully operational; the
OWD meets Right to Information disclosure requirements and implements the Governance and Accountability Action Plan; and a road
safety action plan is put in place. Consultants to provide technical assistance in these matters are on board and it is expected that actions
in institutional strengthening component will soon began.

Implementing Agency: Orissa Works Department, government of Orissa.




                                                                    68
                                                   INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: PMGSY Rural Roads Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: December 20, 2010
    Effective: February 18, 2011
    Closing: November 30, 2015

    Financier                          Financing*       Disbursed        Undisbursed
    IBRD                                   500.00             1.25            498.75
    IDA (4849-IN)                          620.60          500.64             119.96
    IDA (4848-IN)                          279.40              0.0            279.40
    Total Project Cost                      1400           501.89             898.11
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Established in 2000, the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) - also known as the Prime Minister’s
Rural Roads Program - addresses poor rural connectivity. The program originally sought to provide all-season road access for every
community with a population greater than 1,000 by 2003, and all villages with populations greater than 500 by the end of the Tenth Five-Year
Plan in 2007. The time frame for the program has now been extended, and the length of the new and improved rural road network increased
to 274,000 km. As a result, 70,500 habitations are now connected. The program’s implementation capacity has been enhanced si gnificantly,
with over 50,000 km of road being completed annually, compared to just 15,500 km at the beginning of the program. Despite these dramatic
improvements in rural connectivity over the last decade, 25 percent of India’s villages still lack access to all -season roads. The Bank’s US$1.54
billion PMGSY Rural Roads Project covers a mixture of low-income states (Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh), small special
category upland states (Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, and Uttarakhand), and the middle-income state of Punjab.

The project development objective is to support strengthening the systems and processes of the national PMGSY rural roads program to
expand and maintain all-season rural access roads, resulting in enhanced road connectivity to economic opportunities and social services for
beneficiary communities in the participating states. The project is structured around two components:

      PMGSY program financing contributes finances to cover civil works expenditures in the seven participating states associated with
       providing new all-season access to unconnected habitations, and upgrading important link routes in rural areas. The project will
       strengthen implementation efficiency and the sustainability of program roads through improved maintenance.
      Institutional strengthening supports technical assistance to strengthen the capacity of relevant agencies to implement the program,
       including support for further enhancements to the On-line Management, Monitoring, and Accounting System to produce customized
       performance reporting at the national, state, and district levels. The reports will incorporate improved safeguards monitoring
       information and vulnerability-disaggregated data (including by gender), as well as data derived from third-party monitoring.

Key Expected Results:
 The share of rural population with access to all-season roads in participating states is expected to increase from 67 percent in 2011 to 72
    percent by 2015.
 The condition of PMGSY roads will improve. Road condition is measured through a Pavement Condition Index (PCI) which is a five point
    scale where a number of 2 or lower is considered a satisfactory condition. Currently, 12 to 80 percent of the road networks in the
    participating states, where there is information, have PCI levels less than 2. The project target is to have accurate condition data for all
    project states, and an average of 55 percent of the road network with a PCI of less than 2.

Implementing Agency: Ministry of Rural Development, government of India, and National Rural Roads Development Agency.




                                                                       69
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Gujarat State Highways Project II
    Key Dates:
    Approved: December 13, 2013
    Effective: not yet effective
    Closing: January 31, 2019

    Financier                                       Financing*        Disbursed         Undisbursed
    IBRD                                                   175                 -                175
    Government of Gujarat                                  111
    Private sector                                          37
    Total Project Cost                                     323
    *US$ million; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Gujarat has one of the most extensive and traffic-intensive road networks in the country. The state’s has about 145,000 km of
roads, including 3,170 km of national highways, 18,450 km of state highways, and 20,560 km of major district roads. The Roads and Buildings Department
(R&BD) has the primary responsibility for managing about 80,000 km of primary road network and 30,000 km of non-plan roads, with higher-level strategic
guidance/oversight from the Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board (GIDB). Despite rapid expansion in the network capacity and quality, owing mainly to
the government’s sustained emphasis on road development, the road sector faces a new set of challenges to keep up with rapidl y increasing demand, improve
connectivity to the relatively underdeveloped eastern tribal region of the state, and associated financing and safety considerations.

The main goal of the Gujarat State Highways Project II (GSHP II) is to extend Bank assistance to address these challenges. Because this is a follow-up project in
an advanced state, it will place relatively less emphasis on financing civil works - reflected in smaller loan-size with a higher ratio of counterpart and private
funding - and increase focus on finance-plus aspects. For example: (a) new contracting approach to improve investment and operational efficiency by
transferring design risks to the contractors, and clubbing maintenance responsibilities for a longer period; (b) pilot transactions to leverage innovative private
sector investment (modified annuity); and (c) various steps to increase the sector’s institutional and financial capacity to improve road service and safety in an
environmentally sustainable and cost-effective manner.

The project development objective is to improve capacity and enhance the quality and safety of road services for the users of the core road network of state
highways in Gujarat, through institutional strengthening and efficient contracting and financing strategies. The project is structured around three components:

      Highway improvement: includes upgrading about 350 km and rehabilitating 275 km of state highways through a mix of nine performance-based
       maintenance contracts, one public-private partnership (PPP) annuity based DBFOMT12 and one output and performance based road contract (OPRC).
      Sector Policy and Institutional Development seeks to deepen the GSHP I efforts towards improving R&BD’s operational capacity, and also augment the
       state’s capacity in two more critical areas: policy and planning; and knowledge building.
      Road Safety Management strengthens the road safety management system and improves capacity to undertake multi-sectoral road safety interventions
       in the state through a safe corridor demonstration project on two high volume, high safety risk corridors, enhancing asset management with safety
       attributes, and strengthening the Gujarat Road Safety Management System.

Key Expected Results: The project would directly improve the condition, capacity and safety of about 625 km of the 6,444 km core state road network. It is
expected that this will directly benefit about 38 million local businesses and inhabitants served by the project roads, as well as road users, of whom about half
are women. The improved roads will have significantly better capacity and roughness. Travel time should fall by about 30 percent, while the average
volume/capacity ratio, a key measure of highway congestion, should decline significantly. The emphasis on road safety ought to help reduce fatalities by 20
percent on the safe demonstration corridor.

Implementing Agency: Department of Roads & Buildings, Government of Gujarat.




                                                                                   70
                                                         INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Punjab Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project
Key Dates:
Approved: December 14,2006
Effective: March 26, 2007
Closing: December 31, 2014

 Financier                             Financing*      Disbursed**        Undisbursed
 IDA                                         154.00             121.90             32.10
 Government of Punjab                          65.30             60.42              4.88
 Government of India                           42.10             38.58              3.52
 Total Project Cost                          261.40             220.90             40.50
 *US$ millions; as of Feb 20, 2014; **Government of India and Government of Punjab
 disbursement figures are approximate
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Key Results Achieved:
 By end of the project, Punjab will achieve 100 percent coverage of water supply in villages;
 87 percent of rural areas are now fully covered; 3,972 villages have water supply schemes against the end-of project target of 3,000;
 Performance of water supply schemes have improved in 320 villages, against end-of-project target of 200;
 98 villages will have small bore sewer based sanitation systems;
 76 percent of project villages will fully recover O&M costs;
 68 percent of project villages have more than 70 percent of households connected to water supply;
 435,162 new piped household water connections as a result of the project intervention;
 About 250 villages likely to have water metered connections by end of the project;
 About 40 villages already provide around-the-clock water supply, against standard Indian norms of supply for a few hours a day;
 2.6 million people in rural areas provided with access to improved water sources (target of 2.28 million);
 1352 (1292 GPWSC + 60 SLC) other water service providers are being supported (target of 1,250);
 73 percent of participating inhabitants have community sanitation facilities that perform satisfactorily (target of 90 percent).
 The state has come up with a Rural Water Policy to encourage local management; free water connection to each household; support water metering to
   conserve water; and to improve access.

Implementing Agency: Department of Water Supply and Sanitation, government of Punjab.




                                                                            71
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Punjab State Road Sector Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: December 5, 2006
 Effective: April 2, 2007
 Closing: June 5, 2017


 Financier                              Financing*          Disbursed            Undisbursed
 IBRD                                         250                 167                     83
 Government of India                          150
 Total Project Cost                           400
 *US$ million; as of February 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report


Background and Objective: Punjab, located in the northwest, is one of India’s most prosperous states. The agricultural revolution in the 1960s and 1 970s
and resulting high economic growth substantially improved Punjab’s poverty and social indicators. Punjab is rural and landlocked. Two-thirds of its 25
million people live in villages, and agriculture, directly or indirectly, accounts for 40 percent of the economy, substantially above the Indian average of 24
percent. Better roads, lower transport costs, and higher transport service standards have been identified in the government of Punjab’s 10th Five -Year Plan as
core elements of an enabling investment climate and a prerequisite for economic diversification and accelerated economic growth. While maintenance
funding for national highways by the government of India and for village roads through crop tax is sufficient, funding for the state highways has been grossly
inadequate. (Until recently, funding for maintenance for Plans Roads was only 25 percent of that required). While funding for maintenance appears assured in
the short term, the consequences from the previous inadequate maintenance funding and lack of capacity expansion can be only partially remediated. The
Bank is supporting the road sector in Punjab because of the need to address the increasingly serious capacity constraints and to assist the Government of
Punjab in strengthening its road maintenance management of the state highways.

The project development objective is to improve operating conditions of state roads for road users, in a sustainable way, thus helping to provide the business
enabling environment necessary to support Punjab's economic development strategy. The project has two components:

     Road Upgrading, Rehabilitation, and Maintenance: finances civil works along plan roads comprising upgrading, rehabilitation, and maintenance of
      about 1,000 kms of roads; technical assistance; land acquisition; and the required pre-construction activities.
     Institutional Strengthening: funds measures for sector modernization and for improving sector efficiency, as well as for road safety and HIV/AIDS.

Key Expected Results:
 30 percent increase in the average speed of the network.
 20 percent reduction in Vehicle Operating Costs.
 Improved road safety resulting in fewer fatal accidents.

Implementing Agency: Punjab Roads and Bridges Development Board.




                                                                             72
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Rajasthan Agricultural Competitiveness Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: March 27, 2012
    Effective: July 2, 2012
    Closing: April 30, 2019

    Financier                                        Financing*         Disbursed        Undisbursed
    IDA                                                  109.00               0.59            108.00
    Government of Rajasthan                               48.40
    Other (beneficiaries)                                   9.10
    Total Project Cost                                   166.50
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: The desert state of Rajasthan faces acute water quantity and quality issues. Covering 10 percent of India’s land area and
accounting for 5 percent of the population, Rajasthan has less than 2 percent of the country’s water resources. Erratic rainf all and recurring droughts have
exacerbated the situation. A large part of the state relies on groundwater for agriculture, and for industrial and domestic consumption, which has negative
impacts on the quality and quantity of groundwater. Sustainable and efficie nt use of the state’s scarce water resources is a major challenge. Given the size of
the agriculture sector and its water footprint, improved water and agriculture productivity coupled with market linkages are key elements for sustainable and
inclusive growth. While there are many challenges to making the semi-arid dessert bloom, there are also significant opportunities: (1) a promising potential
for diversification into higher value, less water-consuming horticulture, floriculture, spice and medicinal plant production; (2) scope for livestock
development focusing on improved breeding, animal health, nutrition and access to markets; (3) availability of a range of tested on-farm water management
technologies and agronomic practices; (4) a policy framework that is increasingly conducive to private sector-led, sustainable agriculture, including recently
revised state policies on agriculture, livestock, and agribusiness development, as well as water resources management; and (5) the possibility of scaling up
experience in public-private partnerships (PPPs) in agriculture.

The development objective of the project is to establish the feasibility of sustainably increasing agricultural productivity and farmer incomes through a
distinct agricultural development approach that integrates agriculture water management and agricultural technology, farmer organizations, and market
innovations in selected locations across the ten agro-ecological zones of Rajasthan. The project has four components:

      Climate Resilient Agriculture: Supports climate-resilient approaches for sustainable use of the natural resource base, through agricultural and livestock
       production systems aiming to increase long-term productivity and farm incomes in an environment marked by increased climate and rainfall variability.
       Activities include: (a) harvest, capture, collection, delivery, and distribution of water for agriculture and livestock purposes in surface water-irrigated
       canal command areas, groundwater sources, and rainfed areas; (b) on-farm water use efficiency; (c) soil moisture and fertility improvements; (d)
       sustainable intensification and diversification of farm production; and (e) integrated crop and livestock farming systems.
      Markets and Value Chains: Will enable farmers to engage in profitable and sustainable market-oriented production, and promote partnerships and
       market linkages with other value chain participants and agribusinesses.
      Farmer's Organizations and Capacity Building: Supports: (a) establishment of farmer groups and organizations; (b) capacity building for participatory
       planning and plan implementation of collective actions; and (c) strengthening institutions and human resources associated with the project
       implementation.
      Monitoring and Evaluation, and Learning: Aims to implement robust monitoring and evaluation systems, which will support potentially scaling up
       successful approaches across the state. Work will also focus on strengthening synergies, and convergence with ongoing schemes of the government of
       Rajasthan and the Government of India.

Key Expected Results: The project is in its first year of implementation, so progress on achieving results is not yet discernible. By the end of the project in
2019, however, it is expected that:
 Water used in agriculture will be reduced by 15 percent (from 3000 cum to 2550 cum per gross irrigated area).
 Water use efficiency will increase by 65 percent over the baseline.

Implementing Agency: The Rajasthan Agricultural Competitiveness Project Management and Implementation Society (RACP-MIS), government of Rajasthan.




                                                                               73
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: October 29, 2013, 2013
    Effective: Expected on April 2, 2014
    Closing: December 31, 2018

    Financier                              Financing*       Disbursed          Undisbursed
    IDA                                          160              0.00                 160
    Government of India                            67             0.00                  67
    Total Project Cost                         227.00
    *In US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Rajasthan is one of India’s largest states, accounting for 10 percent of its total area and 5 percent of the population. Th e state
has good potential for growth in agriculture and agro-based industries, mining and minerals processing, tourism, handicrafts and cottage industries. But this
potential is not being realized due to inadequate road infrastructure and market linkages. Rajasthan has a road network of 193,017 km. This includes 7,260
km of national highways (NH), 10,953 km of state highways (SH), 9,900 km of major district roads (MDR), 25,033 km of other district roads (ODR) and
139,871 km of village/rural roads. Due to years of under-investment and inadequate maintenance, many of the state highways and MDRs are in poor
condition in terms of riding quality, geometry, pavement strength, drainage, and safety standards, and are disjointed due to missing links and dilapidated
bridges. Only about 11 percent of SHs and MDRs are double lane. The road safety situation in Rajasthan is serious and deteriorating. The Severity Index of
Rajasthan roads is about 40 compared to a national average of 29 and it ranked fifth in the total number of fatalities in 2011, contributing 6.5 percent of all
fatalities in India. The Prime Minister Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) rural roads project, established in 2000, provided all weather road connectivity to about
81 percent of eligible habitations of above 500 people, and to habitations of 250 people or more in desert and tribal areas of the state. About 7,357 habitations
not meeting the PMGSY criteria are yet to be connected under the Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization Project.

The project development objective is to improve rural connectivity, enhance road safety and strengthen road sector management capacity of the state of
Rajasthan. Its components are:

      Rural Connectivity Improvement: supports construction of about 2,500 km rural roads to provide connectivity to about 1,300 revenue villages with
       population between 250 and 499 people in the areas of the state not covered by PMGSY, and introduce good practices of cost effective low volume
       technologies.

      Road Sector Modernization and Performance Enhancement: This component will support implementation of a Road Sector Modernization Plan
       (RSMP) in the areas of: (i) improved policy framework; (ii) modernization of engineering practices and business procedures; (iii) sustainable asset
       management; (iv) institutional and human resource development; (v) preparing a pipeline of feasible projects for implementation and; (vi) enhancing
       governance and accountability in the Public Works Department.




                                                                              74
                                                      INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT




INDIA: Rajasthan Rural Livelihood Program
Key Dates:
Approved: January 11, 2011
Effective: June 22, 2011
Closing: October 31, 2016

 Financier                              Financing*          Disbursed              Undisbursed
 IDA                                        120.49              19.20                   101.29
 Government of India                       15.84
 Total Project Cost                         136.33
 *US$ millions; as of February 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Rajasthan is India’s largest state in terms of area, and is 8 th out of 28 states in terms of both population and state GDP.
More than three-quarters of the population live in rural areas. Despite a rapid decline in poverty, from 50 percent in 1970 to about 24 percent in
2005, more than two million people rank as absolute poor according to the 2002 census. The highest incidence of poverty and vulnerability occurs in
southern and eastern Rajasthan, with human development Indicators lowest in Southern Rajasthan, where periodic drought cycles have led to
significant seasonal out-migration. The Rajasthan Rural Livelihoods Project (RRLP) focuses on 17 districts in southern and eastern Rajasthan.

The project’s development objective is to enhance economic opportunities and empowerment of the rural poor, with a focus on w omen and
marginalized groups, in the 17 targeted districts of Rajasthan. The project has five components:

     Institution Building and Social Empowerment: Helps the poor mobilize themselves into Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and develop their capacity
      to initiate and expand sustainable livelihoods activities.
     Community Investment Support: Supports asset creation of SHGs and their federations; and identifies and supports innovative approaches to
      improve livelihoods of the rural poor.
     Skill Development and Employment Promotion: Supports helping beneficiaries to connect to new employment opportunities by creating a
      structured mechanism for skill development and job creation.
     Climate Change Adaptation: Aims to develop drought adaptation mechanisms and institutional models at the district and local levels.
     Project Implementation Support: Facilitates various implementation, coordination, learning, and quality-enhancement efforts.

Key Expected and Achieved Results:
  400,000 poor rural households mobilized into 33,000 SHGs. As of January 2014, a total of 9,000 SHGS have been promoted and disbursements
      to these groups under the project have started and been made to 3,900 SHGs.
  Link 23,100 SHGs to banks, so as to mobilize credit for poor households. 7,200 SHGs have been linked to banks.
  Enhanced resilience to climate change shocks for poor households by developing and implementing drought-adaptation mechanisms at the
      state, district and local levels.
  Increase in income, savings, and diversification of income sources for 70 percent of targeted poor households.
  17,000 youth receive skill development training and are placed in jobs.

Implementing Agency: Rajasthan Ajeevika Vikas Parishad (RAVP), an independent umbrella society established by the government of Rajasthan to
implement various anti-poverty initiatives. The RGAVP has a governing council chaired by the Chief Minister of Rajasthan, which provides oversight
and general policy and strategic direction. Day-to-day implementation is delegated to a State Project Management Unit (SPMU), which in turn will
work through District Project Management Units (DPMUs) and Project Facilitation Teams (PFTs) at the district and local levels.




                                                                         75
                                                       INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT




INDIA: Rampur Hydropower Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: September 13, 2007
    Effective: April 14, 2008
    Closing: December 31, 2014

    Financier                     Financing*         Disbursed        Undisbursed
    IBRD                               400.0             387.0                 13.0
    SJVNL                              297.0                   -                  -
    Total Project Cost                 697.0                   -                  -
    *US$ millions; as of January 31, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: With more than 350 million people in India still without access to electricity, and the existing supply characterized
by peak and energy deficits, increasing power supply and ensuring universal access to electricity are among the government of India (GoI)’s top
development priorities. With a total potential of around 150 GW, hydropower remains one of the critical options to address the energy/peak
shortages and limit the carbon intensity of the coal-dominated power sector. The growth of hydropower in the country has not only been slow but
also decelerating. The share of hydropower has decreased from 40 percent in 1970 to less than 19 percent by 2013. The government has sought to
leverage the Bank’s engagement to create opportunities to implement good technical, environmental, and social practices through a long-term
partnership with a few developers in specific states in the Himalayan region.The Rampur Hydropower Project (RHP) is a 412 MW run-of-the river
hydropower project on the Satluj River in the state of Himachal Pradesh, and is being implemented by publicly-owned SJVNL (Satluj Jal Vidyut
Nigam Limited). The Bank had been involved in financing SJVNL’s first hydropower project (the 1500 MW Nath pa Jhakri Hydro Electric Project –
currently in operation). The Bank’s support for the RHP is the first step in its reengagement in the hydropower sector in Ind ia after almost a decade
of absence. The engagement also complements the Bank and the Indian gov ernment’s efforts to strengthen the capacity of Himachal Pradesh to
manage its hydropower program in a more sustainable manner through a series of policy level engagements.The development objective of the
project is: (i) to improve the reliability of India's Northern Electricity Grid through the addition of renewable, low carbon energy; and (ii) to improve
the effectiveness of the developer, SJVNL, with respect to the preparation and safe implementation of economically, environmentally, and socially
sustainable hydropower projects. The project consists of three components:

      Construction of the 412 MW Rampur run-of-river hydroelectric scheme;
      Investment support to implement measures for ensuring higher availability of the existing upstream Nathpa Jhakri hydropower project (now
       being funded by SJVNL through its own funds); and
      Technical assistance for institutional reform and capacity building.

Key Results Achieved:

   Adoption of Corporate Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) Policy by SJVNL in 2010, based on RHP experience;
   Inclusion of project-affected people in community development initiatives: health services extended to more than 60,000 people by operating
    a mobile health van in affected villages; sponsorship of 195 local students (including 31 girls) for technical education; merit scholarships
    awarded to 74 students and on-the-job training program to 31 candidates (including five females); small contracts worth US$3 million
    awarded to local people.
 Strengthened contracts’ management practices through the timely issue of variance orders and the formation of a dispute resolution board for
    the settlement of claims;
 Successful implementation of a pilot project for the remediation of muck dumping sites through the use of a geo green blanket, which is being
    scaled up and replicated gradually across all the muck dumping sites;
 Successful completion of a land acquisition and compensation payment process prior to the award of a civil works contract by adopting
    innovative approaches such as a direct purchase method through negotiations, and lease agreement.
Implementing Agency: SJVNL (Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited)




                                                                          76
                                                  INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project for Low Income States
Key Dates:
Approved: December 30, 2013
Effective: Pending
Closing: March 31, 2020

    Financier                        Financing*        Disbursed     Undisbursed
    IDA                                  500                             500
    Government of India                  500
    Total Project Cost                  1000
    *US$ millions; amounts based on exchange rate as of January 2014
    For more information see the Project Appraisal Document

Background and Objectives: India’s Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has prioritized four states (Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand and
Uttar Pradesh) as a Phase I special focus program for rural water and sanitation in low income states. The piped water and sanitation
coverage in these four states is extremely low. Access to household piped water in Assam is 6.8 percent; Bihar 3.7 percent; Jharkhand 2.6
percent; and UP 20.5 percent. Access to household toilets is just 18 percent in Bihar; eight percent in Jharkhand; and 22 percent in UP.
Although Assam has higher coverage, with 60 percent of households having access to toilets, about half of these are insanitary.

The project development objective is to improve piped water supply and sanitation services for selected rural communities in the target
states through decentralized delivery systems and to increase the capacity of the participating states to respond promptly and effectively to
an eligible crisis or emergency. The project has four components:

      Capacity Building and Sector Development: will support the building of institutional capacity for implementing project activities,
       along with sector development studies to inform policy decisions.
      Infrastructure Development: will support investments for improving water supply and sanitation coverage, including construction of
       new infrastructure and rehabilitation and augmentation of existing schemes.
      Project Management Support: includes project management support to the various entities at the national, state, district, and village
       levels for implementing the project.
      Contingency Emergency Response

The project will have ‘twinning’ arrangements with successful on-going Bank supported RWSS projects in India, including a special focus on
the following:
(i) Improving piped water and sanitation coverage in areas with extremely low coverage of tap water and sanitation facilities.
(ii) Implementing decentralization program, including building capacity with the Panchayati Raj Institutions and rural communities.
(iii) Implementing an array of management models for Single Village Schemes and Multi Village Schemes for efficient and accountable RWSS
services.
(iv) Implementing Monitoring and Evaluation Systems, including independent reviews and beneficiary assessments.

Key Results Achieved:
 1.5 million new piped household water connections have resulted from the project.
 An increase in the number of people provided with access to ‘improved sanitation facilities’ under the project – rural, targeting women
     and people below the poverty line.
 More people will be using improved latrines in the project areas.
 Operation and maintenance cost recovery across habitations in the project area will increase.
*baseline and target values are yet to be determined.

Implementing Agencies:
1. Government of India: Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
2. Government of Assam: State Water and Sanitation Mission, Public Health & Engineering Department
3. Government of Bihar: State Water and Sanitation Mission, Public Health & Engineering Department
4. Government of Jharkhand, State Water and Sanitation Mission: Drinking Water & Sanitation Department
5. Government of Uttar Pradesh: State Water and Sanitation Mission: Department of Rural Development




                                                                     77
                                                             INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Scaling Up Sustainable and Responsible Microfinance Project
Key Dates:
Approved: June 1, 2010
Effective: August 18, 2010
Closing: June 30, 2015

 Financier                                               Financing*   Disbursed    Undisbursed
 IDA                                                          100           95              9
 IBRD                                                         200           92            108
 Borrower (Small Industries Development Bank of India)         30           20             10
 Total                                                        330          207            127
 *US$ millions; as of December 31, 2013                                                          Sumita Das of Sualkuchi town in Assam with the loom she bought
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report                    with a loan from a Bank-supported MFI


Background and Objectives: Private sector microfinance institutions (MFIs) have made a significant contribution to promoting
financial inclusion, particularly credit. Despite being a tiny fraction of the banking system, they account for as much as 60 percent of
small loan accounts in the entire banking system. The project was designed recognizing this contribution and the potential for further
scale-up, but also recognizing that the unprecedented growth in the sector could affect the quality of credit discipline and market
behavior on the part of some MFIs.

The objective of the project is to scale-up access to sustainable microfinance services for the financially excluded, particularly in under-
served areas of India, by introducing innovative financial products and fostering transparency and responsible finance. While national in
coverage, the project focuses on financially underserved states. So far, several low income states have been major recipients of project
funding, though some funding has also gone to underserved households in southern states with better financial access.

Key Achieved and Expected Results. The project has made important contributions in promoting responsible microfinance in India,
and over 12 million clients of project-funded MFIs have benefited from a greater focus on responsible lending. Substantive sector-wide
improvements facilitated by the project include: better data transparency; stronger grievance-redressal systems; enhanced systems for
client protection; establishment of a sector-wide code of conduct; and substantially improved use of credit market infrastructure. A
recent achievement has been the launch of a web-based data platform that will provide quarterly operational data and annual financial
data on MFIs. Further applications, such as ‘heat maps’ that geo-map and highlight areas of risk, are proposed to be added to the
platform.

Project funding has also helped scale-up sustainable microfinance, directly funding 568,000 clients for micro-enterprise or consumption
needs, through 12 MFIs, 11 of which are operationally self-sustainable. Around 80 percent of clients are in underserved states, including
in low-income states such as Bihar and Orissa, West Bengal, Rajasthan, and the North Eastern States. Project resources have been
leveraged – in 2013 alone, just in India’s low income states, funding was leveraged over 10 times by partner MFIs that lent over US$1.3
billion to microfinance clients in those states.

Progress on project outcome indicators and implementation continues to be satisfactory. Progress on indicators related to leveraging
project funding by other resources; targeting project funding to underserved areas; sustainability of funded MFI operations; and data
transparency, has been impressive and exceeds the project targets.

Implementing Agency: Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI).




                                                                              78
                                                              INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Second Hydrology Project
Key Dates:
Approved: August 24, 2004
Effective: April 5, 2006
Closing: May 31, 2014

    Financier                         Financing*       Disbursed         Undisbursed
    IBRD                                  104.98            78.47               26.51
    Borrower                               29.54
    Total Project Cost                    134.52
    *US$ million; as of March 1, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Water-related data, information, and tools are a pre-requisite for sound water resources development, planning, and management.
This is the cornerstone of any large investment program in the water sector. The government of India’s National Action Plan on Climate Change also stresses that
building sound and reliable hydro-met systems is crucial in managing and preparing for future climate risks, including floods, droughts, and cyclones.

The multi-state Hydrology 2 Project aims to support the modernization of hydrologic and climatologic information systems (HIS) and monitoring networks, and
the promotion of sustained and effective use of these systems by all users for planning and development purposes. This project complements ongoing programs
in the water sector in India (e.g. Maharashtra Water Sector Restructuring Project, National Ganga Program). The project supports surface and groundwater
agencies for 13 states and 8 central agencies. It has three main components:

      Institutional Strengthening: aims to consolidate the activities from the HP-1 program, with a focus on raising awareness, and disseminating and sharing
       knowledge, and to provide broad implementation support.
      Vertical Extension: encompasses all activities focused on enhancing the use of HIS to demonstrate real hydrological data applications and decision making.
      Horizontal Expansion: focuses on four new states and the establishment of a broad-based HIS.

Key Results Achieved:
 Modernized and real time hydro-met networks including meteorology, surface water, groundwater and water quality (e.g. digital water level recorders,
    automatic weather stations, use of real-time telemetry, acoustic doppler current meters, digital flow meters, water quality labs equipped with modern
    setup).
 Web-based spatial database systems to provide centralized and uniform platform for organization of database, storage, processing visualization and
    dissemination (E-SWIS and E-GEMS) all over the country.
 Real-time data acquisition systems for flood forecasting and operation support to reservoirs with the Bhakra Beas Management Board, in State of
    Maharashtra, and several other states.
 Building of state-wide hydro-met data centers (in Goa, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, and Pondicherry) to provide access to information to a variety of
    stakeholders (e.g. universities, local departments, water users associations).
 Major effort to enhance mapping of aquifers throughout India using advanced geophysical techniques.
 Development of decision support tools and models to aid the management and planning of water resources, and improve the operations of complex water
    systems (covering nine states in India). These tools support flood and drought management, conjunctive use, reservoir operations, and overall water
    resource planning.
 Special research studies on a wide range of water-related problems (e.g. water quality atlas for Kerala, Punjab groundwater isotope study, coastal salinity
    study in Gujarat, Bangalore city water quality study).
 Generation of resource materials (e.g. print, media, brochures, maps) and awareness building activities to encourage the use of hydrologic information by a
    variety of stakeholders.
 Hydrology 2 Project is also actively providing support and analysis to various World Bank water projects in India.
 Building partnerships with outside-India institutions (e.g. memorandums of understanding with the U.S. Geologic Survey on groundwater issues).

    Key Development Partners: Ministry of Water Resources, Central Water Commission, Central Groundwater Board, National Institute of Hydrology, National
    Geophysical Research Institute, Central Pollution Control Board, Bhakra Beas Management Board, Central Water and Power Research Station, Water Resource
    and Groundwater Departments in Maharashtra, Gujarat, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Punjab,
    Himachal Pradesh, Goa, Pondicherry, and various universities.




                                                                                 79
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT




INDIA: Second Karnataka Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project—Additional Financing
 Key Dates:
 Approved: June 15, 2010 18 Dec 2001
 Effective: September 9, 2010 19 April 2002
 Closing:   June 30, 2014 30 Jun 2014


 Financier                                    Financing*      Disbursed       Undisbursed
 IDA                                               150.0          88.86             51.95
 Communities and Gram Panchayats                    22.5
 Total Project Cost                                172.5
 *US$ millions; as of February 28, 2014, net commitments are $104.7 million
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Karnataka's water sector has three major challenges: (i) enhancing the service levels to better cope with the rising aspirations of
rural communities; (ii) ensuring sustainability and enhancing quality; and (iii) correspondingly, introducing new technologies to allow households to switch
from hand pumps to piped water. Along with improving water supply, household and environmental sanitation remains an important challenge for the state.
Decentralization of water supply and sanitation services to Panchayat Raj Institutions (local rural governing bodies) is cen tral to the government’s efforts to
improve service delivery.

The World Bank’s engagement with the government of Karnataka in the rural water supply and sanitation (RWSS) sector spans a d ecade. Karnataka RWSS I
covered 1,104 villages spread over 12 districts during 1993-2000, while the Karnataka RWSS II, popularly known as Jala Nirmal (literally ‘clean water’) covered
3,062 villages spread over 744 Gram Panchayats (GPs) of 11 districts during 2001-10. Based on the results of both projects, and to address the continued and
overwhelming demand from communities, additional financing was approved in 2010 to benefit an additional 623 GPs and 1,342 villages, or about 2.8 million
people.

The project’s development objectives are to increase rural communities’ access to improved and sustainable drinking water and sanitation services; and
institutionalize decentralization of RWSS service delivery to GPs and user groups. The project has three components:

     Community Development and Infrastructure Building
     Institutional Building
     WSS sector strengthening programs

Key Achieved and Expected Results: the objective of institutionalizing the decentralization of RWSS services delivery to GPs has been achieved. Project
results have demonstrated that RWSS services can be successfully decentralized by aligning the project’s institutional arrang ements with the existing three-tier
set up of Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs)—the Zilla Panchayat at the district level; Taluka Panchayat at block level; and the Gram Panchayat at the village
level. This alignment has allowed PRIs to have complete control of resources and decision-making, leading to a deepening and broadening of the
decentralization agenda in the state. The project has also demonstrated that GPs and local communities can successfully manage even large and complex water
supply schemes. Results of the Bank’s engagement in the RWSS sector in Karnataka include:

    1,808 GPs, comprising 4,044 villages in the 11 project districts, have already taken on the responsibilities of RWSS service delivery.
    Half the beneficiaries are poor, and 25 percent are from scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
    More than a third of the Village Water Supply and Sanitation Committee members are women.
    Under RWSS I, about 3,000 Water Supply schemes and 1,427 Road and Drainage schemes were completed.
    Under RWSS II, including this additional financing, 381 Single Village Water Supply Schemes (76 percent of the target) have already been completed;
     almost all 500 Road and Drainage schemes were completed.
    It is expected that 18 Multi Village Water Supply Schemes will be completed before the project closes in 2014.
    Already seven million (out of a target of eight million) people have benefited from these two projects.
    An Operation and Maintenance Policy was developed and approved by the state in September 2012. Additional efforts at formulating and
     institutionalizing long-term sustainability policy are underway.
 
Implementing Agency: Karnataka Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency.

Key Partners: Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, government of Karnataka; Karnataka Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency (KRWSSA),
Panchayat Raj Institutions in 11 districts,




                                                                              80
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Second Kerala Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (JALANIDHI II)
Key Dates:
Approved: December 15, 2011
Effective: April 17, 2012
Closing: June 30, 2017

    Financier                                   Financing*        Disbursed             Undisbursed
    IDA                                              155.3              2.63                 147.96
    Government of Kerala                              46.2
    Other                                             39.7               7.6                    32.1
    Total Project Cost                               241.2            10.23                   230.97
    *US$ millions, as of February 28, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report


Background and Objectives: The government of Kerala (GoK) has significantly improved rural water supply coverage, from 58.6 percent in 2003 to 67.7
percent by 2010. Kerala has also achieved impressive coverage of household sanitation: 95 percent of rural households have access to a toilet facility, and 87
percent of Gram Panchayats (GPs) have received the government of India’s ‘Clean Village Award’ for 100 percent ‘open defecation free’ status. Nevertheless,
rural households disproportionally remain without adequate water supply, and the access gap between rural and urban areas needs to be bridged. The gap is
particularly acute in remote villages and areas with low quantity and poor quality of water. Challenges include: increasing presence of fluoride, iron, and
salinity; contamination of private drinking wells due to poor sanitation; emergence of water-stressed areas where demand outstrips local supply; increasing
numbers of ‘slipped back’ habitations; continued dependence of large number of households on private open wells that dry up in the summer; and low
coverage of household connections from piped water systems.


The development objective of the Second Kerala Rural Water and Sanitation Project (also known as Jalanidhi II) is to increase the access of rural communities
to improved and sustainable water supply and sanitation services in Kerala, using a decentralized, demand-responsive approach. The project has three
components:

      Institution Building: (i) Supports capacity building of sector institutions and support organizations; (ii) assists government of Kerala to implement a
       statewide sector development program; and (iii) supports project management costs.
      Technical Assistance: Provides technical assistance to implementing agencies to ensure that infrastructure investments under Component C are
       properly implemented and resulting services efficiently provided.
      Infrastructure Development: Finances implementation of investments for: (i) new and rehabilitated intra-GP rural water supply schemes; (ii) pilot
       rehabilitation and modernization of multi-GP water supply schemes and transfer of internal distribution to GPs; and (iii) sanitation schemes, mainly
       covering community-centric solid and liquid waste management and household sanitation solutions in difficult terrain.

Key Expected and Achieved Results: Water supply interventions under the project will benefit some 288,000 households, or 1.15 million people, and some
690,000 people will benefit from improved sanitation services. Even in early stages of implementation, the project has begun to yield promising results:
   145 water supply schemes have been completed and commissioned, of which 23 are rehabilitated schemes and the rest are small water supply schemes.
     One large multi-GP scheme covering 6 GPs in the Mala constituency of the Trichur district is under rehabilitation. Additional large water supply
     schemes have been initiated by KRWSA and Kerala Water Authority (KWA).
   An estimated 49,679 households have been covered with clean water supply and sanitation through 22 Batch I GPs. Water supply and sanitation
     activities have been initiated in 65 Batch II GPs.
   Fifty one percent of the total beneficiaries are female; 47 percent are below the poverty line; 9 percent are members of scheduled castes; and 5 percent
     are members of scheduled tribe.
   Beneficiaries and GP contributions are US$3.5 million and US$4.1 million respectively.
   Preparation of water security plans (WSPs) for Batch-I GPs has been completed.
   The government of Kerala has approved a special project of US$2.1 million for implementing Rain Water Harvesting in selected 6 GPs through KRWSA,
     demonstrating commitment toward sustaining the agency beyond the project.
   Some GPs are undertaking Ground Water Recharge activities through convergence of MGNREGA and project resources.
   Other sanitation interventions under implementation include; (i) application of new technologies for latrine solutions in water logged areas, (ii)
     construction of pay and use latrines in markets, bus stands, tourist spots, and for migrant population; and (iii) interventions for safe disposal of solid and
     liquid waste at household and community level.


Implementing Agency: Water Resources Department, Kerala Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency (KRWSA), govt. of Kerala




                                                                               81
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Second Madhya Pradesh District Poverty Initiatives Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: June 24, 2009
 Effective: October 13, 2009
 Closing: December 31, 2014

 Financier                                    Financing*      Disbursed      Undisbursed
 IDA                                                99.3 78.2         21.2
 Government of India/ Government of Madhya Pradesh   10
 Total Project Cost                                109.3
 *US$ millions; as of January 31, 2014. For more information see the latest
 Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: Madhya Pradesh is India’s second largest state in terms of land area. With an estimated population of about 72.5 million, i t is
also the fifth most populous state of India (Census 2011). It remains one of India’s poorer states, a nd more than one-third of its population belongs to socially
and economically marginalized groups. Agriculture employs nearly 72 per cent of all workers, and although poverty in rural areas had declined to 28.3
percent at the time of project preparation, agricultural productivity and incomes were below the national average. The state government has attempted to
address the problems of rural poverty, low agricultural productivity, and social exclusion through a variety of policies and programs, including through the
promotion of Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and employment-focused skills development. The World Bank in India has financed empowerment and livelihood
projects since 2000. Projects have helped mobilize over 30 million rural poor people into institutions, enabling them to access livelihood opportunities and
build social, financial, and economic capital. State level livelihood projects in Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Odisha, and Bihar
have achieved significant results in terms of increased savings, access to credit, livelihoods, and the convergence of public services at the household level. This
experience is now being scaled up through the National Rural Livelihood Project and the North East Rural Livelihood Project, which covers four states in the
North East of India. This is the Second District Poverty Initiatives Project in Madhya Pradesh (MP DPIP-II). The project’s development objective is to improve
the capacity and opportunities for the targeted rural poor to achieve sustainable livelihoods. This will be achieved by enhanced participation by the rural
poor in economic activities, skill enhancement for taking up higher value employment, and increased income among project target households through an
increased asset base and market linkages. The project has four components:
     Social Empowerment and Institution Building: empower the poor by helping them organize themselves into SHGs and federate into higher levels of
      institutions, such as Village Development Committees (VDCs), cluster-level organizations, and producer collectives;
     Livelihoods Investment Support: develop the capacity of SHGs to start livelihoods initiatives and to strengthen their business operations through
      producer-based federations, companies, and cooperatives;
     Employment Promotion Support: enable the project beneficiaries to capture new employment opportunities by establishing a structured mechanism
      for skill development and job creation; and
     Project Implementation Support: facilitate various governance, implementation, coordination, learning, and quality enhancement efforts in the
      project.

Key Expected and Achieved Results:
  With the current mobilization of more than 380,000 households (across 4,580 villages) into over 33,300 SHGs, the project has surpassed its target of
     forming 30,000 SHGs. This is resulting in stronger financial inclusion, substantial group savings (over US$4.5 million) and improved access to credit
     (US$43.9 million loans from VDCs and over US$ 8.9 million from bank loans).
  Close to 24,000 youth have received skills training in various trades for both wage and self-employment, and over 113,000 youth benefited from job
     placements services through job fairs.
  Eighteen producer companies in agriculture, dairy, and poultry have been established, and play a significant role in providing economic benefits
     through employment, markets, and quality produce to farmers and shareholders.
  A 2012 assessment found a strong improvement in household incomes for over 70 percent of SHG members (Outcome target is for at least 60 percent of
     graded SHG members to report a minimum of 20 percent increase in household incomes).

Implementing Agency: Madhya Pradesh Society for Poverty Alleviation Initiatives, and Rural Development Department, government of Madhya Pradesh.




                                                                               82
                                                         INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Secondary Education Program
 Key Dates:
 Approved: March 22, 2012
 Effective: November 7, 2012
 Closing: June 30, 2017

 Financier                            Financing*        Disbursed           Undisbursed
 IDA                                         500               128                  371
 Government of India                      12,306
 Other                                        90
 Total Project Cost                       12,896               128                  371
 *As of February 20, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: The outstanding success of the government of India’s elementary education program, which increased enrollment rates to
almost 100 percent, is putting pressure on secondary education (grades 9 and 10). Secondary education needs to expand rapidly in response, while at the
same time improving the quality of education: two Indian states which participated in the OECD PISA assessment of 15-year olds in mathematics, science, and
reading, ranked second from the bottom of 70+ participating countries/regions. The government of India asked the Bank to support expansion and quality
improvement in secondary education through the Bank’s flagship program, given our long history of support to elementary educa tion. Since 2004, IDA has
contributed close to US$1.85 billion to the program in 2 phases - SSA I–2004-2007 (US$500 million), and SSA II–2008-2012 (US$1.35 billion). The Secondary
Education Program, like SSA, is also funded by DFID and the EU, though total development partner contributions are about 10 percent of costs over five years.
However, the Bank’s financial contribution enables it to support and influence the shape of the whole multi -billion dollar program.The project development
objective is to help India achieve increased and more equitable access to good quality secondary education through support of the government's ongoing
program for secondary education as delineated in the Rashtriya Madhyamki Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) framework. The framework is designed to expand
access, enhance equity, and improve the quality of secondary education; and in particular, support new innovations and expansion of promising pilot
programs. Quality improvement activities include teacher professional development, recruitment of additional teachers, and capacity building of local
institutions to support change. Access will be expanded through new and upgraded schools, especially in underserved areas, outreach to communities, more
relevant learning materials, and better teachers. Innovations will be supported through new activities of the RMSA program, with clear guidelines for
application and appraisal of proposals.


Key Expected Results: The RMSA program will contribute to the improvement of access, equity, and quality in secondary schools across India, preparing
students for higher education and eventually the job market. More specifically, performance indicators are:
 Enrollment of students in Secondary (Grades IX and X) will rise from 28.3 to 38.4 million.
 Gender Parity Index in enrolment in schools covered by RMSA programs will increase from 0.94 to 0.97.
 Gross graduation rate will increase from 74 to 86 percent.
 RMSA’s Quality Improvement Policies modified using the analysis of the new National Assessment of Student Achievement in secondary education.
 Up to January 2014, the program has achieved the following over the 2009-10 baseline figures:

          Enrolment increased from 28.3 to 34.5 million.
          Gender parity index increased from 0.94 to 0.98.
          National Assessment of Student Achievement for grade 10 is under preparation and will be conducted in 2014.


Implementing Agency: Ministry of Human Resource Development, Department of School Education and Literacy, New Delhi. State governments are
responsible for implementation, and contribute 25 percent of financing, except for the seven North Eastern states that contribute 10 percent of financing.

Key Development Partners: United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID) (direct to program) and European Union (through
education sector budget support).




                                                                            83
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Sustainable Urban Transport Project and GEF- Sustainable Urban Transport Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: December 10, 2009
 Effective: May 3, 2010
 Closing: November 30, 2015

 Financier                             Financing*        Disbursed        Undisbursed
 IBRD                                       105.2             28.3              76.93
 Global Environment Facility                 20.3             4.51              15.82
 Government of India                        223.1
 Total Project Cost                         234.4
 *US$ millions, as of February 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: India’s continuing urbanization and high economic growth over the last decade have led to an inevitable rise in ownership a nd
use of motorized vehicles across the country’s cities and towns. Two -wheeler (e.g. mopeds, motorcycles) and car ownership in cities has grown rapidly - by
double digits. This growing motorization, already well-underway, may be exacerbated by the ongoing expansion of urban and industrialized areas as well as
rising incomes. The result is additional stress on available - and often limited - transport infrastructure, and on the institutions in charge of road construction
and maintenance, traffic management, road safety, and public transport services. As more and more cars and two-wheelers hit the streets, city centers become
congested, road safety deteriorates, and the environment suffers as greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions increase. While the urban transport sector accounts for
less than 10 percent of India’s total emissions, it is one of the fastest growing sectors in terms of fossil fu el consumption. Without timely interventions to
develop and provide attractive alternatives to personal modes of transport, the situation is likely to worsen. With support from the Global Environment Facility
(GEF), the Bank, in partnership with UNDP, has been supporting the Ministry of Urban Development since 2006 to develop and implement a Sustainable Urban
Transport Program, which aims to strengthen national and local government capacity in urban transport planning and management in a more integrated and
comprehensive manner. The project supports the implementation of the India National Urban Transport Policy.

The project development objective and global environment objective is to promote environmentally sustainable urban transport in India, and to improve the
use of environment-friendly transport through demonstration projects in selected cities. The project has two components:
    Capacity Development Assistance for Urban Transport: Provides technical assistance to the Ministry of Urban Development to improve national, state
     and local capacity to implement the National Urban Transport Policy.
    City Demonstration Projects: Will catalyze high profile-high impact projects in five cities (Pimpri-Chinchwad in Maharashtra, Naya Raipur in
     Chhattisgarh, Indore in Madhya Pradesh, and Hubli-Dharwad and Mysore in Karnataka. These demonstration projects focus on: public transport; non-
     motorized transport; and a pilot Intelligent Transport System (ITS). City Projects include:
     o    Pimpri-Chinchwad: A Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS) along two corridors;
     o    Naya Raipur: Bus Rapid Transit System Lite between Raipur and Naya Raipur and within Naya Raipur, and pedestrian and cycling infrastructure in
          the city;
     o    Hubli-Dharwad: A BRTS corridor along with associated public transport infrastructure and passenger access improvements;
     o    Mysore: Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) including Passenger Information System and Automatic Vehicle Location Systems for city bus service;
     o    Indore: Intelligent Transport Systems for BRTS including Automatic Fare Collection System and Traffic Signal Priority.
In 2013, through a major project restructuring the demonstration project in Pune was cancelled and the project in Hubli-Dharwad was formally inducted into
SUTP.

Key Achieved and Expected Results: At project end, this transport project will create better urban transport project preparation and implementation
capacities, and will catalyze many more sustainable public and non-motorized transport projects across the country. The implementation of the ITS project in
Mysore, involving user-friendly Passenger Information Systems and an Automatic Vehicle Location System, has recently been completed. The Leaders in
Urban Transport Planning training program for ensuring exposure of urban transport officials and decision makers to the complexities and multi-faceted
nature of the issues, has been launched in partnership with MoUD and CEPT University in Ahmedabad. Two batches have undergone training at CEPT
University covering 64 officials from across the country and another 60 officials have received training in the Seoul and Singapore. The training has been well
received and the target is to cover at least 200 officials around the country.

Implementing Agency: Ministry of Urban Development, Pimpri-Chinchwad Municipal Corporation, Naya Raipur Development Authority, Hubli-Dharwad
BRTS Company Limited, Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation, Atal Indore City Transport Services Limited.

Key Development Partners: United Nations Development Program.




                                                                               84
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Tamil Nadu and Puducherry Coastal Disaster Risk Reduction Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: June 20,2013
 Effective: Not yet Effective
 Closing: July 28,2018

 Financier                                         Financing*        Disbursed        Undisbursed
 IDA                                                     236.0                0             236.0
 Government of India                                     101.2
 Total Project Cost                                      337.2
 *US$ millions; as of 28 February 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: In the aftermath of the Indian Ocean Tsunami of December 26, 2004, the World Bank supported India’s recovery efforts with t he
India - Emergency Tsunami Reconstruction Project (ETRP), focused on the state of Tamil Nadu and the Union Territory of Puducherry. The objective of the
ETRP was to revive livelihoods and promote recovery in Tsunami-affected areas. ETRP was restructured in August 2009, with the addition of a new
component: Vulnerability Reduction of Coastal Communities (VRCC). The VRCC extended the reconstruction program beyond those affected by the tsunami to
the entire coast, targeting communities regularly exposed to cyclones, storm surges, and coastal flooding (and potential tsunamis), as well as addressing these
communities’ poor access to evacuation shelters and early warning systems. When the restructured ETRP closed on December 31, 2011, several works were
complete, several ongoing, and some had yet to be taken up.

The Tamil Nadu and Puducherry Coastal Disaster Risk Reduction Project (CDRRP) focuses on new initiatives in risk reduction and mitigation, but also
integrates the previous ETRP.

The CDRRP aims to increase the resilience of coastal communities in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry to a range of hydro-meteorological and geophysical hazards,
along with improving the capacities of project implementation entities to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency. The project has
five components:

    Vulnerability reduction of coastal communities: through infrastructure such as permanent houses, evacuation shelters and routes, and a resilient
     electrical network.
    Sustainable fisheries: aims at upgrading infrastructure, sustainable co-management, and addressing safety at sea.
    Capacity building: focused on disaster risk management of government institutions, civil society, the school education system, and coastal communities.
    Implementation support: Includes incremental operating costs for operating the Project Management Unit (PMU) and respective Project
     Implementation Units (PIUs) in the line departments.
    Contingency Emergency financing: will be drawn by the government of Tamil Nadu and/ or Puducherry to cover emergency response and recovery
     costs.

Key Expected and Achieved Results: Project yet to be signed and awaiting effectiveness. Reconstruction of over 16,000 vulnerable houses from earlier ETRP
are now complete, and several fisheries infrastructure works are on-going.

Key Development Partners: The project supports the government of Tamil Nadu and government of Puducherry in implementing the project, and works with
other state agencies such as the Revenue Administration Disaster Management and Mitigation Department, Fisheries Department, Environment and Forest
Department, Public Works Department, and Rural Development Department.




                                                                             85
                                                        INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty Reduction Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: July 12, 2005; November 18, 2010 (AF)
    Effective: October 24, 2005 and February 22, 2011 (AF)
    Closing: September 30, 2014

    Financier                                    Financing* Disbursed   Undisbursed
    IDA                                             274        192          82
    Government of India/Government of Tamil Nadu     64
    Other – Community                                12
    Total Project Cost                              350
    *US$ millions; as of February 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: Tamil Nadu is India’s eleventh largest state by area and the seventh mo st populous state. It is also one of the most
industrialized states and had the country’s second largest economy in 2012. However, over 20 percent of the population contin ues to live in poverty,
which is particularly pronounced in rural areas with high inequality and a large disabled population. A large portion of the population depends on
agricultural for their livelihoods, due to low skill levels and weak access to credit and markets with which to engage the growing non-farm sector.

The World Bank has financed empowerment and livelihood projects in India since 2000, which have mobilized over 30 million rural poor to form
their own institutions, enabling them to access livelihood opportunities and build social, financial, and economic capital. State level livelihood
projects (in Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Orissa, and Bihar) have achieved significant results in terms of increased
savings, access to credit, livelihoods, and the convergence of public services at the household level. This experience is now being scaled up across the
country through the National Rural Livelihood Program, as well as to four states in the North East under the Bank-supported North East Rural
Livelihood Project.

The project development objective is to empower the poor and enhance their livelihoods through the development of community-level institutions;
to enhance skills and capacities of the poor (especially women, youth, differently-abled, and the vulnerable); and to finance demand-driven
investments related to livelihoods for the target poor. The project has three components:

      Village Livelihoods Program: Building institutional capacity, and funding productive livelihood-related investments at the village level;
      District and State Support to Village Livelihoods Program: Strengthening project teams at the state and district levels to extend support to
       the village level, and support monitoring, evaluation, and learning; and
      Project Management: Includes staffing and human resource development.

Key Expected and Achieved Results: The original project covered 2,509 village panchayats and over 581,000 households in 16 districts of Tamil
Nadu. The additional finance credit enables the project to expand to include another 1,665 village panchayats (388,000 households) spread across 10
new districts.
 More than 35,000 new Self Help Groups (SHGs) have been formed by the project, with a particular focus on the poorest women and inclusion of
    youth, tribal, and differently-abled. The savings and internal lending of these SHGs have enabled members to enhance their livelihood activities
    and household incomes. By establishing Panchayat Level Federations, and clustering SHGs around economic activities, opportunities have been
    provided for improved access to services and markets. The total savings and credit available with SHGs is over US$370 million, of which about
    25 percent is from SHG savings.
 Over 225,000 target youth have benefited from job-oriented skills training, with 82 percent now employed in corporate sectors including the
    construction industry, the service sector, telecommunications, and garment production.
 Over 199,000 differently-abled and vulnerable persons have received individual assistance through the village institutions.
 Impact evaluation surveys of the original project districts are showing that the project has been successful in reducing the high cost debt
    burden, moving livelihood activities towards more skilled employment and on the empowerment of women.

Implementing Agency: Tamil Nadu Pudhu Vaazhvu Society established by the Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department, Government of
Tamil Nadu.




                                                                           86
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Tamil Nadu Health System Project
Key Dates:
Approved: December 16, 2004; April 29, 2010 (AF)
Effective: January 27, 2005; August 6, 2010 (AF)
Closing: September 30, 2014

 Financier                          Financing*     Disbursed       Undisbursed
 IDA                                  235.77          184.77          28.06#
 Government of Tamil Nadu              34.56          30.34             4.22
 Total Project Cost                   270.33          215.11           32.28
*US$ millions; as of February 24, 2014; # US$ 20 million cancelled & reallocated
to post-Tsunami reconstruction project in 2005.
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report
                                                                                               Tribal patients being seen by doctor at camp in Gudalur Block



Background and Objectives: Tamil Nadu, with a population of 72 million (Census 2011), has demonstrated a strong commitment to development through its
social sectors. With a vibrant history of engagement with the Bank, the state has been a pioneer in reforming health, education, rural development, and
livelihoods. It has proactively identified its priorities in health, and worked towards achieving them by operationalizing a functional health system. The state
has a robust public health infrastructure, a committed pool of skilled human resources in the health sector, and significant experience in managing several
state-based as well as vertical health programs. Under the Tamil Nadu Health System Project, the state is continually strengthening its health system, and
focusing on maternal and child health, equitable access to health care, prevention and treatment of non-communicable diseases, ICT-based health information
systems, improved quality of care, and private sector engagement in health.

The project’s development objective is to significantly improve the effectiveness of the health system in Tamil N adu. It has four components:
    Increasing access to and utilization of services: focuses on (i) operationalizing a network of Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care
     Centers (CEmONCs) across the state to address the currently stagnant Maternal Mortality and Infant Mortality Rates; (ii) supporting targeted
     interventions for equitable access to quality health care for tribal populations; and (iii) facilitating use of public hospitals by the poor and disadvantaged
     by harnessing the private sector and its strengths.
    Non-Communicable Disease Prevention and Control: focuses on (i) health promotion through school, workplace, and community-based interventions,
     as well as a multi-dimensional information and education campaign; and (ii) clinical interventions of free screening (basic and higher diagnostics),
     treatment, and follow up of screened positive patients.
    Building capacity for oversight and management of the health system: focuses on (i) strengthening monitoring and evaluation through an ICT-enabled
     hospital management system in secondary health facilities and a health management information system networking the entire public health
     infrastructure of the state; (ii) improving quality of care by accrediting selected health facilities and strengthening ongoing quality improvement
     programs at secondary health facilities; (iii) strengthening health care waste management knowledge and practices in all public health facilities of the
     state; and (iv) building capacity of the state government in strategic development and implementation with infrastructure, administrative, and M&E
     support.
    Improving effectiveness and efficiency of public sector to deliver essential services: focuses on (i) equipment rationalization, strengthening equipment
     and pharmaceuticals logistics, and supply chain management; and (ii) HR planning and development.

Key Results Achieved and Expected:
 125 centers fully functional, resulting in greater access to and use of maternal and neo-natal care services, particularly by poor, disadvantaged, and tribal
    groups.
 Decrease in the infant mortality rate (IMR) from 43/1,000 live births in 2005, to 22/1,000 live births in 2012 (SRS, India Census).
 Decrease in the maternal mortality rate (MMR) from 109 in 2004-05, to 79 in 2012-13.
 All 5 tribal health interventions well established with good uptake.
 Public-private partnerships for emergency transportation and mortuary van services well established.
 Effective non-communicable disease interventions scaled up throughout the state; non-communicable disease prevention, screening, and treatment pilot
    scaled up to all 32 districts. Over 6.2 million people screened for hypertension and 740,000 put on treatment; over 4 million screened for diabetes and
    210,000 put on treatment; 2.8 million women screened for cervical cancer and more than 121,000 identified positive for the condition; and 2.7 million
    screened for breast cancer and more than 36,000 women identified positive for the condition.
 Improved health outcomes, access, and quality of service delivery through accreditation of health facilities, strengthened oversight of the public sector
    health systems, and greater engagement of NGOs.
 Increased effectiveness of public sector hospital services, primarily at district and sub-district levels.

Implementing Agency: Tamil Nadu Health Systems Project, Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation and Public Works Department.

Key Development Partners: Department of Public Health, Department of Medical Services, and Department of Medical Education, Government of Tamil Nadu;
Electronics Corporation of Tamil Nadu; National Institute of Epidemiology; Department of Education; Department of Labor; and Tamil Nadu Corporation for
Development of Women.




                                                                                   87
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Technical Engineering Education Quality Improvement II Project
Key Dates:
Approved: March 18, 2010
Effective: August 6, 2010
Closing: December 31, 2014

    Financier                              Financing*          Disbursed         Undisbursed
    IDA                                          208                47.2               160.8
    Government of India                          147
    Other
    Total Project Cost                           355
    *US$ millions; as of February 19, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report


Background and Objectives: The government of India has set itself the target of training 500 million people, from basic literacy to higher degrees, by 2020.
The higher education sector is beset by problems - from non-transparent governance, to poor quality, low investments, lack of labor market orientation, and
weak quality assurance. The first phase of the Technical Engineering Education Quality Improvement Project (TEQIP) started a reform process through 109
government and private engineering education institutions in 13 states and 18 national institutions. In the TEQIP institutions, graduates’ salaries increased
by 90 percent over the baseline in nominal terms, and the employment rate increased by 42 percent. About 83 percent of the existing education curricula
have been revised, and about 91 percent of eligible programs are either accredited or under assessment for accreditation. The principles in the TEQIP
program - autonomy coupled with accountability - are central to the government’s reform agenda in higher education. These reforms have now been taken
forward in the second phase of the TEQIP, which has almost doubled the number of participating institutions and states. The project development objective
of TEQIP II is to strengthen selected institutions to produce more employable and higher quality engineers and prepare more post-graduate students to
reduce faculty shortage.
The TEQIP II project has two components:

      Improving quality of education in selected institutions: grants are provided to institutions to improve undergraduate education or graduate
       education, and to establish Centers of Excellence.
      Improving System Management: includes a number of activities to improve the governance and management of institutions and the system (including
       management training, establishing a management information system, and support governing bodies).



Key Results Achieved and Expected: The project is making good progress toward achieving its key performance indicators. More specifically:
 The percentage of institutions that have academic autonomy has increased from 30 percent to 59 percent, only 6 percent short of its target value of 65
    percent.
 The number of faculty with Masters or PhD degrees has also increased and surpassed its end-project target of 60 percent. The baseline was 45 percent
    and today 70 percent of faculty have these higher educational degrees.
 The number of Masters and PhD level students has also increased from 30,000 to 32,269, against a 34,000 end-project target.
 The proportion of programs supported under the TEQIP project which are officially accredited or applied for has increased from 30 percent to 38
    percent, against a 50 percent end-project target. This indicator has shown slower progress, as for some programs’ the accreditation period ended, and
    many new programs have been started and only recently applied for accreditation.

The project was restructured in January 2014 which included a cancellation of US$80 million.

Implementing Agency: Ministry of Human Resources Development, Department of Higher Education, New Delhi. Most of the resources under the project
are provided to individual engineering colleges to carry out improvements in line with their Institutional Development Proposals. The state governments are
also partners, as they provide support through State Facilitation Units and meet 25 percent of project costs.




                                                                              88
                                                        INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Third Tamil Nadu Urban Development Project (TNUDP III)
 Key Dates:
 Approved: July 5, 2005
 Effective: October 19, 2005
 Closing: March 31, 2014

 Financier                                 Financing*       Disbursed             Undisbursed
 IBRD                                           300.0           264.0                    36.0
 Government of Tamil Nadu                        94.0             84.0                   10.0
 Capital Markets                                 40.0             40.0                    0.0
 Total Project Cost                             434.0           388.0                    46.0
 *US$ millions, as of January 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objective: Tamil Nadu is the most urbanized among the larger states in India, with a total population of about 72 million and an
urbanization rate of 48 percent. Tamil Nadu has four cities with over a million people, including its capital, Chennai, and faces fundamental challenges in
managing urbanization and providing for adequate public housing and urban services such as water supply, sewerage, drainage, solid waste management
and urban transportation networks, and systems for a fast growing urban population. The Tamil Nadu Urban Development Project is the third in the series
of Bank support for urban development to the state, and part of a long-standing partnership with the state on urban development.

The development objective of the project is to improve the delivery of urban services by enhancing the quality of urban infrastructure and strengthening
the institutional and financial framework. This would be achieved through: strengthening and deepening the empowerment of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)
by continuing and expanding capacity building programs; and by mobilizing resources on a sustainable basis for urban infrastructure investments through
private sector financing, and linking ULBs to financial markets through the intermediation of the Tamil Nadu Urban Development Fund (TNUDF). The
project components are:
  Institutional Development component: Supports capacity building initiatives at ULBs, including IT/E-governance, urban mapping, transportation
      master-plans, and training municipal staff.
  Urban Investment component: Urban Investments through the Tamil Nadu Urban Development Fund (TNUDF), including investment support
      through a line of credit in the form of sub-loans and grants to ULBs for urban infrastructure and investment support for urban transport
      improvements in and around Chennai.

 Key Results Achieved:
  TNUDF established as a state-level, viable ‘Municipal Fund’ - a first-of-its-kind Bank engagement in India. Established under the earlier TNUDP-II, the
     Fund has served as a model for many other states;
  TNUDF has maintained a 100 percent repayment track record on sub-loans to ULBs to date (against a target of less than 95 percent), and carried out
     pioneering transactions including: the first pooled finance municipal bond issue; promoting capital contributions from beneficiaries of urban
     projects as a financing mechanism; and public-private partnerships at the municipal level;
  Approximately US$40 million has been leveraged through market-based and non-traditional sources;
  Computerization and e-governance has been implemented in 49 smaller ULBs as part of capacity building efforts;
  Over 180 km of city roads have been upgraded; water supply services have improved in 17 ULBs, benefitting over 400,000 people; and over 300,000
     have started benefiting from new sewerage services/connections across 7 ULBs, with more sewerage schemes expected to be commissioned over
     the next few months.

 Implementing Agency: Municipal Administration and Water Supply Department, government of Tamil Nadu; Tamil Nadu Urban Development Fund
 (TNUDF), and Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority (CMDA).

 Key Development Partners: KfW, the German Development Bank, and JBIC (Japan Bank for International Cooperation) have participated through
 parallel lines of credit to TNUDF using the Bank’s framework.




                                                                           89
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization and Water Bodies Restoration and
Management Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: January 23, 2007
    Effective: April 9, 2007
    Closing: September 30, 2014

    Financier                              Financing*       Disbursed              Undisbursed
    IBRD                                        335.0            163.3                   171.7
    IDA                                         150.0            150.0                       0
    Government of Tamil Nadu                     81.0
    Total Project Cost                          566.0
    *US$ millions; as of January 1, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

    Background and Objectives: Tamil Nadu is a water-stressed state in southern India. Problems associated with water availability have become more
    pronounced due to increasing demands from both industry and households, as well as a long-term uptrend in the use of water for agriculture. The Tamil
    Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization and Water Bodies Restoration and Management Project supports the government of Tamil Nadu’s goal of
    improving irrigation systems across the state to increase agricultural and livestock productivity, and create market linkages for farmers. The government
    also recognizes the need to develop and implement a comprehensive institutional framework for efficient water management.

    The project’s development objective is for selected stakeholders (i.e. those in the watershed area covered by the project) to increase irrigated agriculture
    productivity in a sustainable water resources management framework. The project has five components:

      Irrigation Systems Modernization in a Sub-basin Framework: focuses on improvements in local water body’s irrigation and larger irrigation systems.
      Agricultural Intensification and Diversification: focuses on improvements in crop, livestock, and fisheries varieties and management practices, as well
       as improvements in marketing linkages for farmers.
      Institutional Modernization for Irrigated Agriculture: focuses on capacity building for the Water Resources Organization and the establishment and
       operation of Water Users Associations.
      Water Resources Management: focuses on establishing and operating a State Water Resources Management Agency as an apex body for water
       management issues for the state.
      Project Management Support

 Key Results Achieved and Expected: The Project is progressing well toward achieving its targets.
 Crop yields have increased anywhere from 18 to 32 percent, in line with the project target (25-30 percent).
 Farmers have diversified from traditional crops such as paddy to higher-value horticultural crops (30 percent area increase).
 New micro-irrigation systems, which cover over 37,000 hectares, have already been introduced against an end-of-project target of 40,000 ha.
 Farmers’ incomes from agriculture have increased by roughly 35 percent, progressing well toward the intended target of 5 0 percent.
 Planned targets for improved irrigation systems are being achieved in terms of area coverage, and the quality of these interventions has been above that
    prevailing outside the project.
 The planned number of Water Users Associations has been established, though their functioning is less effective than anticipated. A model for
    invigorating the WUAs through a broader program of community water budgeting has been tested successfully and is being expanded.
 The project has successfully tested a model to integrate the activities of various line departments at the local level based on Single Window Information
    Centers, and this model is also being scaled up.
 The State Water Resources Management Agency is established and serves as a hub for the state to deal more effectively with its water management
    issues.

Implementing Agencies: There are eight implementing agencies involved in the project. The primary one is the Water Resources Organization of the Public
Works Department. Other agencies are: Department of Agriculture, Department of Horticulture, Tamil Nadu Agriculture University, Department of
Agricultural Marketing, Department of Agricultural Engineering, Department of Animal Husbandry, and Department of Fisheries. The work of these agencies
is being coordinated by the Multi-Disciplinary Project Unit, established by the government of Tamil Nadu specifically for the IAMWARM Project.




                                                                               90
                                                        INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Uttar Pradesh Health Systems Strengthening Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: December 20, 2011
    Effective: May 25, 2012
    Closing: March 31, 2017

    Financier                         Financing*      Disbursed             Undisbursed
    IDA                                 147.18           17.09                 129.97
    Government of India                  17.03            1.90                 15.13
    Total Project Cost                  164.21           18.99                 145.10
    *US$ millions; as of February 27, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Uttar Pradesh is India’s most populous state with an estimated population of nearly 200 million, or 17 percent of the
population of India (Census 2011). Seventy-seven percent of the population lives in rural areas, and about 33 percent live below the poverty line. Uttar
Pradesh has been ranked in the bottom third of Indian states on the Human Poverty Index since 1981, and the state lags behind all other states of the
country on most human development indicators.

Uttar Pradesh will determine achievement of India’s health goals and its health related Millennium Development Goals, given the size of the state
population and the disproportionately higher mortality and morbidity rates. Public health spending has been steadily increasing in the state and is no
longer the binding constraint. Despite increasing government, donor, and private investments in the health sector in Uttar Pradesh, the main challenges
that are undermining the full impact of the inputs are centered on inadequate organizational performance. The Bank-financed project is expected to
leverage its resources to support the government of Uttar Pradesh to improve the efficiency of the health system and enhance the effectiveness of
public investment in the health sector.

The development objective of the Uttar Pradesh Health Systems Strengthening Project is to improve the efficiency, quality, and accountability of health
services delivery in the state by strengthening the state Health Department’s management and systems capacity. The project’s two components are:

      Strengthening the Department of Health's management and accountability Systems: supports: (i) strengthening strategic planning functions;
       (ii) improving use of data for program management; (iii) strengthening the use of financial information for improved decision making, and
       strengthening of procurement and supply chain management systems; and (iv) introducing and strengthening social accountability mechanisms
       and introducing provider incentives in the public sector, and evaluating their impact.
      Improving the Department of Health’s capacity to perform its quality assurance role and more effectively engage the private sector :
       supports: (i) strengthening the institutional capacity for service quality improvement and regulatory capacity by establishing Quality Assurance
       (QA), Environment Management, and Public-Private Partnership (PPP) cells in the Directorate of Health; (ii) hospital accreditation under the
       National Accreditation Board of Hospitals; (iii) contracting with the private sector for delivery of diagnostic services and non-clinical support
       services; and (iv) strengthening human resources management and availability.

The project disburses a third of the credit against results met in pre-agreed indicators (Disbursement Linked Indicators); it uses a technical assistance
provider and works through the regular client systems, with necessary risk mitigation.

Key Results Expected:
 Creation and staffing of key cells in the Health Directorate.
 Supporting the government in its development of a draft health PPP policy, and on strengthening procurement and supply chain management.
 Development of drug stock indenting and supply chain management software for all districts, and training staff to use it.
 Identification of facilities for accreditation and a gap assessment for all hospitals underway.
 Development and piloting of a draft health report card.
 Development of draft bidding documents and contracts for housekeeping and diagnostics.

Implementing Agency: Department of Health and Family Welfare, government of Uttar Pradesh.

Key Development Partners: Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and UNICEF. Duke University (impact evaluation) and IFC (larger private sector
engagement).




                                                                           91
                                                          INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



India: Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project 2
 Key Dates:
 Approved: August 28, 2013
 Effective: December 10, 2013
 Closing: October 31, 2020

 Financing
 Financier                            Financing              Disbursed               Undisbursed
 IBRD
 IDA                                    360.0                $9.4 million                350.6
 Government of India                    155.0
 Total Project Cost                     515.0
In US$ millions; as of March 11, 2014

Background: With a population of approximately 200 million, Uttar Pradesh (UP) lags behind most Indian states across a number of human development
indicators. Currently, over 50 million people live below the poverty line with a large majority living in rural areas. Agriculture accounts for about 30 percent
of the state GDP and 60 percent of the total employment. Rural people are especially dependent on agriculture as a source of labor and livelihoods. The
project aims to help build the institutional capacity of water-related institutions—institutions needed to increase agricultural productivity in this low-income
state where agriculture will continue to play an important role in alleviating poverty.

Under the Phase 1 operation, irrigation and drainage systems covering about three percent of the irrigated area (343,000 hectares) were rehabilitated and
modernized in the pilot Jaunpur Branch basin using modern surveys and designs. More than 800 Water Users Associations (WUAs) were established and
strengthened following the passing of the seminal UP Participatory Irrigation Management Act (2009). Other achievements include a state-level water
resource agency and introduction of a management information system for the UPID. Phase 2 will rehabilitate and modernize critical irrigation and drainage
infrastructure in identified areas, consolidate and deepen various institutional reforms established under Phase 1, and refocus on water-saving agricultural
activities through farmer water schools and joint activities between the Irrigation and Agriculture departments.

Development Objective and brief component description: the Project Development Objective is to: a) strengthen the institutional and policy framework
for integrated water resources management for the entire state; and (b) increase agricultural productivity and water productivity by supporting farmers in
targeted irrigation areas. The project comprises five six components:

         Strengthening of State-Level Water Institutions and Inter-Sector Coordination: this component aims to provide support to the institutions in the state
          responsible for overall integrated water resources management and implementation of the State Water Policy.
         Modernization and Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage Systems: this component is the major infrastructure component and aims to improve
          the system performance of key canal systems in the state through modernization and rehabilitation.
         Consolidation and Enhancement of Irrigation Institutional Reforms: this component aims to enhance the efficiency of the UP Irrigation Department
          (UPID) and strengthen the participatory irrigation management (PIM) approach (through water users associations).
         Enhancing Agriculture Productivity and On- Farm Water Management: this component aims to improve the overall agriculture productivity and
          water-use efficiency at the field level.
         Feasibility Studies and Preparation Activities for the Next Phase: this component is to prepare detailed surveys and designs for future phases.
         Project Coordination and Monitoring

Expected Key Results: The following results are expected to be achieved during the first year of project implementation:
     50 percent completion of the Parallel Lower Ganga Canal and three reservoir systems in the Bundelkhand.
     75 percent preparation of package A, B, and C survey, design, and bidding documents.
     State Water Agency major consultancy draft reports (including flood forecasting tools).
     At least one cycle of farmer water schools and associated agriculture investments.
     Water user association elections held and completed for year-1 investment areas.
     UPID real-time monitoring systems installed in year one investment areas.
     Rehabilitation and modernization works have commenced in two major irrigation systems (on the Parallel Lower Ganga Canal and in
         Bundelkhand) and the survey and design consultancies for the remaining works packages have been mobilized and are starting the field surveys.

 Implementation Entity: Irrigation Department, Agriculture Department, Groundwater Department




                                                                              92
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Uttar Pradesh Sodic Lands Reclamation Project III
Key Dates:
Approved: June 30, 2009
Effective: September 18, 2009
Closing: December 31, 2015

 Financier                                             Financing*        Disbursed           Undisbursed
 IDA                                                        197.0             68.8                 128.2
 Government of Uttar Pradesh                                 49.2             15.8                  33.4
 Beneficiaries                                               25.8              8.3                  17.5
 Total Project Cost                                         272.0             92.9                 179.1
 *US$ millions; as of March 1, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Uttar Pradesh is the most populous state in India. It is also one of the poorest, with an annual per capita income of US$436 in
2011, compared to US$1,410 nationally: almost 40 percent of the population lives below the poverty line. Agriculture is a crucial sector for the state. Eighty
percent of the population is rural and highly dependent on agricultural production for their livelihoods; agriculture employs about 66 percent of the labor
force, primarily in rice and wheat cultivation. Yet the state’s a griculture suffers from productivity gaps of more than 50 percent in key crops, such as rice and
wheat.

The Bank-supported Uttar Pradesh Sodic Lands Reclamation Project-III builds on the lessons learned from two predecessor projects that reclaimed about
255,000 hectares of sodic lands from 1993 to 2007. The ongoing project aims to sustainably reclaim another 130,000 ha covering 25 districts of predominantly
barren and low productivity sodic lands. This would improve household food security through increased productivity and cropping intensity. By focusing on
degraded lands cultivated by poor farmers, the project contributes to sustainable poverty alleviation. The Bank has been the government of Uttar Pradesh’s
key partner in sodic land reclamation for the last 15 years and has helped develop and refine the intervention model, including institutional development at
the state and user levels.

The project development objective is to increase agricultural productivity of degraded lands in selected areas of Uttar Pradesh by reversing water-induced
land degradation, enhancing soil fertility, and improving the provision of agriculture support services. The project has five components:
    On-Farm Development and Land Treatment: aims to sustainably reverse water-induced land degradation - salinization, sodification, and water-
     logging - through carefully sequenced technical interventions.
    Improvement of Drainage Systems: aims to improve the drainage networks in the project area to remove/leach effluents, excess rain, and irrigation
     water from reclaimed and adjoining areas.
    Agriculture Support Services: aims to increase agricultural productivity by introducing improved technology, better agronomic practices, and more
     effective provision of key support services.
    Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Market Access: improves the profitability of farm production and enhances livelihoods of the
     poor by creating better input-output market linkages and more efficient and effective delivery of key support services, and strengthening community-
     level capacities and provision of some productive infrastructure.
    Project Management: aims to ensure smooth implementation of all project activities, monitoring of project implementation progress and
     outputs/outcomes, and learning from project experience.

Key Results Achieved:
 Over 65,000 ha of sodic land have been reclaimed, with another 20,000 ha expected this year.
 Over 4,000 ha of ravine land have also been reclaimed, against a target of 5,000 ha.
 The productivity of the reclaimed sodic lands has increased to nearly 6.5 tons per ha and the cropping intensity to 200 percent. A majority of these
    lands had been previously barren. On both these fronts (productivity and cropping intensity), the mid-term achievements have exceeded the targets.
 The annual crop income per household, at nearly US$700, has exceeded the end of project target.
 The project continues to have an inclusive, pro-poor character: 93 percent of beneficiaries are small and marginal farmers, and 80 percent of
    beneficiaries belong to backward castes which constitute the most marginalized communities. The project has enabled nearly 40,000 landless and
    marginal farmers (37.5 percent of total beneficiaries) to obtain secure tenure and possession of land (some 17,000 ha). Of this, over 3,000
    beneficiaries have been allotted new land.

Implementing Agency: Uttar Pradesh Bhumi Sudhar Nigam, government of Uttar Pradesh.

Key Development Partners: Departments of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Irrigation; Panchayati Raj, government of Uttar Pradesh, and the Remote
Sensing Application Centre, Lucknow.




                                                                               93
                                                  INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Uttarakhand Disaster Recovery Project
Key Dates:
Approved: October 25, 2013
Effective: February 7, 2014
Closing: December 31, 2017

    Financier                                   Financing*        Disbursed         Undisbursed
    IDA                                               250                 0                 250
    Government of Uttarakhand                            0
    Total Project Cost                                250
    *US$ millions equivalent; as of October 4, 2013
    For more information see the WB Project site
    or the Government of Uttarakhand Project site

Background and Objectives: In June 2013 the monsoon arrived almost two weeks earlier than expected in the state of Uttarakhand,
located in northern Himalayan region of India. From June 15 to 17, 2013, an extreme amount of precipitation (124.5 – 244.4 mm) hit
several parts of the higher reaches of the Himalayas. This unprecedented rainfall resulted in a sudden increase in water levels, giving
rise to flash floods in the Mandakini, Alakananda, Bhagirathi and other river basins, while also causing extensive landslides at various
locations. According to official sources, over 900,000 people have been affected by the event. This region is one of the most important
pilgrimage circuits in India. Since the disaster coincided with the peak tourist and pilgrimage season, it significantly increased the
number of casualties, missing, and affected population. More than 4,000 lives were lost, 4,200 villages were affected, about 3,320
houses and 995 public buildings were damaged, and close to 9,000km of roads were affected.

Uttarakhand is also in a zone highly prone to natural disasters. The entire state falls within Zone IV and V (V represents the highest
level of seismicity) of the Earthquake Zoning Map of India. In the recent past, the state has witnessed two major earthquakes
(Uttarkashi 1991 and Chamoli 1999). Every year, the state faces losses, particularly during the monsoon, due to rains, cloudbursts,
landslides, floods, hailstorms, and waterlogging events. The Uttarakhand Disaster Recovery Project supports the government of
Uttarakhand for risk and vulnerability reduction, with assistance for reconstructing damaged infrastructure, restoring connectivity,
and improving technical support for managing future disaster risks.

The development objective of the project is to restore housing, rural connectivity and build resilience of communities in Uttarakhand
and increase the technical capacity of state entities to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency. The project
has four components:

      Resilient Infrastructure Reconstruction: focusing on the immediate reconstruction of damaged housing and restoration of public
       buildings essential for public services using resilient construction standards under an owner driven reconstruction modality.
      Rural Road Connectivity: focusing on restoring the connectivity, providing access to markets as well as health and education
       services, through the reconstruction of damaged roads and bridges with upgraded designs to withstand earthquake and flood
       forces as per the latest official design guidelines, including improved drainage and slope stabilization.
      Technical Assistance and Capacity Building for Disaster Risk Management: to enhance the capabilities of government entities
       in risk mitigation and response, including: risk modeling and assessment; establishing a decision support system; strengthening
       early warning systems and response capacity; and to finance relevant studies to better understand and manage natural disaster
       risks.
      Financing Disaster Response Expenses: for eligible expenses already incurred during the post-disaster response period.
      Implementation Support: to support the incremental operating costs of the project, including as well the creation of small,
       temporary field implementation offices, training, exposure visits, and knowledge exchange programs.
      Contingency Emergency Response: this component can be triggered, at the request of the government, following an adverse
       natural event that causes a major natural disaster to re-allocate unallocated project funds to support response and reconstruction.

Key Results Expected:
 2,500 affected households with resilient housing, restoration of 20 public buildings, 3,600km of roads, 140 bridle bridges, and 400
    bridle roads restored.
 By the end of the project the Uttarakhand Disaster Management Authority will be informing disaster management preparedness
    and response measures in the state using a robust information system, based on updated disaster risk data.

    Key Development Partners: The Bank team is working closely with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), National Disaster
    Management Authority, National Institute of Disaster Management, and Uttarakhand State Disaster Management Authority.




                                                                    94
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Uttarakhand Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
Key Dates:
Approved: May 9, 2006
Effective: October 11, 2006
Closing: December 31, 2015

    Financier                                         Financing*    Disbursed       Undisbursed
    IDA                                                       126         108               18
    Additional Financing (IDA)                                 24
    Government of Uttarakhand and Government of India         104
    Total Project Cost                                        230
    *US$ millions; amounts based on exchange rate as of February 20, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: In 2003, only 50 percent of habitations in the mountain state of Uttarakhand were categorized as ‘fully covered’ with
functioning water supply schemes, 38 percent as ‘partially covered,’ and about 12 percent as ‘not covered’. Between 75 to 80 percent of the rural population
did not have access to latrines. Villagers spent one to three hours a day collecting water for domestic use. The problem was aggravated by water supply
systems with outdated design and inadequate operations and maintenance. All too often, rural water supply and sanitation services did not adequately
respond to the user communities’ needs; and structures were built at sites without consideration of community needs or prefer ences. This resulted in
government-dominated and target-driven service that became unsustainable in many communities.

The project development objective is to improve the effectiveness of Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (RWSS) services through decentralization, increasing
the role of Panchayati Raj Institutions and local communities in the state of Uttarakhand, and by restoring services of damaged schemes in disaster affected
areas. The project supports a sector-wide approach (SWAp) and has three components:

      RWSS Sector Development: supports the state’s sector reform process by establishing and enhancing its institutional capacity to implement, manage, and
       sustain the medium term RWSS program, including sector planning, programming, and M&E. Key elements include transfer of RWSS service delivery from
       the state water agencies to Panchayati Raj Institutions, and transformation of the government’s role from service provider to facilitator.
      RWSS Infrastructure Investments: aims to improve sustainable access to RWSS services by financing the infrastructure and software investments. All
       new water supply investments are made in an integrated manner, with catchment-area management, health, and hygiene awareness promotion, and
       incentives for construction of individual household latrines. The new investments include building or rehabilitating water supply and sanitation facilities,
       including water source-strengthening measures, which the communities plan, implement, and manage.
      RWSS Program Management Support and M&E
       RWSS Disaster Mitigation Activities

Key Results Achieved:
 The RWSS SWAp with uniform policies and principles has been successfully implemented across all 13 districts in the state.
 The three implementing agencies have completed water supply works for Single Village Schemes and Multi Village Schemes in 7,208 habitations, against
      the overall target of 8,270 habitations.
 The project is expected to cover 8,490 habitations, exceeding the project target of 8,270 habitations.
 The project has already benefited 1.22 million people, against a target of 1.2 million.
 An additional 721,358 Individual Household Latrines have been constructed, and national-level Nirmal Gram Puruskar (NGP) awards received by 525
      Gram Panchayats (accounting for 32 percent of the Project Gram Panchayats, against an overall project target of 30 percent).
 The government of Uttarakhand has honored the project management unit with the Right to Information (RTI) Award in October 2009 and October 2010
      for its good governance and transparency practices.
Additional IDA support to the on-going project requested by government was negotiated on January 15, 2014. The additional financing will support
reconstruction and restoration of RWSS schemes (both project constructed schemes and other schemes) damaged by natural disaster. The closing date of the
existing credit will be extended by 18 months, from June 16, 2014 to December 31, 2015.

Implementing Agencies: Swajal Project Management Unit, Uttarakhand Jal Nigan (UJN), and Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan (UJS).




                                                                                   95
                                                         INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydroelectric Power Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: June 30, 2011
 Effective: November 7, 2011
 Closing: December 31, 2017

 Financier                                 Financing*        Disbursed        Undisbursed
 IBRD                                            648.0              1.6             646.4
 THDCIL                                          274.0                 -                -
 Total Project Cost                              922.0                 -                -
 *US$ millions; as of January 31, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: Recurrent and severe electricity shortages (peak power deficit of 9.0 percent and energy deficit of 8.7 percent in 2013) have
imposed high costs on the Indian economy. In addition, the poor technical and commercial performance of most of the state electricity providers has led to a
loss of US$20 billion during 2011-12, according to the India Power Sector Review Study (2013). This bleak scenario is compounded by the fact that more than
350 million people in India today still lack access to electricity, impeding their ability to fully benefit from a high-growing economy. Furthermore, India’s
power sector also relies heavily on fossil fuels (primarily coal), and the country is currently the world’s fourth largest gr eenhouse gas (GHG) emitter. To
address these issues, the government of India plans to: (i) expand generation by using renewable energy sources whenever feasible and strengthen the
central transmission network to facilitate energy exchange across regions; (ii) improve energy efficiency and performance of institutions in the power sector;
and (iii) expand access for rural and peri-urban populations. The Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydroelectric Power Project (VPHEP) is an important part of the World
Bank‘s commitment to helping improve the performance and sustainability of the hydropower sector in India, which is critical to the greening of the power
sector, and sustaining the country’s economic growth. In line with the Ministry of Power’s desire to develop public sector h ydro companies into top-
performing public companies in the power sector, like POWERGRID and NTPC Limited, the Bank is supporting THDC India Limited (THDCIL) to strengthen its
capacity and systems to become a leading hydropower company. The project, which supports activities on the Alaknanda River in Uttarakhand and the
Rampur Hydroelectric Project on the Sutlej River in neighboring Himachal Pradesh, provides an opportunity to inform the hydro policy dialogue and practice
in these two Himalayan states that are expected play a critical role in India‘s hydropower development in the future. Building on lessons learned in other
countries, the project will help create effective project execution for cascaded hydropower systems and foster a coordinated approach to river basin planning
and development. VPHEP will also help increase generating capacity to complement the government of India’s efforts to improve the perform ance of the
country’s distribution and transmission networks. The project development objective is to increase the supply of electricity to India‘s national grid through
the addition of renewable, low-carbon energy; and strengthen THDCIL’s institutional capacity with respect to the preparation and implementation of
economically, environmentally, and socially sustainable hydropower projects. It has two components:
     Construction of the 444 MW Vishnugad Pipalkoti Hydro Electric Project in Chamoli District, Uttarakhand, India;
     Support to capacity building and institutional strengthening at THDC India Limited, the project developer.

Key Expected Results:
             Addition of 444 MW of renewable energy (hydropower) generation capacity.
              The strengthening of the institutional capacity of THDCIL through the development and implementation of a capacity building and
               institutional strengthening plan.

 Implementing Agency: THDC India Limited (THDCIL).




                                                                             96
                                                           INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT


INDIA: Vocational Training Improvement Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: June 5, 2007
 Effective: December 17, 2007
 Closing: November 30, 2014

 Financier                      Financing*            Disbursed        Undisbursed
 IDA                                 277.4                179.7               98.2
 Government of India                  79.0                     -                 -
 Total Project Cost                  359.0                179.7               98.2
 *US$ million; as of February 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report

Background and Objectives: India is a fast growing economy with a rising demand for skilled workers. A skilled workforce enhances the efficiency and
flexibility of the labor market, reduces skills bottlenecks, and enhances mobility and productivity. One of the key suppliers of such workers is the vocational
education and training (VET) system. A major component of the VET system is the Craftsmen Training Scheme (CTS), run under the auspices of the Ministry of
Labor and Employment and the National Council for Vocational Training ( NCVT) at the national level, and the State Department’s dealing with vocational
training and the State Council for Vocational Training (SCVT) at the state level. However, graduates from the CTS system face low labor market outcomes; the
2006 Baseline Tracer Study conducted by the World Bank shows that less than 30 percent of graduates from industrial training institutes find employment
upon graduation. The Indian government sought World Bank assistance to introduce key reforms at the system and institution levels.

The project development objective is to improve the employment outcomes of graduates from the vocational training system, by making the design and
delivery of training more demand responsive. It has three components:
    Improving Quality of Vocational Training focuses on: (a) improving quality and relevance of training provided in 400 eligible Industrial Training
     Institutes (ITIs) selected competitively from eligible states/union territories; (b) upgrading training of ITI instructors; and (c) providing incentive funds
     to states to reward good performance in project implementation.
    Promoting Systemic Reforms and Innovations focuses on activities that enhance the overall reach and effectiveness of the vocational training system
     in the medium-term. Implementation of activities under this component is the responsibility of the Directorate General of Employment and Training,
     discharged in collaboration with states, industry associations, and private training providers, as necessary.
    Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation support is provided to: (a) establish project management and implementation structures at the
     national and state levels; (b) make improvements in system management and implementation of reforms by training policy planners, managers, and
     administrators; (c) carry out project monitoring and dissemination of information with the help of a computer-based management information system;
     and (d) carry out project evaluation and policy and system research studies at the national and state levels.

Key Results Achieved and Expected: The project has performed well, surpassing many of its end-of-project targets. A new sector-focused multi-skilling,
multi entry and exit vocational training course called “Center of Excellence" was introduced in the CTS system. The Institution Management Committee (IMC),
with significant private sector representation, was set up at training institution level to bring strong private sector participation in institutional management,
and significant power and functions were devolved to the IMC. At the national and state levels, private sector participation in decision-making bodies was
introduced. A strong monitoring and evaluation culture was created by establishing a sector-wide and web-based management information system. Capacity
was significantly strengthened for developing curricula, training trainers, and developing training and teaching aids. This had an impact on recruitment and
professional development policies related to trainers.
 78 percent** of the graduates from project ITIs already exit from the CTS system with a NCVT certificate, compared to the baseline of 61 percent and an
     end-of-project target of 73 percent.
 60 percent of project ITI graduates find employment within one year of finishing training, compared to the baseline 32 percent and an end-of-project
     target of 50 percent. 38 percent of female graduates find employment within a year of finishing training compared to the baseline of 18.7 percent.
 Real monthly earnings of employed graduates from project it is, measured one year after completing training, rose from a baseline of Rs2,421 to Rs3550 #
     (as of October 2012).

**Data refer to the batch of trainees enrolled in 2010-11. These trainees would have taken their final institution-based examination in 2012. # Data from mid-
term tracer study.

Implementing Agency: National Project Implementation Unit, Ministry of Labor and Employment.

Key Development Partners: Directorate General of Employment and Training, Ministry of Labor and Employment.




                                                                               97
                                                    INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: West Bengal Accelerated Development of Minor Irrigation Project
 Key Dates:
 Approved: October 4, 2011
 Effective: March 19, 2012
 Closing: December 31, 2017

 Financier                             Financing*       Disbursed        Undisbursed
 IBRD                                         125              1.22            123.78
 IDA                                          125            14.35             106.91
 Government of West Bengal                     50
 Total Project Cost                           300
 *As of March 1, 2014
 For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report


Background and Objectives: Water resources development is a priority for the government of India, given the country’s limited water
resources. Development of irrigation infrastructure is necessary to reduce climatic risks, and irrigated agricultural development has always been
central to the government’s strategy for ensuring food security for all. The average agriculture productivity levels are stil l low in West Bengal,
compared to those of advanced agricultural states in the country. There is large potential for enhancing agriculture productivity, provided that
the timely supply of all inputs and adequate irrigation water can be assured. Despite having abundant surface and groundwater resources, 40
percent of the state’s cultivated area is rainfed, and the cropping intensity has stagnated at 180 percent over the last decade . The majority of the
rainfed area belongs to small and marginal farmers, and to help improve livelihoods, the state provides them with minor irrigation schemes for
exploiting surface and ground water, including lift irrigation, deep and shallow tube wells, pump-dug wells, tanks, and small water harvesting
structures. Once developed and implemented, these schemes are operated and maintained by the community. Unfortunately, performance of
these minor irrigation schemes has been mixed, mainly due to the absence of any strong ownership among users. The Bank-supported West
Bengal Accelerated Development of Minor Irrigation Project aims to contribute to improved reliability of water resources for irrigation and
increased agricultural productivity by empowering communities. The total area to be developed under the project is 139,000 hectares, benefiting
an estimated 166,000 farm families.

The project development objective is to enhance agricultural production of small and marginal farmers by developing minor irrigation schemes,
strengthening community-based irrigation management, and supporting agricultural development, including provision of agricultural services,
encouraging crop diversification and use of new technologies, and creating income-generating opportunities. The project’s four components are:
    Strengthening Community-based Institutions: by establishing water users’ associations and other farmers’ organizations to assume
     responsibilities for management, operation, and maintenance of minor irrigation schemes and improved irrigated agricultural practices.
    Irrigation System Development: by supporting construction of 2,400 new minor surface water irrigation schemes and 2,260 new minor
     ground water irrigation schemes.
    Agriculture Support Services: by providing agricultural support services in the project area to enhance productivity and diversification in
     agriculture.
    Project Management Support: by strengthening the state’s water resources department to ensure effective project management.

Key Expected Results: The project, in its third year of implementation, is in the process of providing irrigation schemes for around 12,000 ha and
29,000 beneficiaries. The project’s main contribution will be in the area of modernized planning and monitoring, improved wat er resources
development and management practices, and creation of sustainable institutions to efficiently operate and maintain irrigation structures. The
project is expected to result in a more than 40 percent increase in yield of main agricultural crops (rice, oilseeds, and vegetables), 4,200 new
operational water users associations with 25 percent female beneficiaries, and more than 60 percent of marginal and poor farmers strengthened
to generate resources for management, operation, and maintenance of the schemes.

Implementing Agency: Department of Water Resources Investigation and Development, government of West Bengal.




                                                                        98
                                                            INDIA COUNTRY SNAPSHOT



INDIA: West Bengal Institutional Strengthening of Gram Panchayats Project
    Key Dates:
    Approved: June 8, 2010
    Effective: September 3, 2010
    Closing: December 31, 2015

    Financier                                      Financing*         Disbursed      Undisbursed
    IDA                                                   200             158.25           41.75
    Government of West Bengal                               35              35.00         0.00
    Total Project Cost                                    235             193.25           41.75
    *US$ millions; as of January 31, 2014
    For more information see the latest Implementation Status and Results Report
                                                                                                                       Strong citizen interface

Background and Objectives: West Bengal has a progressive record amongst Indian states in decentralization initiatives for local governance systems. The
Panchayats and Rural Development Department (PRDD) of the government of West Bengal (GoWB) is committed to expanding and deepening this process by
providing the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) with the resources, capacities, and incentives to improve service delivery and governance. The overall
strategic vision of the project is to institute a discretionary block grant system which incentivizes local governance and service delivery performance
throughout the state as an integral and ongoing element of the broader PRI fiscal framework in West Bengal.

The project development objective is to develop institutionally-strengthened local government bodies at the village levels - Gram Panchayats (GP). The project
features four main components:

      Support annual performance-based block grant: to participating GPs for local public goods and services. In order to access the grant, GPs are required
       to meet a prescribed set of mandatory minimum conditions and pass an annual independent score-based performance assessment in key areas.
      Focus on capacity building for GPs: provides support to strengthen the institutional capacity of GPs to deliver basic services.
      Strengthen PRDD’s oversight and systems for monitoring of PRIs: through (i) annual performance assessments and quality assurance audits; (ii)
       internal and external monitoring and reporting systems; (iii) evaluations and studies of the program; and (iv) external audit support.
      Support Program Management and Project Communications: in overall project coordination, implementation, and citizen communication .

 Key Results Achieved and Expected:
    96 percent of the GPs have already established well-functioning planning and fiduciary systems, compared to target of 80 percent.
 In FY14-15, a total of 960 GPs out of 1,000 GPs have qualified for the fourth round of the block grant. This is a 48 percent increase since the project
    started.
 At present, 98.6 percent of the project GPs have approved and disclosed their plans and budge ts; 99 percent have ‘clean’ external audits; 100 percent
    have up-to-date financial, planning, and accounting records maintained in the GP Management System; and around 97 percent could expend a minimum
    60 percent of all untied grants received by the third quarter in a fiscal year.
 Own Source Revenue generation by project GPs has increased by 65 percent in FY13-14 over the base year of FY10-11.
 The annual performance assessment shows that districts with a large vulnerable group population are progressively ranking better.
 Close to 83 percent GPs have incorporated vulnerable group plans into the FY13-14 GP annual plan;
    All project GPs undertake gender-based reporting on schemes.
 All project GPs provide detailed implementation reports through web-based management information system.

    Implementing Agencies: Panchayats and Rural Development Department, government of West Bengal.




                                                                                99
