                          86813




Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


March 2014
                                                    Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Economic Overview

Sri Lanka has achieved strong economic growth since the end of conflict in 2009 and GDP rose by 7.3 percent in 2013.
Sustaining this momentum will require greater private sector activity and investment, as well as boosting exports and
taking steps to tackle fiscal imbalances. The country needs policies that enhance skills to help it lift productivity and
improve the climate for foreign investment. Unemployment is low at four percent, but high youth unemployment and
limited female labor force participation pose challenges. Strong remittances from the two million overseas Sri Lankan
workers have helped to reduce the current account deficit, and foreign exchange reserves rose to over five months’ worth
of imports. But rising labor costs and a skills shortage constrains the country’s export potential.

Poverty Reduction

Sri Lanka has witnessed a sharp decline in headcount poverty, which fell from 23 percent in 2002 to nine percent in 2009,
driven by improved farm incomes, greater productivity among urban workers, and a lower dependency ratio. Economic
prosperity has also been broadly shared. But pockets of poverty persist, especially in the post-conflict regions of the north
and east. Safety net spending has fallen sharply as a share of GDP and needs to be better targeted.
In education, Sri Lanka has made impressive gains. It has lifted primary school enrollment levels to almost 100 percent,
and it gets as many girls into the classroom as boys. But there is a shortage of skills that the country needs to fill in order
to succeed in becoming a knowledge-based economy. Public spending on education is modest compared to middle income
countries. Sri Lanka has also achieved excellent results in health indicators, especially in view of its relatively low
spending on healthcare, although malnutrition among mothers and children remains high.
Rapid urbanization offers a growth opportunity if the country can create a strong network of environmentally sustainable
cities. But it faces serious capacity constraints in realizing this vision, and Bank projects back government efforts to
enhance urban areas. Sri Lanka also boasts a wealth of environmental assets and could become a leader in wildlife
tourism. However, it has suffered serious deforestation, and environmental sustainability does not get enough policy
attention or resources.

World Bank Group in Sri Lanka

The World Bank Group portfolio currently has a commitment value of over $1.6 billion. This includes 12 active Bank
projects, with a total commitment value of $1.34 billion, plus International Finance Corp’s investment portfolio of $280
million. Almost half of the Bank’s programs are focused on urban and transport infrastructure, followed by human
development, rural development and community livelihoods. The portfolio is highly rated, with no problem projects as of
February 2014. Over half of IFC’s investments are in Sri Lanka’s financial sector. It also operates 14 active advisory
projects, with a heavy emphasis on small and medium-sized enterprises.
The World Bank, which has been involved with the country for almost 60 years, is helping Sri Lanka tackle challenges as it
transitions to a middle income country. The Bank’s FY13-16 country partnership strategy with Sri Lanka focuses on
facilitating sustained private and public investment; improving living standards and social inclusion; and supporting
structural shifts in the economy. As the focus has pivoted from post-conflict reconstruction to an emphasis on equitable
access and social inclusion, most new projects are nationwide in design.




                                                              1
                                                     Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot




COUNTRY SNAPHOT
Nearing five years after the end of the three-decade armed conflict in the North East, Sri Lanka is now focusing on long-
term strategic and structural development challenges as it strives to transition to an upper middle income country. Key
challenges include ensuring that growth is inclusive, realigning public spending and policy with the needs of a middle
income country, ensuring appropriate resource allocations for the various tiers of government, and enhancing the role of
the private sector, including provision of appropriate incentives for increasing productivity and exports.



RECENT ECONOMIC AND SECTORAL DEVELOPMENTS

Growth Performance and Prospects

The Sri Lankan economy has seen robust annual growth at 6.4 percent over the course of 2003 to 2012, well above its
regional peers.1 Following the end of the civil conflict in May 2009, growth rose initially to eight percent, largely
reflecting a “peace dividend”, and underpinned by strong private consumption and investment. While growth was mostly
private sector driven, public investment contributed through large infrastructure investment, including post war
reconstruction efforts in the North and Eastern provinces. Growth closed at 7.3 percent in 20132, driven by a rebound in
the service sector which accounts for aabout 60 percent of GDP.3 With nearly two million Sri Lankans living abroad,
overseas employment has contributed with foreign exchange and remittances of around 10 percent of GDP in 2013.
Overall, unemployment at four percent is low, although youth unemployment (ages 15-24) at around 17.3 percent and
low female labor force participation at 30 percent do pose a challenge.

Sri Lanka seeks to achieve $4,000 in GDP per capita by 2016, from an estimated $3,280 in 2013, but faces three particular
macroeconomic challenges. Sustaining an eight percent-plus annual growth to meet this goal will require: (i) fostering
private sector development and greater private investment; (ii) increasing exports to generate jobs and managing the
current account deficit; and (iii) further addressing fiscal imbalances and reversing the declining trend in revenue
collection. Such growth would need to be driven by a high investment rate of above 40 percent of GDP, which seems
ambitious given the country’s 31 percent level in 2013.4

Growth will largely depend on fostering private sector development and private investment, especially increased foreign
direct investment. Increasing gross FDI above the two percent of GDP level achieved in 2013 will be crucial. Streamlining
procedures and reducing administrative barriers to FDI will be important in this regard. Sri Lanka will also need to
demonstrate sustained commitment to ensuring a conducive investment environment with clear rules of the game
applied equally. Notwithstanding Sri Lanka’s significant improvements on many counts in the 2013 World Bank Group
Doing Business Indicators, areas for further progress remain (Figure 1). Sri Lanka’s economy depends on FDI to bring in
innovation. The import of FDI is further underscored by the country’s limited domestic savings rate, brought about largely
by its demographic trends. Contrary to most economies in South Asia, Sri Lanka does not have a demographic dividend:
by 2036, more than 22 percent of the population will be over 60, and there will be 61 dependents per 100 adults.
Increases in the labor force, employment rates and productivity will be central to growth. Against the background of an
aging society, efficient and well-targeted social assistance will also become more important.




1
  These years also saw periods of high government fiscal deficits, double digit inflation, overheating and a balance of payments
crisis requiring assistance from the IMF and a significant adjustment to the exchange rate.
2
  Based on provisional data as of 18 March, 2014 released by the Department of Census and Statistics, Sri Lanka.
3
  Manufacturing and agriculture account for 30 and 11 percent of the economy, respectively. Sri Lanka’s main exports are
apparel, textiles and agricultural products, notably rice, rubber and tea.
4
  The country’s 2013 investment rate represents total investment, including public, private and foreign direct investment.

                                                               2
                                                                          Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot




Figure 1: Sri      Lanka
               Table       Doing
                      6: Sri        Business
                             Lanka Doing      Rankings
                                         Business Rankings              Figure 9.Most
                                                                    Figure2:              The most         problematic
                                                                                                                  problematic factors             factors  forbusiness
                                                                                                                                                               doing business
                                                                                                                                                     for doing
  Topic Rankings                     DB 2012 DB 2013 Change in Rank
                                                                      Tax rates ............................................................15.7
  Starting a Business                  71       33         38         Tax regulations ..................................................14.6
  Dealing with Construction Permits    116      112        4          Inflation .............................................................10.8
                                                                      Inefficient government bureaucracy....................9.9
  Getting Electricity                  104      103        1
                                                                      Policy instability..................................................9.3
  Registering Property                 164      143        21         Corruption............................................................9.1

  Getting Credit                       80       70         10          Inadequate supply of infrastructure …................8.1
                                                                      Access to financing..............................................6.5
  Protecting Investors                 46       49         -3         Restrictive labor regulations................................5.7
  Paying Taxes                         175      169        6          Foreign currency regulations...............................4.0

  Trading Across Borders               54       56         -2          Poor work ethic in national labor force ..............2.5
                                                                      Inadequately educated workforce........................1.6
  Enforcing Contracts                  134      133        1          Government instability/coups .............................1.0
  Resolving Insolvency                 49       51         -2          Crime and theft ...................................................0.7
                                                                                             Poor public health................................................0.2

                                                                                                                                                                     0   5            10        15   20
    Overall Ranking                            96         81              15                                                                                             Percent of responses
                                                                                             Source: The Global Competitiveness Report 2012-2013, World Economic Forum
    Source: World Bank Doing Business 2013

Sri Lanka’s growth and competitiveness are constrained by a skills gap that has emerged with the changing labor
market conditions. Sri Lanka’s economy is no longer dominated by the agriculture sector but rather by services, followed
by industry and manufacturing. Employment patterns have followed, shifting significantly from agriculture to industry
and services. Labor productivity levels need to rise, however. There is also a mismatch between graduates and private
sector needs particularly with regard to “soft skills”.5 Improving the quality of human capital through effective education
and skills development is central to Sri Lanka’s economic growth and competitiveness and t o the government’s aspiration
of becoming a knowledge-based economy.

The World Bank is helping to identify and address the particular challenges to skills development in Sri Lanka.
Beyond assisting the country’s education systems (see Education section below), World Bank-supported analytical work
has helped Sri Lanka’s education authorities in identifying critical policy issues related to the demand and supply of skills
in a changing labor market environment, with a view to making the workforce development system more responsive to
the labor market. The work has informed a Skills Development Project currently under preparation for the 2014 fiscal
year, which aims to enhance the relevance of training programs for the needs of the labor market.


External Developments

The current account deficit is expected to contract to 4.0 percent of GDP in 2013 from 6.6 percent in 2012, benefitting
from robust remittance growth and earnings from tourism. Exports increased by 6.3 percent in 2013, with earnings from
textiles and garments, the country’s main export product, rising 13 percent as both the gradual recovery of European and
US markets and difficulties in Bangladesh’s garment industry increased orders. The import bill declined by 6.2 percent in
2013 largely on the back of lower petroleum imports as favorable weather in the country resulted in higher hydro power
generation. Worker remittances topped $6.8 billion or 10 percent of GDP and continue to remain the top foreign exchange
earner of the country. Higher tourist arrivals saw earnings from tourism increase by 35 percent to reach $1.4 billion in
2013, a four-fold increase over tourism earnings in 2009.6 The country’s gross international reserves improved to $8.0
billion by end January 2014 (sufficient for 5.3 months of imports) from $6.9 billion (sufficient for 4.3 months of imports)
as at end 2012. A $1.0 billion five-year International Sovereign Bond (Euro bond) issued in early January 2014 at a yield
of 6.0 percent per annum was oversubscribed by 3.2 times, notwithstanding tighter global capital markets following the
announcement of the tapering of the US Federal Reserve’s quantitative easing program.

A number of structural challenges continue to adversely affect Sri Lanka’s export potential. These are rising unit
labor costs, a mismatch of skills, labor market rigidities, infrastructure bottlenecks and limited regional integration. With
half of Sri Lanka’s tradable goods going to the EU and US markets, weaker external demand for Sri Lankan exports could
undermine the exporting sectors and widen the country’s trade deficit. Rising global oil and food prices could also put
pressure on the price of imports and would increase the costs of generating electricity.


5
 Soft skills are defined as communication skills, presentational skills and the ability to work in teams.
6
 Tourist arrivals have been on the rise since the end of the armed conflict in 2009, growing from 0.45 million to 1.275 million
between 2009 and 2013, representing an annual average growth rate of 29.7 percent.

                                                                                         3
                                                    Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot



Fiscal Sector

While Sri Lanka has made significant progress in bringing down its fiscal deficit and public debt ratio in recent
years, fiscal space remains constrained. Although the overall budget deficit has declined from a historic decade-high of
9.9 percent in 2009 to 6.4 percent in 2012 (with expectations of reaching 5.8 percent in 2013), the revenue balance
remains in deficit.7 Total revenues (excluding grants) have fallen from 17 percent of GDP in 2002 to 13 percent of GDP in
2012. Sri Lanka has one of the highest gaps in South Asia between actual and potential revenue, with these gaps likely to
worsen. Sri Lanka also records one of the lowest revenue buoyancies in South Asia —a ratio close to 0.61, substantially
below unity.8 Sri Lanka’s low buoyancy seems to stem from poor performance of all tax instruments. Revenue collection is
insufficient to stabilize public finances, cover the country's ambitious plans and safeguard it against cyclical disturbances.

While the Government has curtailed expenditure growth in the interest of fiscal consolidation, revenue collection
continues to be a challenge. Notwithstanding tax reforms in 2007 and 2011, revenue collection has not increased in line
with growth. The tax-to-GDP ratio reached an historic low of 11.1 percent in 2012 and is an area where additional efforts
are needed. The 2014 budget includes new measures to enhance revenues and strengthen debt management, and the
fiscal balance and debt situation are expected to continue to improve. This would support the positive outlook for Sri
Lanka’s economy of 7.3 percent real growth for 2014.

The World Bank is helping the government assess the composition of its public expenditures as it looks to align
its spending with the needs of a middle-income country and improve the efficiency by which it uses public
resources for service delivery, particularly in the education and health sectors. The Public Expenditure Review will
offer an analytical basis for the government to use public resources more effectively and in ways that promote economic
growth and reduce poverty. World Bank analytic and advisory activities have also been outlining alternative financing
arrangements for public infrastructure and services (including public-private partnerships) and the pros and cons of the
various options. The experiences of other middle income countries are informing this exercise.

The World Bank has also been responding to a government request for support to enhance the country’s public
financial management systems. A knowledge exchange was arranged in 2012 providing senior Sri Lankan policymakers
the opportunity to exchange views and learn from the experiences of South Africa, Mauritius, Cambodia, South Korea and
New Zealand. Further to this, the World Bank carried out a review of the country ’s public financial management systems
using the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability methodology, helping to identify strategic areas for
improvement. Among the areas identified for strengthening were: monitoring and reduction of payment arrears;
oversight of aggregate fiscal risk; public access to key fiscal information; taxpayer registration and tax collections; internal
auditing; procurement procedures and predictability in the availability of funds. The government is undertaking a
number of reform initiatives, including in the areas of revenue administration and treasury management. The government
has also been working to reform and develop its public procurement system, with World Bank technical assistance
through an IDF grant. Public procurement expenditure in Sri Lanka is substantial, equivalent to $4 billion in 2012 or over
21 percent of total government spending.


Financial Sector

Sri Lanka’s financial sector is small relative to emerging market peers. Limited in both scope and depth, the
country’s financial sector is neither a major source of funding nor a significant vehicle for long-term investment and
savings. Sri Lankan companies have been funding their operations and expansion primarily from retained earnings. There
has been little change in the structural composition of the financial system since 2007. Banks dominate the financial
sector, accounting for around two-thirds of financial sector assets, and have enhanced its resilience to shocks. Non-bank
financial institutions such as provident funds hold around 20.9 percent of financial sector assets, with insurance
companies, finance companies, and leasing companies each accounting for around three percent of financial sector assets.
Sri Lanka’s equity market has remained at Rs. 2.2 trillion ($17 billion) over the last two years, accounting for about 17
percent of GDP and with potential for growth. While the government bond market has grown, the corporate bond market
remains undeveloped.

The Securities Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka (SEC) has taken proactive steps to strengthen the legal and regulatory
framework for the capital market and align it with international standards and best practices. 9 The current SEC law is

7
  Revenue balance is defined as total revenue less current expenditure.
8
  No individual tax category has buoyancy above 1.0, and buoyancy is particularly low for VAT, the single largest source of tax
revenue. Tax buoyancy measures how rapidly actual revenue from a tax rises as the tax base rises due to economic growth.
9
  Technical assistance has been provided through the World Bank’s Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening (FIRST)
initiative.

                                                               4
                                                      Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


inadequate for Sri Lanka to build a vibrant capital market as there are no legal provisions to facilitate the demutualization
of the stock exchange or its modernization in terms of governance, positioning and market infrastructure. Addressing
gaps in the legal and regulatory framework particularly for the capital markets will also require building the capacity of
supervisors and regulators, as well as market participants. As Sri Lanka looks to deepen and diversify its financial sector it
will be important to maintain a balance between financial development and financial stability. The World Bank is
currently providing technical inputs to assist policymakers in developing a capital market development strategy including
improvements to the legal framework, financial infrastructure and product diversification.

Access to finance is a major constraint in both urban and rural areas for corporate as well as small- and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs). SMEs in Sri Lanka were severely affected by the credit crunch arising from the global financial
crisis and the country’s protracted civil conflict. Despite declining interest rates and improved liquidity in the financial
sector since 2010, access to finance for SMEs continues to remain significantly constrained. Non-performing assets in the
SME sector are above the industry average. There is a need to ensure that SMEs have sufficient capacity to effectively
utilize bank loans for the growth of their businesses. Areas that are particularly constraining SMEs’ access to banking
include record keeping and accounts, financial management, human resources, marketing and product quality. The
central bank has initiated a consolidation process of the banking and non-bank financial institution sectors, aiming to
strengthen their regulatory environment, improve the stability of the financial system and increase access to finance.

Microfinance institutions have played a major role in broadening access to development financing to the poor
and landless while contributing to rural savings and group formation, particularly amongst poor rural women.
The number of microfinance clients is estimated to be 10 million. Although semiformal institutions have made an
important social and economic contribution by meeting the critical needs of poor households, the microfinance sector in
Sri Lanka suffers from several problems. Key constraints include the narrow range of products, weak financial
performance, dependence on subsidized funds, and the lack of a proper regulatory framework. Government policies for
addressing uneven access have in the past focused on state ownership of financial institutions and subsidizing or
controlling interest rates. These policies, however, have not built the conditions for the market to expand services to
under-served groups, especially the urban poor. The government has been moving away from subsidies and working to
encourage more market-based practices such as forward sales contracts, warehouse receipts and linking farmers to the
corporate sector.

The World Bank has been actively supporting efforts to increase access to finance for the country’s SMEs and for
the poor. The World Bank is currently supporting a warehouse receipts financing pilot project to help catalyze
collateralized lending by commercial banks to farmers. The development of warehouse receipts as collateral is designed
to reduce bank risk and farmer financing costs, increasing farmers’ access to finance and liquidity to invest in productivity
enhancing inputs and equipment. The World Bank has provided long term funding for SMEs as well as technical
assistance to support capacity building efforts in the banking sector to improve the SME lending culture in the country. A
recent Bank study has identified that even though the underserved urban poor have access to banking, more innovative
products need to be made available to improve their livelihoods.

Poverty and shared prosperity

Sri Lanka’s headcount poverty rate has declined dramatically, falling from 23 percent in 2002 to nine percent in
2009.10 This impressive performance has largely been driven by three factors: a rising return to farm employment
resulting from the increase in food prices; productivity growth among wage workers, particularly in secondary cities
outside of Colombo; and declines in the dependency ratio. Economic prosperity has been broadly shared. Real per capita
consumption of the bottom 40 percent grew between 2002 and 2009 by an average of 4.3 percent annually, compared to
2.6 percent of the top 60 percent.11 As a result, inequality in per capita consumption expenditure fell during this period, as
reflected by a decline in the Gini coefficient from 0.41 to 0.36. Shared prosperity has been associated with dramatic
declines in poverty. Among rural, urban and estate sectors, poverty reduction has been particularly dramatic in the estate
sector, where it however remains highest at 11 percent.12




10
   These numbers are based on the national poverty line. Poverty rates are calculated separately for urban, rural and estate
(plantation) sectors.
11
   More recent data is not yet available.
12
   Sri Lanka is divided into three geographic areas – urban, rural, and ‘estates’. The estates were originally plantations set up
during the colonial period as enclaves with most of the labor as well as capital imported. Since independence, the rigid distinction
between the estates and the rest of the country has reduced, though they continue to be disadvantaged relative to the rest of the
country.

                                                                 5
                                                     Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


Despite the very positive story of poverty reduction and shared prosperity, important development challenges
remain in Sri Lanka. Pockets of poverty continue to exist, specifically in the districts of Batticaloa (in the Eastern
Province), Jaffna (in the Northern Province), Moneragala (in Uva Province) and in the estate sector. Spending on safety
nets has declined in recent years (from 2.2 percent of GDP in 2004 to 0.3 percent in 2009) and suffers from inefficient
targeting. The decline in the country’s main safety net program, Samurdhi, is estimated to have slowed poverty reduction
by two percentage points between 2002 and 2009. An estimated nine percent of Sri Lankans who are no longer classified
as poor live within 20 percent of the poverty line and are, thus, vulnerable to shocks which could cause them to fall back
into poverty. It is also important to consider other related challenges, such as high rates of malnutrition, which have
persisted even as the population has become wealthier.

Sri Lanka compares favorably with other countries in its income band in terms of gender equality. In 2012 Sri
Lanka ranked 75th out of 186 countries on the UN Gender Inequality Index.13 On the OECD’s Social Institutions and Gender
Index, Sri Lanka scores highest among all South Asian countries.14 The main gender challenges relate to women’s access
to employment opportunities, gender-based violence and women’s and children’s nutritional status. Sri Lanka hosts the
20th largest gender gap in labor force participation globally, which presents significant challenges to its growth and equity
goals. In 2010 the labor force participation rate among women over age 15 in Sri Lanka was 41 percent, compared to 82
percent for men of the same age. In contrast, women’s 2010 labor force participation rates in Thailand and Malaysia were
80 percent and 57 percent, respectively.

Sri Lanka has met the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) target of halving extreme poverty and is on track to
meet most of the other MDGs, outperforming other South Asian countries. Whereas South Asia as a whole is on track
or an early achiever for nine of the 22 MDG indicators, Sri Lanka manages this for 15 indicators. Among the targets
achieved early are those related to universal primary education and gender equality. Sri Lanka is expected to meet the
goals of maternal health and HIV/AIDS. Progress on reaching the goals related to malnutrition and child mortality is,
however, slower. Indicators are mixed on the environment: while Sri Lanka is an early achiever on indicators of protected
area, ozone depleting substance consumption, safe drinking water and basic sanitation, it has stagnated or is slipping
backwards on forest cover and CO2 emissions.15

The World Bank is supporting government efforts to improve living standards and increase social inclusion and
equitable access to public services. Activities focused on conflict-affected areas have included the Community
Livelihoods in Conflict Affected Areas project, the Emergency Northern Recovery project, and the North and East Pilot
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene project for post conflict resettlements. These issues are being addressed at the national
level as well, including through: the Second Community Development project, a Poverty and Inequality Assessment,
technical assistance on the government’s social protection strategy and Samurdhi program; a trust fund on economic
integration of vulnerable groups; vocational training for the disabled; pilot approaches to sustainable, affordable
sanitation services to under-served low-income groups; work with youth organizations to support their involvement in
development issues; and technical assistance to the Ministry of Labor on its gender strategy. Recent analytical work on
women’s labor force participation in Sri Lanka has also helped to shed light on why women, although well-educated
compared to men, are less often in paid employment. The government envisages World Bank support for a Social
Protection Modernization project to improve the targeting and efficiency of social assistance. Additional support to boost
rural livelihoods and agricultural productivity is also anticipated through an Agricultural Productivity and
Competitiveness project. Support could focus on increasing productivity and access to markets, increasing access to and
efficiency of irrigation, and extending crop protection from wildlife.


Changing demographics

Contrary to most South Asia economies, Sri Lanka does not have a demographic dividend: by 2036, more than 22
percent of the population will be over 60 and there will be 61 dependents per 100 adults. The aging and urbanization of
the population are having dramatic impacts on education and health as well as the economy. Unless labor force and
employment rates increase (notably through greater inclusion of women) a very small number of employed persons will
need to provide for a very large number of non-working persons – straining the budgets of families and government. With
96 percent literacy rates, the education system will need to place increasing emphasis on job specific skills that match

13
    The Gender Inequality Index is a composite measure of reproductive health (maternal mortality ratio and adolescent fertility
rate); women’s empowerment (share of parliamentary seats held by women; and female secondary and tertiary educational
attainment rates); and labor participation (share of women in the labor force). UN Development Program, 2013.
14
   The OECD index looks at family law, civil liberties, physical integrity (including violence against women), son preference and
ownership rights.
15
    Accelerating Equitable Achievement of the MDGs: Closing Gaps in Health and Nutrition Outcomes. Asia-Pacific Regional
MDG Report 2011/12, UNDP, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and ADB.

                                                               6
                                                     Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


private sector demand and tertiary education. The types of public services required will change as the population
becomes older and has a higher income. The health system, for example, must build capacity to address non-
communicable diseases associated with a wealthier, more urban lifestyle (e.g. chronic conditions like diabetes and traffic
accidents) and with an older population (namely, geriatric care).16 Social protection for the elderly will need to be
enhanced and the social security system made sustainable. Population densities associated with increasing urbanization
will require investments in mass transit and expanded water and sewage networks.


Education

Sri Lanka’s general education system has made important gains in the recent past, particularly in basic
education. The net primary education enrollment rate is 98 percent, and the completion rate for primary education
exceeds 95 percent. Gender parity is high in the education system, with an equal proportion of girls and boys enrolled in
primary education and a slightly higher number of girls than boys in secondary education. Learning outcomes in primary
education in first language (Sinhala and Tamil), mathematics and English increased significantly between 2003- 2010.

Despite this past progress, the general education system faces a number of future challenges. The skills and
competencies required for modern knowledge-based economic activities have become considerably more complex than
in the past. To serve as a knowledge hub, as Sri Lanka aspires to, English language, information and communications
technologies (ICT), science and mathematics are among the skills that will need to expand considerably. Wide regional
disparities exist in the current education system, requiring urgent attention in the interest of equity. Public expenditures
on education are modest when compared to middle-income countries and other comparable nations.

The World Bank’s most recent support for the education sector is being extended through the Transforming the
School Education System project. The project is promoting equitable access to secondary education, working to
improve the quality of education and strengthen governance and delivery of education services. Several innovative
reforms are being supported, including the establishment of a system for conducting national assessments of learning
outcomes, school-based management, and school-based teacher development. The Higher Education for the Twenty-First
Century project is also active, working to enhance the capacity of Sri Lanka’s higher education system, institutions, and
human resources to deliver quality higher education services. It is expected that the World Bank will provide assistance in
areas such as skills development to help orient the training sector to the emerging needs of a MIC, and early childhood
education, which has long-lasting impacts on both cognitive and non-cognitive skills of children.


Health

Sri Lanka has better health indicators than most developing countries and many lower-middle-income countries.
Sri Lanka’s achievement stands out even more when its low expenditures on health are considered. It spends a total
(public and private combined) of approximately 4.2 percent of GDP or $70 per capita on health.17 Yet, many of its health
indicators are comparable to those found in Thailand and Malaysia – richer countries that spend significantly more on
health per capita. The remarkable success in reducing maternal and infant mortality to very low levels (36 per 100,000
and 12.2 per 1,000 live births, respectively)18, is partially the result of effective and integrated maternal and child health
services for the last half century. Communicable diseases like malaria and vaccine preventable diseases (such as polio,
measles, diphtheria, and tetanus) are close to elimination, with services for the prevention and control of communicable
diseases and maternal and child health care, such as for childhood immunizations, antenatal care and institutional
deliveries, at nearly 100 percent coverage. Barring under-nutrition and some persisting communicable diseases, such as
tuberculosis, dengue, rabies, and leptospirosis, Sri Lanka has successfully dealt with most of the typical health problems
of low-income countries.

Malnutrition among mothers and children is an exception among otherwise exemplary maternal and child health
status indicators. About 22 percent of Sri Lankan children under five are underweight,19 as against the 14 percent
expected for Sri Lanka’s income level. That malnutrition has persisted even as the GDP per capita has increased reflects
the complexity of the problem. Tackling malnutrition will require a combination of multi-sector actions involving


16
   Sri Lanka has the oldest population age composition outside of the Eastern European transition economies. In two decades Sri
Lanka’s age profile will be similar to that of Europe and Japan today, but with much lower income to support the large number of
elderly dependents.
17
   Sri Lanka Health Accounts, National Health Expenditure, Institute for Health Policy, Colombo, Sri Lanka, July 2011.
18
   According to government’s Registrar General’s Department 2006 and latest data.
19
   Low weight-for-age and an indicator used for the second target of the first MDG.

                                                               7
                                                       Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


healthcare, food security, provision and use of clean water and appropriate sanitation facilities, as well as communication,
to promote good health and nutrition-related attitudes and behaviors.

Sri Lanka is in the advanced stages of a demographic and epidemiological transition owing largely to the marked
increase in life expectancy and decrease in fertility rates. The country faces the challenges of an aging population and
a shift in the disease profile, with non-communicable diseases (NCDs)20 now accounting for 85 percent of the total burden
of disease. Beyond the rapidly changing age distribution, economic development, urbanization, increased motorization
and lifestyle changes (including low levels of physical activity, less healthy eating, and tobacco, alcohol, and substance
abuse) are contributing to the growing incidence of NCDs.

While Sri Lanka has achieved excellent health outcomes and an equitable health system at relatively low cost,
significant challenges lie ahead. Although the model of extensive public provision has served Sri Lanka well, the
country now finds itself at a crossroads. Servicing the needs of the elderly, as well as treating and managing NCDs,
requires longer-term and more expensive services relative to maternal and child health and infectious diseases
interventions. Tackling child malnutrition through a multi-sector approach and treating and managing the NCDs for the
elderly will require longer term and more expensive services relative to previous interventions.

The World Bank has been supporting Sri Lanka’s health sector through analytical work and credits from the
International Development Association (IDA) since the late 1980s. The Health Sector Development Project (2004-
2010) contributed to improving service delivery and building system capacity at the central, provincial and district levels.
A review of the private health sector in FY13 analyzed private financing and provision of health services in Sri Lanka,
identifying options for the government to further tap into the private sector's potential in the health sector. The World
Bank is now helping the government analyze public expenditures in the sector, to assess the efficiency and equity of
health spending in the country. A JSDF trust-funded Local Level Nutrition Interventions project is helping to address the
nutritional problems of the resettled population in the Northern Province. Surveys already indicate improvements in
nutrition outcomes, through supplementary feeding of targeted pregnant and lactating mothers, infants and young
children and through community-based nutrition activities to reinforce the health and nutrition behavioral change. A
national health sector program is also currently being supported under a $200-million Second Health Sector Development
Project (approved in FY13), designed to improve the standards of performance of the public health system and enable it
to better respond to the challenges of malnutrition and NCDs. The project will also support innovation, results
monitoring, and capacity building in the health sector. Funds under the project will be disbursed as budget support linked
to agreed results achieved over the project period.


Rural-Urban Transition

Sri Lanka has been one of South Asia’s most dynamically urbanizing countries. Population density in urban areas
has almost doubled over the past decade to 3,213 persons per square kilometer, and, as of 2011, 35.3 percent of the
country’s 21 million people live in urban areas.21 It is projected that by 2020 Sri Lanka’s population will reach 23 million
with 60 percent (13.8 million people) residing in urban areas. Sri Lanka is shifting from a predominantly rural-based
economy to an urban one oriented around manufacturing and services (with industry and services contributing to 88.9
percent of GDP in 2012). To date, Sri Lanka’s economic growth has been primarily driven by the Colombo Metropolitan
Region, which currently generates 45 percent of the country’s GDP and which is home to 28 percent of its population.
Consistent with this, the Colombo Metropolitan Region is the country’s most prosperous region with a per capita income
level of $3,808. Recognizing the importance of this region to economic growth, the government initiated a program to
transform the Colombo Metropolitan Region into a competitive and environmentally friendly world-class capital.

Central to the government’s development agenda is also the creation of a strong network of well -connected and
environmentally sustainable cities throughout the country, fostering economic growth in major urban centers
outside of Colombo to produce a more spatially balanced distribution of economic opportunities and bolster

20
   The term Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) is used in this document to include both chronic and acute NCDs, e.g., cardio-
vascular diseases, all cancers, endocrine disorders such as diabetes mellitus, degenerative diseases, mental illnesses, asthma, renal
disease of unknown etiology and injuries from all causes. Chronic NCDs is used when referring to diabetes, hypertension,
asthma, cancers, renal diseases, cerebrovascular and circulatory diseases.
21
   As measured using the agglomeration index which defines as urban all Divisional Secretariats (DS-divisions) with an average
population density of 150 persons per km2 and which lie within a 60 minute drive of a city with population greater than 100,000.
If we instead define as urban all DS-divisions with a population density of 150 persons per km2 and which lie within 60 minutes
of a city with a population greater than 50,000, the estimated urban share increases to 64.6 percent. Source: Urbanization in South
Asia: An Application of the Agglomeration Index, Background Paper to the SAR Urbanization Flagship, Washington, D.C.: The
World Bank.

                                                                 8
                                                   Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


overall national economic growth. While Sri Lanka is taking important steps to implement its urban vision, including
connectivity improvements, urban renewal and green city initiatives in the Colombo Metropolitan Region and secondary
cities, a number of challenges remain. Urban local authorities are currently constrained by limited institutional mandates
for urban planning and service delivery, as well as inadequate financial and human resources, resulting in delayed
implementation of urban plans and inefficient service provision. Regulatory and institutional constraints in land markets
and inadequate incentives to stimulate efficient and sustainable land use and property development have resulted in
urban sprawl. Housing finance products have also been limited.

Efficient and environmentally sustainable land use when supported by high density urban transportation could
deliver sizeable economic benefits by reducing vulnerabilities to natural disasters, lowering infrastructure costs,
limiting the impact on environmental assets, stimulating private investment in land and housing and expanding
municipal own-source generation. The sustainability of urban water supply systems is at risk, and water quality needs
to improve, especially in the North and East. The largest cities, in particular the tourist destinations, need an integrated
approach to environmental management including sewerage, wastewater treatment, drainage, and solid waste
management. This is important as a response to increasing population densities but also to make the tourist areas
attractive to foreign and national visitors. Urban transport is a key contributor to city competitiveness, but much remains
to be done to improve public transportation in the main cities, and to enable efficient utilization of urban roads. With the
challenges of global climate change, Sri Lanka’s cities are becoming increasingly more vulnerable to natural disaster s, and
adaptation strategies need to be mainstreamed into urban plans to manage the risk.

For generations, Sri Lanka’s population has been more internally mobile than most countries, on account of the
extensive network of roads, buses and railways and relatively compact geographic territory.22 During the war,
much of this infrastructure was damaged and attention was not given to modernizing or even maintaining the
infrastructure. Today, road travel within the country is very slow with average speed of only 26 kilometers an hour. A
massive effort is currently underway to bridge the infrastructure gap, using domestic resources as well as support from
the multilateral and bilateral communities. The country’s first expressway opened in 2011, halving travel time from
Colombo to Galle. Nevertheless, challenges remain. More needs to be done to understand and enhance the economic
connections across the country to take advantage of forward and backward linkages in supply chains and of distinct
comparative advantages of different parts of the country.

The World Bank is supporting government efforts to enhance Sri Lanka’s urban areas and support internal
integration. The Metro Colombo Urban Development project, approved in FY12 and funded by the International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), is currently helping the Colombo Metropolitan Region to address obstacles
preventing it from realizing its full economic potential, including inadequate infrastructure and services and significant
vulnerability to flooding. A number of complementary studies and South-South exchanges have been launched in
connection with the project, including on solid-waste landfill, wetland management, private participation in waterfront
development, and strategic city development. Further support is to be extended to the Colombo Metropolitan Region
through the Colombo Green Growth technical assistance program, currently under preparation, which would provide a
holistic framework and incentive mechanism for participating municipalities and ministries to propose, plan, and
implement environmentally and socially sustainable and resilient urban development projects and policies.

The World Bank will deepen its support for the development of a strong network of well-connected and
sustainable cities throughout the country. Sri Lanka is taking important steps to implement its urban vision, including
connectivity improvements, urban renewal and green city initiatives in the Colombo Metropolitan Region and secondary
cities. Following analytical work to understand the economic drivers of rapidly growing secondary cities, the World Bank
is supporting government efforts to improve urban services and livability through the Strategic Cities Development
project (FY14 pipeline). Fostering economic growth in major urban centers outside of Colombo should produce a more
spatially balanced distribution of economic opportunities and bolster shared prosperity and overall national economic
growth. The government has also requested World Bank analytical support for its national cities investment and
management program, which will include multiple cities and sectors and involve public, private and development
partners such as the ADB and AFD.

In the transport sector, two World Bank projects are currently helping to address deferred maintenance and
contribute to better quality and safer roads: the Road Sector Assistance Project and the Provincial Roads Project.
The latter has been helping the government improve access to socioeconomic centers in the Eastern, Northern and
Uva Provinces, through the sustainable management of improved road infrastructure. The Road Sector Assistance Project,
approved in 2005, has been instrumental in increasing the level of funding channeled to rehabilitation and maintenance
of national roads, as institutionalized in a Road Maintenance Trust Fund. World Bank support for Sri Lanka’s transport

22
  As of 2010, there were 1.7 km of road per km2 and 97 percent of villages are reached by the road network. As of 2000, 86
percent of the roads were paved.

                                                             9
                                                     Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


sector is expected to continue, not only for rehabilitation and maintenance but potentially for the development of the
country’s expressway network, for which public private partnership options are also being considered in coordination
with the IFC.


Environment, Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management

Sri Lanka has a wealth of environmental assets, boasting the highest biodiversity per square kilometer in Asia.
During the conflict, the slow pace of economic development meant that degradation was slower than it otherwise might
have been. Among the government’s goals for 2016, as outlined in its Mahinda Chintana vision for development, is raising
forest coverage from 23 percent to 35 percent of the land area. Sri Lanka risks losing many of its assets and biodiversity:
33 percent of fauna and 61 percent of flora have been found to be under threat. The country’s rate of deforestation – loss
of more than 35 percent of its old-growth forest cover since 1990 – is among the highest in the region. Total forest cover
has diminished by almost 18 percent with predictable consequences for watersheds, soil loss and the panoply of
environmental and economic damages. Sri Lanka has tremendous potential for being a leader in wildlife tourism, which is
largely considered one of the country’s key untapped and underdeveloped markets. Through careful development of this
potential niche industry, Sri Lanka can reap high benefits and, in turn, benefit biodiversity conservation in the country.

As a middle-income country Sri Lanka is dealing with many of the environmental challenges that come with
prosperity, including air pollution and solid waste management. Though data is sparse, the evidence broadly
suggests that air pollution and the impacts on health are worsening or have stagnated at undesirable levels in the major
urban centers. Waste generation is characterized by distinct geographic patterns in Sri Lanka – with higher volumes being
generated in more prosperous urban areas and provinces. Collection rates are generally low across the country and
average 31 percent. This compares unfavorably with other middle-income countries that average collection rates of 68
percent. The bulk of waste is organic, suggesting there is scope for reducing the pollution load of wastes requiring
ultimate disposal, and for employment generation through complementary composting activities.

Environmental sustainability is part of this government’s vision for the country, but has yet to receive adequate
policy attention or resources. While the country has been effective in identifying environmental problems and
developing policies and strategies to address these, actual steps taken to resolve environmental and natural resource
issues have been weak. Rapid and unplanned development has contributed to habitat fragmentation and the loss of key
ecosystem services, particularly in the northern and southern regions of the country. The only MDG Sri Lanka is unlikely
to achieve is MDG 7 on ensuring environmental sustainability by 2015.

The fiscal and physical impacts of natural disasters in Sri Lanka have been sizable over the past decade,
particularly flooding and drought. Floods have cumulatively affected more than 8.5 million people, while droughts
have affected more than five million over the past 10 years. Landslides and high winds are frequent phenomena that
destroy or damage thousands of houses every year. The fiscal and economic impacts of disaster are understood to be
relatively high in Sri Lanka. The annual fiscal loss is significant, estimated by the Ministry of Disaster Management to
exceed $50 million, while, in some years, the fiscal loss is much greater. The floods of December 2010 to February 2011,
for instance, resulted in estimated direct damages of more than $600 million. Climate scenarios project less and less
frequent precipitation in the already dry areas, potentially increasing the frequency and duration of droughts. Higher and
more variable rainfall is expected to increase the frequency and intensity of floods, especially affecting monsoon-
dependent areas. Climate change is expected to significantly impact agriculture, water resources, energy, environment
and fisheries in Sri Lanka.

In recognition of the social and economic effects of climate-related hazards, the government has recently made it
a priority to strengthen the country’s resilience to natural disasters and climate change. Responding to the
government’s expression of interest for assistance in this connection, a comprehensive program of support involving
adaptation enhancing investments and a Catastrophe Deferred Draw-Down Option (CAT-DDO) is being prepared. To
increase resilience, physical investments will be financed to address short term infrastructure weaknesses, coupled with a
contingent credit line to safeguard against immediate fiscal impacts of a disaster. The program will be comprised of: i) the
Improving Climate Resilience project (FY14) aimed at the immediate reduction of physical risk and improving
understanding of disaster risks to direct future investment; ii) a Comprehensive Disaster Risk Mitigation project (FY16)
that would, amongst other things, uplift the recommendations provided in the Improving Climate Resilience project; and
iii) a Development Policy Loan (DPL) with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT-DDO) (FY14) to strengthen
fiscal resilience to events. In addition, the World Bank, as part of its analytical and advisory activities, has been helping Sri
Lanka to mainstream disaster risk management with a view to strengthening its early warning system and the capacity of
the government to assess risks, integrate disaster risk reduction into the planning process and prepare post-disaster
assessments. As noted above, vulnerability to flooding is being addressed under the Metro Colombo Urban Development
project. A Dam Safety and Water Resources Planning project is supporting the government in strengthening high-risk


                                                               10
                                                    Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


dams and improving water resources planning to increase the capacity of the upstream water reservoir. Additional
Financing for this project (FY14) will support the rehabilitation of additional dams in the Eastern province that could not
be included in the original project due to conflict in the area at that time.


Energy Sector

The government of Sri Lanka has established a series of targets for the energy sector, most notably for household
electrification and the diversification of the generation mix. The government hopes to achieve universal
electrification by 2016.23 Until the mid-1990s, most of the new electricity demand in Sri Lanka was met by hydropower.
All of the large-scale sites that are economically viable have largely been exploited. Consequently, the bulk of new energy
has come from oil-based generation, which has driven up consumer tariffs due to the high international price of
petroleum products. Diversifying the fuel mix will be crucial going forward. To meet the growing demand the country’s
power expansion plan consists of a four-fuel mix comprised of existing large hydropower and oil-fired power together
with new investments in coal plants and non-conventional renewable resources.24 Given Sri Lanka’s high dependence on
oil, most of the expansion is scheduled to come from coal-fired power and non-conventional renewable resources.

World Bank support for Sri Lanka’s renewable energy sector has had demonstrable impacts. The recently closed
Renewable Energy for Rural Economic Development Project supported the development of 185.3 megawatts (MW) of
renewable energy capacity, or about 65 percent of total renewable electricity generating capacity in Sri Lanka, as of March
2012. It also provided off-grid electricity to over 116,000 remote rural households, benefitting around a half a million
people. The project also helped to address one of the most important barriers to renewable energy development, namely
the availability and access to sufficient long-term credit. Commercial banks were encouraged to lend to renewable energy
projects to demonstrate that the risks are manageable and that lending would also be profitable. Commercial banks seem
willing to continue lending in the sector. Since the project closed at the end of 2011, Standardized Power Purchase
Agreements have been signed for 95 renewable energy projects with a total capacity of 281 MW. Some banks have even
taken their financing abroad to other renewable energy projects outside of Sri Lanka. Funds have also been mobilized
through initial public offerings by several local firms, foreign funds, and the IFC’s risk sharing facility, the Portfolio
Approach to Distributed Generation Opportunities.




WORLD BANK GROUP: SUPPORTING SRI LANKA’S TRANSITION TO MIC STATUS
The World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Sri Lanka for FY13-16 aims to help the country
address the long-term strategic and structural challenges outlined above, as it transitions to Middle Income
Country (MIC) status. The CPS focuses on: (i) facilitating sustained private and public investment; (ii) supporting the
structural shifts in the economy; and (iii) improving living standards and social inclusion. An existing portfolio of projects
contains a number that were set out in the previous Country Assistance Strategy (FY09-12) to support the restoration of
livelihoods and community development in the conflict-affected North and East. As the focus has shifted from post-
conflict reconstruction to an emphasis on equitable access and social inclusion across the entire country, the majority of
new projects under the current CPS are nationwide in design. They are, nonetheless, expected to benefit citizens in
lagging regions. The CPS provides for the strategic use of analytical and advisory work to inform planned lending
activities and support dialogue in key policy areas. It is designed to be flexible, focusing on a small number of large
projects, and using country systems to the extent possible.

A CPS Progress Report prepared this fiscal year has provided an opportunity to review the country program and
strategy together with the government, taking stock both of progress to date and the government’s evolving
development needs and agenda. While the strategic objectives of the CPS remain relevant through FY16, the Progress
Report proposes a refocusing of some activities as well as the addition of a fourth strategic area of engagement, namely
increasing resilience to disasters and climate change, deemed central to Sri Lanka’s current development agenda and
poverty reduction efforts as discussed above. As the country shifts from reconstruction to addressing the challenges of
development on a middle income trajectory, greater emphasis has been placed on facilitating and creating the enabling
environment for increased foreign and domestic investment. At the same time, continued pockets of poverty highlight the
need for renewed efforts to target development to the poor.


23
 The current share of electrified households is 94 percent, according to the Ministry of Power and Energy.
24
  Small hydro (less than 10 megawatts), wind, biomass, and other energy sources such as agricultural waste, landfill gas and
municipal solid waste.

                                                             11
                                                   Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


The World Bank has been supporting Sri Lanka’s development for close to six decades, having accompanied the
country as it has grown to join the ranks of middle-income countries. International Development Association (IDA)
commitments to date exceed $4 billion, and close to $500 million in IBRD lending has been provided. Sri Lanka re-
emerged as a blend IDA-IBRD country in FY12, regaining access to IBRD resources after a 26-year hiatus, and it will likely
become an IBRD-only country at the end of the IDA17 cycle which concludes in FY17.

With Sri Lanka’s graduation to middle-income country status, the government has broadened its options for
foreign financing of public investment. While historically Sri Lanka’s largest lenders have been the Asian Development
Bank, the World Bank, and Japan, China has emerged as the largest lender, with involvement primarily in the road sector.
Concessional assistance from western bilateral partners in general has diminished whilst financing in the form of export
credits has increased.

The World Bank Group’s program of support to Sri Lanka continues to benefit from close coordination and
collaboration with development partners. A number of mechanisms are in place for the government and its
development partners to coordinate and harmonize foreign assistance. These include a Development Partners Forum
whereby respective assistance strategies, programs and new initiatives are shared, and a Development Partners
Committee supported by a Secretariat and sector-based working groups.25

The current active World Bank portfolio in Sri Lanka comprises 12 projects (10 IDA operations, one IBRD
operation, and one recipient-executed trust fund of over $5 million) with a total net commitment value of $1.34
billion. The portfolio comprises eight recipient-executed trust funds of a total net commitment value of $32.3 million.
Urban and transport infrastructure account for 46 percent of the overall portfolio, followed by human development (25
percent), rural development and community livelihoods (24 percent), and finance and private sector (five percent). This
fiscal year, the lending program is expected to include four projects supporting skills development, the development of
secondary cities and improving climate resilience which would include a project to build the capacity to manage physical
risk as well as a Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option to help strengthen fiscal
resilience to catastrophic events. Additional financing to the Dam Safety project also forms part of the FY14 lending
program, and will cover a financing gap resulting from increased costs of construction during implementation, as well as
support the rehabilitation of additional dams in the East of the country.

Sri Lanka has a highly-rated project portfolio, with a mature profile and no problem projects as of end February,
2014. Project implementation is generally satisfactory, with historically high disbursement rates, 100 percent proactivity,
and Project Management Units mostly integrated in line ministries. As of end February 2014, the overall disbursement
rate stood at 15.8 percent. Procurement and financial management performance is good across the portfolio, and financial
management systems rely increasingly on the country systems. Steps are being taken by the government to enable
increased reliance on country procurement systems, such as capacity building initiatives, strengthening and
institutionalizing procurement monitoring and evaluation, professionalizing public procurement and introducing e-
procurement. Performance in the area of environmental safeguards is also solid. An upcoming joint diagnostic review will
be identifying gaps and defining the way forward to increase use of country systems in this regard. Efforts have also
increased to build the capacity of key line ministry staff in the area of social safeguards. Public participation in program
implementation and monitoring will require continued attention. Engaging youth in the monitoring process will continue
to be pursued.




25
  The World Bank is one of the six foreign aid missions that form the Development Partners Committee, mandated by the larger
Development Partners Forum to manage the interaction with the government on behalf of the development partners. The
Development Partner Committee is comprised of three multilateral (World Bank, UN Resident Coordinator, Asian Development
Bank) and three bilateral missions selected on an annual basis by the Bilateral Donor Group. The Chair of the Development
Partners Forum also chairs the Development Partners Committee. The three bilateral Development Partners currently on the
Committee are AusAID, Japan International Cooperation Agency and USAID.

                                                            12
                                                   Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot



International Finance Corporation (IFC)
Sri Lanka became an IFC member country in 1956. Since then, IFC has invested $802.5 million in Sri Lanka, including
$102.2 million mobilized from other institutions. IFC opened its office in Colombo in 1998.

As of end February 2014, IFC’s total committed investment portfolio stood at $280 million , including $65 million
mobilized from partner institutions. The committed portfolio has more than doubled since the start of FY12 (July 2011)
with the financial sector accounting for 58 percent of IFC’s own portfolio. IFC expects continued strong expansion in its
investments over the balance of the CPS period. IFC operates 14 active advisory projects, including 9 active portfolio and
5 active pipeline projects, with a combined fund value of $9 million. Around 80 percent of the active portfolio assists
SMEs. In terms of access to finance, investment and advisory projects committed in FY13 alone are expected to increase
access to financial services for over 60,000 MSMEs.

IFC’s activities in Sri Lanka are supporting the World Bank Group CPS goals, aligned with the government’s
Mahinda Chintana vision. IFC is particularly focused on projects that enhance: (i) inclusive growth, including supporting
the base of the pyramid, rural areas, infrastructure building and improving access to finance for micro, small and medium
enterprises (MSMEs); and (ii) global integration through improved financial infrastructure, investment climate reforms,
trade financing, logistics, and South–South investments.

Working closely with the World Bank, the government of Sri Lanka and other partners, IFC is helping to promote
private sector growth, using a combination of investment and advisory services to: create growth opportunities for
MSMEs; make strategic investments to increase access to financial services, build infrastructure, improve healthcare and
develop key sectors such as agribusiness and tourism; and improve the investment climate to promote private sector
participation in infrastructure, and make it easier for businesses to start and operate. Priority areas include access to
finance, infrastructure, tourism, and agribusiness, with a focus on lagging regions and communities especially in the North
and East post-conflict regions.

Increasing access to finance for small and medium businesses in Sri Lanka constitutes one of the World Bank
Group collaboration projects in South Asia. IFC’s advisory support for SMEs accounts for 73 percent of its advisory
portfolio in Sri Lanka and is coupled with capacity-building advisory support through an SME Toolkit and Business Edge
training program. The IFC also recently received €4 million from the EU to promote SMEs as part of a broader €60-million
program in the country’s North and East post-conflict regions,26 supporting districts’ transition from recovery to
development and helping to bridge the gap between more developed areas of the country. The World Bank and IFC are
also jointly working on public-private partnership opportunities in transport infrastructure. The Norwegian, Irish, Dutch
and Japanese governments are among key partners that fund IFC’s advisory program in Sri Lanka.



Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
Sri Lanka is an important country for MIGA, given MIGA's global focus on supporting high development impact
investments into IDA countries and fragile and conflict-affected situations. MIGA supports the World Bank Group
Strategy for Sri Lanka, and is currently actively considering projects in the infrastructure sector. MIGA is partnering very
closely with the World Bank and IFC with all potential transactions, to ensure full collaboration.




26
  The Support for District Development Planning program is implemented jointly by IFC, UNDP, the Food and Agriculture
Organization, the International Labor Organization, the United Nations Office for Project Services, and the United Nations
Children Fund.

                                                            13
                                                             Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


         SRI LANKA:: SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT


Key Dates:

Approved: 07-Sep-2010
Effective: 05-Jan-2011
Closing: 30-Sep-2015

Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier                       Financing          Disbursed         Undisbursed
IBRD
IDA                                57.4               24.0                35.2
Govt. of Sri Lanka
Other
Total Project Cost                 57.4
*As of February 2014




Background and Objectives:

The project is designed to improve access to finance, including long-term finance, for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in Sri
Lanka affected by the global financial crisis. The core components are a Financing and Risk Sharing Facility ($41.0 million), and policy and
capacity enhancement for SME banking ($16.4 million). The project underwent a restructuring in June 2013, to address the following: (i)
reallocating funds among the project’s components; (ii) revising the R esults Framework accordingly; and (ii) extending the closing date by
18 months from March 31, 2014, to September 30, 2015. The project objectives remained unchanged.
This project also has fostered policy dialogue with the government in enhancing financial sector development and has supported the
Collateral Registry and Credit Information Bureau, an initiative backed by the International Finance Corporation (IFC).


Key Results Achieved and Expected:
The following have been achieved as of December 31, 2013:
 (i)     A total of 387 active loans (against a target of 560);
(ii)     Cumulative disbursements of sub loans amounting to $23.9 million;
(iii)    More than 7,543 SMEs and 5,651 commercial bank staff have been trained;
(iv)     An estimated 3,509 potential new employment opportunities created.

The project is expected to achieve a target of 1,000 loans by end of 2015. There will have been 9,000 SME and 8,000 SME bank staff trained
by the end of the project.


Key Development Partners:
Ministry of Finance and Planning




                                                                     14
                                                              Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot



SRI LANKA: WAREHOUSE RECEIPTS FINANCING PROJECT

Key Dates:

Approved: 17-Jul-2012
Effective: 17-Jul-2012
Closing: 31-May-2015

 Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier                            Financing       Disbursed         Undisbursed
IBRD
IDA
Govt. of Sri Lanka
Global Food Crisis Response Program 6.50               1.54                4.96
Total Project Cost                  6.50
 *As of February 2014

Background and Objectives:

The project is a response to the recurrent issues of food insecurity and price fluctuations in Sri Lanka. The project aims to contribute to
increased food security and agricultural incomes. By building quality warehouse storage, it will help to reduce the estimated 10-15 percent
wastage of rice crops. An electronic warehouse receipts mechanism aims to catalyze collateralized lending by commercial banks to farmers.
Overall, the project should help to smooth out food availability and allow farmers to sell at higher prices into commodity markets after the
post-harvest glut. The development of warehouse receipts as collateral would reduce bank risk and farmer financing costs, thereby
increasing farmers’ access to finance and liquidity to invest in productivity-enhancing inputs and equipment.
The project is piloting a warehouse receipts system which has been implemented in other countries. It aims to provide access to farmers in
selected areas of Sri Lanka to quality storage facilities for agricultural products and to facilitate the use of such products as collateral to
access financial services by developing an electronic and negotiable warehouse receipt financing program. Warehouse receipts financing
facilitates the dual purpose of providing a value chain service to producers through warehousing and simultaneous access to credit against
stored produce.


Key Results Achieved and Expected:*:
The project has begun implementation and construction of the first warehouse, in the village of Upuldeniya in Anuradhapura District, was
expected to start in February 2014. The first crops can then be warehoused from October 2014.

 * As at December 31, 2013

Key Development Partners:
Ministry of Finance and Planning




                                                                      15
                                                               Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot



    SRI LANKA: HIGHER EDUCATION FOR THE TWENTY FIRST CENTURY PROJECT

Key Dates:

Approved: May 13, 2010
Effective: November 1, 2010
Closing: June 30, 2016

Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier                       Financing            Disbursed         Undisbursed
IBRD
IDA                               40                   20.23                 19.05
Govt. of Sri Lanka
Other
Total Project Cost                40
*As of December 31, 2013

Background and Objectives:

The Higher Education for the Twenty First Century (HETC) project supports the development of the higher education sector in Sri Lanka,
including university education and short-cycle vocational higher education. The project aims to enhance the capacity of the higher education
system, institutions, and human resources, to deliver quality higher education services in line with equitable social and economic
development needs.
The project comprises four components:

(1) Institutionalizing norms for higher education: developing the institutional foundation of the country’s higher educati on sector through
the establishment of a qualification framework covering the higher education and training sectors, plus development of a quality assurance
system to cover the entire higher education sector.

(2)    Promoting relevance and quality of teaching and learning: providing university development grants to improve the social and
economic relevance of university education, as well as quality and innovation grants to improve the performance of strategically selected
study programs.

(3) Strengthening alternative higher education: to modernize the Sri Lanka Institute for Advanced Technological Education and its network
of Advanced Technological Institutes through curriculum and management reforms, and to expand the coverage of the ATI to under-served
areas to provide more equitable access to alternative higher education.

(4) Human resource development, monitoring, evaluation, studies, coordination and communication: to strengthen the human resource
and organizational capacity of the higher education sector, including the qualifications of academic staff of higher education institutions,
while also supporting monitoring and evaluation, policy analyses and dissemination.


Key Results Achieved and Expected:*
A Sri Lanka Qualification Framework covering all stages of education and training has been developed.
•    A Quality Assurance Framework covering public and private higher education institutions has been prepared and implementation is in progress.
•    University Development Grants to improve the employability of students are under implementation in all 17 universities.
•    Quality and Innovation Grants have been awarded to 58 study programs, exceeding the project target of 51 study programs.
•    There are 12,500 students enrolled in the Advanced Technological Institutions, surpassing the project target of 10,000 students at the present
     stage. Nearly 200 university and Sri Lanka Institute for Advanced Technological Education academics have commenced Master’s o r PhD
     degree programs, exceeding the project target of 100 Masters/PhD degrees.
•    Three hundred and seventy-five university management staff (75 percent of target) and 634 academic staff (83 percent of target) have completed
     short-term human resource development programs.

* As at December 31, 2013

Key Development Partners:
Ministry of Finance and Planning




                                                                        16
                                                            Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot




         SRI LANKA: TRANSFORMING THE SCHOOL AND EDUCATION SYSTEMA AS THE FOUNDATION OF A KNOWLEDGE HUB PROJECT

Key Dates:

Approved: November 29, 2011
Effective: June 21, 2012
Closing: June 30, 2017

Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier                       Financing         Disbursed         Undisbursed
IBRD
IDA                               100               28.08                71.92
Govt. of Sri Lanka
Other
Total Project Cost                100
*As of February 2014


Background and Objectives:

The Transforming the School Education System as the Foundation of a Knowledge Hub Project (TSEP) aims to enhance equitable access and
quality of primary and secondary education to provide a foundation for the knowledge-based economic and social development of the
country. The project is organized under three components: a) promoting access to primary and secondary education; b) improving the
quality of education; and c) strengthening governance and delivery of education services. These are aligned with the themes of the
Government of Sri Lanka’s Education Sector Development Framework and Program for 2012-2016.
This $100-millon project is helping the government to strengthen the country’s education system at multiple levels, including national and
provincial educational agencies, but especially schools. Several innovative reforms are being supported, including the establishment of a
system for conducting national assessments of learning outcomes, school-based management, and school-based teacher development.


Key Results Achieved and Expected:*:
The overall progress of the TSEP after one year of implementation is satisfactory. All outcome and disbursement linked indicators have been
achieved to date. Of specific note:
 •       The survival rate of students through grade 11 was 84 percent (87 percent for girls and 81 percent for boys)
 •       A national assessment of learning outcomes of children at grade 8 was completed in 2012.
 •       School-based management has been introduced in 44 percent of education zones during 2012-2013. About 2,400,000
         students (55 percent of all students) are enrolled in schools in these zones.
 •       School-based teacher development programs have been conducted in 44 percent of education zones during 2012-2013. About
         140,000 teachers (63 percent of all teachers) have benefited from these programs.

* As at 30 September, 2013.

Key Development Partners:
The World Bank, the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization, Germany’s GIZ, the Asian Development Bank, Japan
International Cooperation Agency, Australian government, the Korean International Cooperation Agency, and the United National Children’s
Fund are active development partners in the education sector in Sri Lanka, and are working in support of the government’s overall
Education Sector Development Framework and Program for 2012-2016.
        The Bank is a coordinating agency and ensures that the activities done by development partners are harmonized with the
         government program. A joint review mission is undertaken annually by the Bank team with interested development partners.
        AusAID supports the Education Sector Development Framework and Program through a trust fund agreement with the Bank.
     




                                                                    17
                                                              Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot




    SRI LANKA: SECOND HEALTH SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

Key Dates:

Approved: March 27, 2013
Effective: Not effective
Closing: September 30, 2018

Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier                        Financing           Disbursed         Undisbursed
IBRD
IDA                                 200                 11               188.759
Govt. of Sri Lanka (for 2013-18)   4,970
Other
Total Project Cost                 5,170
*As of December 31 2013




Background and Objectives:

As a lower middle-income country, Sri Lanka has achieved remarkable progress in maternal and child health and communicable disease
outcomes, as indicated by its maternal mortality rate of 36 per 100,000 live births, infant mortality rate of 12.2 per 1,000 live births, and life
expectancy at birth of 75 years. Today, Sri Lanka is seeing the effects of demographic and epidemiological transitions - an aging population,
increasing prevalence of non-communicable diseases, both chronic (diabetes, cancers, cardio-vascular diseases, mental health issues etc.)
and acute (mainly injuries). The country continues to face emerging and re-emerging communicable diseases like tuberculosis, leptospirosis,
dengue, and influenza. Furthermore, malnutrition among mothers and children has not improved adequately, with 17.9 percent of babies
delivered each year born at a low birth-weight, and 13 percent of children under-five stunted. Fifty percent of outpatient, 95 percent of in-
patient, and 99 percent of preventive care needs of the country are provided by the public health system. The private health sector mainly
provides outpatient care services, with expanding roles in in-patient, investigative, and laboratory services, largely in urban and semi-urban
areas. The Ministry of Health finalized the National Health Development Plan under the guidance of the government’s national development
strategy, the Mahinda Chintana, to improve the health sector to meet middle-income country standards.
The Second Health Sector Development Project will support the implementation of the government’s National Health Development Plan. It
aims to upgrade the standards of performance of the public health system and enable it to better respond to the challenges of malnutrition
and non-communicable disease. More specifically, the project will support the implementation of interventions prioritized under the
National Health Development Plan for (i) addressing malnutrition, (ii) improving prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, and
(iii) improving health systems. Funds will be disbursed as budget support linked to agreed results achieved over the given period. The
project will also support innovation, results monitoring, and capacity building in the health sector. A core team will be involved with
monitoring and support, training, workshops, testing of innovative ideas, operational research, demographic and health surveys, base-line
and end-line surveys and Disbursement Linked Indicators’ results reporting.


Key Results Achieved and Expected:*:
This recently approved project expects to support the implementation of 20 results (a subset of the National Health Development Plan
results). The first funds release was completed in December 2013 and the first Results Report for the project is due in March 2014.

* As at January 16, 2014

Key Development Partners:
The Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Local Government and Provincial Councils, and the Government of Sri Lanka.




                                                                       18
                                                             Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot




    SRI LANKA: DAM SAFETY AND WATER RESOURCES PLANNING PROJECT

Key Dates:

Approved: March 27, 2008
Effective: June 26, 2008
Closing: June 30, 2015

Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier                       Financing          Disbursed         Undisbursed
IBRD
IDA                               65.33               49.4                14.2
Govt. of Sri Lanka                 4.00
Other
Total Project Cost               69.33
*As of January 14, 2014



Background and Objectives:

Dams are part of the essential hydraulic infrastructure to store water for Sri Lanka’s irrigation, hydropower, and domestic a nd industrial
water supply needs, as well as to provide flood control. At present, about 85 percent of the developed water resources are used for
irrigation in the dry zone, which covers nearly two-thirds of the country. The dam network in Sri Lanka comprises over 270 medium and 80
large dams. Due to lack of maintenance over time, the dams pose an escalating public safety threat. Many large dams are ageing and suffer
from various structural deficiencies and shortcomings in operation and monitoring facilities, requiring urgent attention. In addition, the
country is in need of a ‘Dam Safety Secretariat’ that would routinely monitor the performance and status of each dam.
This project aims to: (i) establish long-term sustainable arrangements for the operation and maintenance of large dams; and (ii) improve
water resources planning. More specifically, the project will enhance public safety of 32 high-risk large dams through rehabilitation and
modernization; improve the basic facilities (roads, lighting, etc.) of 80 dams (including the 32 high-risk dams); and establish sustainable
institutional arrangements for dam safety management and operation and maintenance. The project provides for the implementation of
Livelihood Assistance Plans to assist communities around four dams where the reservoir has to be emptied in order to carry out the work.
The project also sets out to enhance the institutional capacity, as well as the physical and analytical infrastructure, for monitoring hydro-
meteorological data, detecting and forecasting water hazards, and water resources planning and management. Around 120 hydrometric
stations will be established and upgraded, along with the establishment of a database at the Irrigation Department and establishment of a
groundwater monitoring system. The project will also help to strengthen the institutional capacity for integrated and multi-sector water
resources planning, and assist in the selection and prioritization of water resources development investments.


Key Results Achieved and Expected:*:
After a slow start the project has been performing well during the past years. Except for one dam, all contracts have been awarded and so
far remedial measures at 12 dams have been completed. As a result, the risk of dam failure has been reduced substantially. All works for
basic facilities (e.g. dam access, electricity, maintenance tools and equipment) are either completed or in an advanced stage of completion.
The contract for the development of 122 hydro-meteorological stations is also ongoing and the first automatic stations have been installed
and tested. Institutional development and reform of agencies to be better able to monitor, operate and maintain dams are ongoing. A
National Water Use Plan and an updated Mahaweli Water Resources Development Plan have been completed. In October 2013, the
government requested $70 million Additional Financing (AF) to: (i) cover cost overruns to complete the original project scope; and (ii)
scale-up successful project activities, including rehabilitation and modernization of dams in the east and north of the country that could not
be part of the project area under the original project. The World Bank has responded positively to this request and is currently processing
the AF with a proposed Board date of March 27, 2014.

*As at January 14, 2014

Key Development Partners:
Implementing agencies include the Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources Management, the Irrigation Department, Mahaweli Authority
of Sri Lanka, the Ceylon Electricity Board, and the Water Resources Board.




                                                                     19
                                                            Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot


    SRI LANKA: COMMUNITY LIVELIHOODS IN CONFLICT AFFECTED AREAS PROJECT (RE-AWAKENING PROJECT)

Key Dates:

Approved: June 22, 2004
Effective: October 12, 2004
Closing: June 30, 2014

Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier                     Financing   Disbursed         Undisbursed
IBRD
IDA                               123.47      113.99            13.12**
Govt. of Sri Lanka
Other
Total Project Cost                123.47
**As of December 31, 2013; ** A withdrawal application of US$5.2m is being
processed.

Background and Objectives:

The World Bank has been supporting the government of Sri Lanka’s rehabilitation efforts in conflict -affected areas (North, East, and
bordering districts) since 1998. The North-East Irrigated Agriculture Project, ($27 million) approved in 1999 during the conflict, focused on
helping conflict-affected communities to reestablish at least a subsistence level of production and basic community services. The Second
Northeast Irrigated Agriculture Project ($64.7 million), approved in 2004, added a focus on community development which became
increasingly important over the life of the project. This project was subsequently restructured in 2007 and renamed the Community
Livelihoods in Conflict- Affected Areas Project, known locally as the Re-awakening Project. The escalation of violence had made it difficult to
implement large-scale infrastructure through public-sector agencies in conflict-affected areas. Community demand for immediate livelihood
support had also increased, requiring more flexible staffing arrangements with a greater emphasis on skills development and accountability
at the community level for project management and facilitation.
The Re-awakening Project aims to help the conflict-affected communities and villages in Northern and Eastern provinces and adjoining
areas by restoring their livelihoods, enhancing agricultural production and incomes, and building their capacity for sustainable social and
economic reintegration. It includes four components: (i) village rehabilitation and development, supporting the restoration of village assets
and mobilization of community institutions in focal villages in twelve districts; (ii) essential rehabilitation of selected major irrigation
schemes to ensure safety and improve water management capacity; (iii) farmer organization and support for agricultural services to
develop capacity and improve marketing and competitiveness of agriculture; and (iv) capacity building and project implementation support
for monitoring, oversight and project management.
Successive additional financing has been provided. The first emergency additional financing ($12 million provided in 2009 and designed in
tandem with the Emergency Northern Recovery Project) set out to help conflict-affected communities in the Northern Province to restore
village assets and mobilize community institutions in some 135 Grama Niladhari Divisions. The second and third additional financing
(processed together in 2011 for a combined $38 million) was designed to help communities and villages in North, East and the adjoining
areas affected by the devastating floods of 2010/2011 by restoring their livelihoods, enhancing agricultural production and incomes, and
building their capacity for sustainable social and economic reintegration. They are focused on the rehabilitation of villages, irrigation
schemes and rural infrastructure.


Key Results:*:
 • Since inception, the project has reached 1,039 war-affected villages, assisting 283,087 beneficiaries through 24,288 small groups, 1520
    village development organizations, as well as 781 Women Rural Development Societies.
 • 101,845 families have either started new income generation activities or scaled up existing activities through low interest loans
    provided under the project’s village revolving fund.
 • 3,203 community infrastructure and social services subprojects have been completed and maintained by the communities to improve
    their quality of life. Another 1,093 subprojects are nearing completion.
 • 2,003 km of rural roads have been rehabilitated. Increased water supply through rehabilitated irrigation has increased farm areas by
    54,670 hectares, benefitting 40,646 households.
 • 2,200 youth employed following skills development training provided through the community skill development fund.
 • The project has assisted 31,449 ex-combatants to start their own livelihood activities.
 • The project has initiated 108 cluster level commercial sub-projects, of which 18 are in operation. *As at December 31, 2013


Key Development Partners:
Ministry of Economic Development, Provincial Councils, various civil society organizations, and conflict/flood-affected communities.


                                                                      20
                                                            Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot



    SRI LANKA: SECOND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND LIVELIHOOD IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Key Dates:

Approved: 10 Sept-2009
Effective: 11 Dec, 2009
Closing:31 March,2014

Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier                       Financing    Disbursed              Undisbursed
IBRD
IDA                                  75           63.80                    11.20
Govt. of Sri Lanka                   18           10.72                    7.28
   Other***                          12            6.33                    5.67
Total Project Cost                  105
**As of December 31, 2013; *** (Community Contribution)



Background and Objectives:

This project supports government efforts to enhance incomes and the quality of life of poor households in the poorest parts of the country.
The project also aims to build the capacity of government agencies, local governments, and community organizations for service delivery
and overall project implementation. Phase I was completed successfully in March of 2009 March and phase II commenced in 2010. The
project was restructured in June 2013 to enhance the achievement of the project’s development objectives. The government has requested a
six-month extension of the project’s closing date (for 31 September, 2014 closure), with which t he World Bank is in agreement, in order to
complete unfinished infrastructure activities.
The project focuses on the following areas: strengthening the institutional capacity of pro-poor institutions (village organizations); village
fund development and livelihood related investments at the village level; promoting inter-village development to consolidate and sustain
livelihood; and infrastructure activities and investments generated at the village level. This involves strengthening the capacity of local
governments (Pradeshiya Sabhas) to plan, deliver and maintain services in a cost-effective, participatory, and transparent way; and
developing partnerships between rural communities and private and public sector agencies to increase access to new technology and
marketing opportunities; and enhance skills for employment generation, especially among unemployed youth.
The project also provides support for the overall coordination, planning, implementation and monitoring of the project at the district,
national, and provincial levels. Additionally, the project provides for building the capacity of local officials and public agencies to deliver
government programs using a community-driven development approach, and to develop policies and procedures for funding communities
and local governments directly.


Results:*:
The project has promoted a total of 1,010 village organizations since 2010. These organizations have established 1,990 community
microfinance institutions (called village savings and credit organizations, or VSCOs), which have mobilized 230,882 members, constituting
75 percent of the total membership of village organizations. The VSCOs are comprised of 38,707 small groups, managing combined savings
of $4.1 million, and a Livelihood Support Fund of $14.1 million. The VSCOs have disbursed project loans worth $45.4 million to 326,167
members and the current VSCO account balance is $48.4 million. Technical assistance is being provided for interconnectivity programs and
producer groups, while the village organizations are linked with technical departments of government agencies and the private sector.
Progress on monitoring and evaluation, and a management information system, are evident through improved capture and reporting of
project data. Of the 4,486 targeted infrastructure sub projects, a total of 2,619 are completed. The project has also completed 22 out of the
scheduled 37 sub-projects of the extended pilot interconnectivity program in six Pradeshiya Shabhas. It has mobilized a total of 27,882
small and marginal producers into 407 producer groups, with about 272 of these groups having been financed to the tune of $2.1 million for
improved productivity. Successful partnerships have also been established with line ministries and the private sector providing technical
support to the village organizations. Training is being provided for community development officers formerly employed under the
government’s “Divineguma” poverty reduction program.


Key Development Partners:
Government of Sri Lanka, Ministry of Economic Development




                                                                      21
                                                              Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot




    SRI LANKA: NORTH EAST LOCAL SERVICES IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

Key Dates:

Approved: May 13, 2010
Effective: December 15, 2010
Closing: December 31, 2015

Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier                       Financing        Disbursed          Undisbursed
IBRD
IDA                                50.00              41.83                08.17
Govt. of Sri Lanka                 34.00              11.65                22.35
 Other***                           2.00              01.46                00.54
Total Project Cost                 86.00
**As of December 3, 2013; *** (Beneficiary)

Background and Objectives:

IDA has moved swiftly to support Sri Lanka’s government as it implements the three main pillars of its short - to medium-term development
plans for the Eastern and Northern Provinces. The recovery and community livelihoods projects cover infrastructure essential to recovery
as well as the restoration of livelihoods in selected areas. There are, however, significant needs with respect to improving local capacity to
effectively maintain and create local public goods and services for all conflict-affected citizens. As a complementary piece of the overall
package, the North East Local Services Improvement Project (NELSIP) addresses those needs, further helping to lay the foundation for long-
term socioeconomic development of the two provinces. The project is designed to improve the delivery of local infrastructure services (such
as rural roads, drinking water supply, drainage and waste disposal) by local authorities in the Northern and Eastern Provinces in an
accountable and responsive manner.
More specifically, the project aims to: (i) improve the quantity and quality of public goods delivered and maintained by local authorities; (ii)
ensure that local authorities undertake public expenditures and deliver local services in a transparent and accountable manner; (iii)
strengthen service delivery systems and build the capacity of local authorities to deliver their mandated services, as well as strengthen the
monitoring capacities of the provincial and national level institutions; (iv) establish a comprehensive monitoring system, evaluate technical
and social audits and prepare citizen score cards and other needed analysis; and (v) support the key agencies at the central, provincial and
local levels that are involved in the day to day management of the project to procure necessary consultant, equipment and operational
support for the smooth implementation of the project.


Results:*:
•        493 km rural and village roads and 23 km flood drainage canal systems completed and maintained
•        7 rural water supply schemes completed and used
•        66 playgrounds, markets and nurseries completed and used
•        28 rural electrification schemes completed
•        70 percent capital grants released against allocations
•        87 percent increased satisfaction of local people regarding local authorities
•        75 percent of local authorities preparing annual financial statements within 3 months of closure
•        75 percent acceptable financial audits of accounts
•        45 percent of local authorities with budgets prepared in a participatory manner
•        79 percent of local authorities whose revenues, expenditures and procurement decisions are publically disclosed

*As at December 31, 2013

Key Development Partners:
Ministry of Economic Development, Ministry of Local Government and Provincial Councils, provincial councils, civil society organizations,
private sector and citizens. Australia’s AusAID has offered $20.8 million in co -financing to roll out the project to adjoining areas and the
Grant Agreement is being reviewed by the government for signature by January 31, 2014.




                                                                      22
                                                              Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot



    SRI LANKA: ROAD SECTOR ASSISTANCE PROJECT

Key Dates:

Approved: December 15, 2005
Effective: March 16, 2006
Closing: September 30, 2014

Financing in million US Dollars*:
Financier                         Financing        Disbursed          Undisbursed
IBRD
IDA                            298.1                  235.0                63.1
Govt. of Sri Lanka             44.12                  44.12                 0
 Other                          12                     6.33                5.67
Total Project Cost             342.22
   **As of December 31, 2013

Background and Objectives:

The government of Sri Lanka expects the economy to grow at an annual rate of six to eight percent over the next five years, and
infrastructure development will be paramount in supporting this growth target. In this context, a broad agenda has been set for the road
sector, including connecting poor regions and production centers to domestic and international markets, building a national highway
system and an integrated road network, enhancing road safety, and promoting private sector participation in the sector. The Road Sector
Assistance Project (an initial project of $100 million, with additional financing of $98 million and $100 million approved in 2008 and 2011,
respectively) aims to lower transportation costs through the sustainable delivery of an efficient national road system that serves the need of
road users and the Sri Lankan public at large. The project was designed to assist the country in its endeavor to improve its road network,
whose maintenance had been neglected during years of civil conflict. The project was prepared to address the rehabilitation of priority
national and rural roads and was instrumental in increasing the level of funding channeled to rehabilitation and maintenance of national
roads, as institutionalized in a Road Maintenance Trust Fund. The project has also piloted a rural road strategy for the entire country with
road inventories, prioritization criteria as well as a database created for approximately 66 percent of the Pradeshiya Sabahs, or local
authorities, where awareness has been created at all levels of government and staff empowered through on-the-job training. The project
was recently restructured to accommodate the replacement of a road section requested by government.


Key Results Achieved and Expected*
The project has been transformational in many respects, particularly in developing both private contracting capacity and the in-house design
and supervision capacity of the Road Development Authority, as well as its culture in terms of environmental and social safeguards and road
safety. At the network level, roads in poor and bad condition have been reduced from 52 percent to 35 percent. The International Roughness
Index has improved from 9.5 to 6.1. Likewise, vehicle operating costs have improved, decreasing from Rs23/km to Rs18/km. A sustainable
arrangement for road maintenance has been established and is being implemented. All legal covenants are being met. End of project targets
are on track to be met.

* As at December 31 2013 (Results collected for 2012)

Key Development Partners:
The Road Development Authority (implementing agency), the Asian Development Bank, and Japan International Cooperation Agency




                                                                      23
                                                             Sri Lanka: Country Snapshot



    SRI LANKA: METRO COLOMBO URBAN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

Key Dates:

Approved: 15 March 2012
Effective:10 July 2012
Closing: 31 December 2017

Financing in million US Dollars*:

Financier                           Financing       Disbursed          Undisbursed
IBRD                                213              34.65              178.35
IDA
Govt. of Sri Lanka                  108                 1                   107
 Other
Total Project Cost                  321
   *As of December 31, 2013

Background and Objectives:

As recognized by the government of Sri Lanka’s medium-term development plan (the Mahinda Chinthana), Sri Lanka needs competitive and
dynamic cities to reach its aspiration of becoming an upper-middle-income economy and a global hub by 2016. In particular, Sri Lanka needs
to tap the competitive advantages of the Colombo Metropolitan Region (CMR) to accelerate growth. The CMR will continue to generate much
of the capital, human resources, technology and services needed for growth in the rest of the country. While the CMR covers only about 6
percent of the country’s total land area and is home to 28 percent of its population, it accounts for about 45 percent of na tional GDP and 80
percent of industrial value added. It is the country’s major urban agglomeration and is growing faster than any other in Sri Lanka. A number
of obstacles are preventing the CMR from realizing its full economic potential. These include inadequate infrastructure and services;
significant vulnerability to flooding, the impacts of which are being exacerbated by climate change and sea level rise; plus poorly designed
and maintained drainage. In addition, limited financial and human resources available to local authorities, combined with their lack of
coordination, hinder effective delivery, and operation and maintenance of local infrastructure services. Integrated planning, management
and coordination at the metropolitan level are virtually nonexistent. The project aims to support the government in reducing flooding in the
catchment of the Colombo Water Basin, and strengthen the capacity of local authorities in the Colombo Metropolitan Area to rehabilitate,
improve and maintain local infrastructure and services through selected demonstration investments. The project includes a component on
flood and drainage management and one focused on strengthening strategic planning processes at the metropolitan level. This is in addition
to supporting local authorities to rehabilitate and manage streets and drainage infrastructure, and improve local public facilities and other
urban services.


Results:*
The project is in its early stages of implementation, and the following results are anticipated: (i) reduction in the area under risk of flooding
(50-year return period) in the project area; and (ii) the percentage of total urban roads maintained by the project local authorities that are in
good and fair condition to increase by 20 percent (indicating improved capacity of local authorities in operation and maintenance of critical
municipal infrastructure). A number of early intermediary results have been achieved over the course of implementation to date, including
improved coordination between central agencies and local authorities and among local authorities within the metropolitan area, and
institutionalization of metropolitan level coordination agencies, such as the Metropolitan Wetland Management Department and the Colombo
Metropolitan Unit of the Urban Development Authority. The project was able to answer a presidential request to identify solutions to a Solid
Waste Management emergency for the Colombo Metropolitan Area, and launch a feasibility study for a new engineered landfill for the
metropolitan region.

* As at January 2014

Key Development Partners:
Ministry of Defence and Urban Development; Sri Lanka Land Reclamation and Development Corporation; Urban Development Authority;
Colombo Municipal Council; Dehiwela Mount Lavinia Municipal Council; Kotte Sri Jayawardenapura Municipal Council; and the Kolonnawa
Urban Council.




                                                                       24
