                                        86811
              Nepal: Country Snapshot




Nepal: Country Snapshot

 March 2014




                        0
                                                Nepal: Country Snapshot



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Economic outlook

Nepalese growth slowed slightly to 3.6 percent of GDP in FY13 from 4.9 percent the year before after agricultural activity
was dented by a poor monsoon and private investment declined amid heightened political instability in the run up to the
elections. Remittances by Nepalese workers from abroad provide some relief and – together with increased political
stability following the elections – are expected to help the economy gather strength in FY14, while more favorable
weather patterns will also lend support. Food price pressures kept inflation close to 10 percent, where it is expected to
remain for the rest of FY14. Strong remittances, which amount to a quarter of Nepalese GDP, have helped the country
accumulate a significant current account surplus. On the fiscal side, the budget is expected to record a small surplus in
FY14. This provides the government room to manoeuver, and to unlock much-needed capital spending. After a crisis in
2011, the Nepalese financial sector remains vulnerable, with stress tests showing that banks would be at risk if
nonperforming loans were recognized. Nepal also continues to rely heavily on foreign remittances to finance domestic
consumption and to boost growth, but if the country wants to lift its growth path further, it must remove obstacles to
higher levels of investment.

Poverty reduction

Nepal is a development ‘paradox’ that continues to deliver impressive progress in poverty reduction despite modest
economic performance. It has halved the proportion of the population living below the poverty line since the mid-1990s
to 24.8 percent, which is lower than in India and Bangladesh. The bulk of these gains have been made in rural areas,
which is where the vast majority of poor people still live. That said, Nepal is one of South A sia’s most equal countries in
terms of per capita consumption, although many people continue to live on incomes that are only just above the $1.25 a
day poverty threshold, leaving them vulnerable to shocks. It has the second lowest road density in the region and needs to
improve transport links between remote rural areas and economic centers to enable more poor people to sell agricultural
produce and access social services. It also faces severe electricity shortages, despite a wealth of hydropower resources.

World Bank Group in Nepal

The World Bank portfolio comprises 20 active projects with net commitments of just over $1.5 billion, including 17
International Development Association projects with commitments of $1.375 billion and three Trust Fund projects with a
total commitment of $87.5 million. Cumulative IDA disbursements are about $661 million. The projects cover a wide
range of areas, including energy, food security, water management, education, healthcare and transportation. The
portfolio also includes three regional projects with net commitments of $240 million, of which $24 million has been
disbursed.

Overall, despite its fragile country context, Nepal boasts a relatively stable track record on disbursements, which is better
than similar IDA countries. Over the last four years, disbursements have averaged around 27 percent. However, portfolio
quality and implementation progress remains a challenge. Eleven projects, or 55 percent of the portfolio, are at risk, and
five of those are actual problem projects. Implementation issues include delays in approval of work plans, frequent
turnover of project staff, weak safeguard capacity, weak procurement and financial management, and weak evaluation
capacity. Steps are being taken to improve performance, including bi-annual joint reviews with the finance ministry and
project authorities, coordinating performance reviews with the government and other development partners, training, as
well as proactive measures to restructure or cancel funds.




                                                             1
                                                 Nepal: Country Snapshot



COUNTRY SNAPSHOT
With GDP growth averaging over four percent per annum, Nepal has made good progress during the past thirty
years in improving human development and reducing poverty. A noteworthy feature of Nepal’s economy is that it has
continued to grow during the recent decade-long period of conflict (1996-2006). However, unlike many other post-
conflict countries, it did not experience acceleration in growth following the end of hostilities. With a small export base
given its size and limited financial integration, Nepal’s economy is relatively insulated from global shocks. However, many
households are dependent on remittances from migrant workers abroad; these transfers have grown rapidly in recent
years and are now equivalent to more than 25 percent of GDP. Nepal has already reached the first Millennium
Development Goal (MDG1) of halving extreme poverty during 1990-2015, and has also made substantial progress in
reaching other MDG milestones related to key human development outcomes. Over the past 15 years, real per capita
consumption has grown by an average of 3.5 percent per year and the Human Development index has improved at a rate
of 2.6 percent annually through 1980-2010.

                                               GDP growth (annual, percent)

                        10

                         8

                         6

                         4

                         2

                          0
                           1960        1970         1980          1990       2000        2010
                         -2

                         -4

Nepal’s current growth ‘model’ is based on remittance financed consumption, b ut achieving faster growth will
require it to remove constraints to investment. Economic activity in Nepal remains driven by consumption; weak
investment continues to constrain the economy’s full growth potential. Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) has r isen
only moderately from 20 percent of GDP in FY05 to a peak of 22.2 percent in FY10 before ebbing again down to just above
21 percent in FY13, significantly below the shares observed in most other South Asian countries. During this period,
government GFCF remained in a narrow band between 2.7 - 4.7 percent of GDP. Such modest levels of investment are not
due to tight fiscal balances and/or excessive recurrent spending: between FY10 and FY13, the budget balance has
oscillated between a deficit of 1 percent of GDP and a surplus of 2 percent of GDP in FY13, when Nepal was the only
country in South Asia to report a budget surplus. Likewise private investment has remained subdued despite Nepal’s
tremendous unexploited hydroelectric capacity and expressed interest by foreign investors. The spectacular growth in
remittance transfers recently has translated into a buildup of liquidity in the financial system, but relatively low uptake of
credit by the private sector. Moreover foreign direct investment has increased rapidly, but from a minuscule base ($38
million in FY10 to $102 million in FY13), and in FY13 amounted to just 0.5 percent of GDP.

Recent Economic Developments
Growth
Economic growth slowed to 3.6 percent in FY13 but is expected to rebound to 4.5 percent this year. Growth in
FY13 fell to 3.6 percent compared to 4.9 percent in FY12, reflecting both a poor monsoon and heightened political
instability. The weak monsoon and an inadequate supply of agricultural inputs during the peak plantation season led to a
disappointing performance from agricultural, with growth of 1.3 percent in FY13 compared to 5.0 percent growth in
FY12. Industrial sector growth slowed from 3.0 percent in FY12 to 1.6 percent in FY13 as private sector investment was
put on hold due to political uncertainty. The only source of relief came from significant growth of the services sector (6.0
percent in FY13 compared to 4.5 percent in FY12) mostly aided by growth in remittance transfers (12 percent growth
from FY12 in dollar terms). Economic growth is expected to rebound to 4.5 percent in FY14 owing to favorable weather
patterns and continued high growth in remittance transfers. Agriculture output is expected to recover in FY14 and




                                                              2
                                                 Nepal: Country Snapshot


services growth to continue at a healthy rate. With a good monso on, the production of Nepal’s two staple crops has
expanded significantly, compared to the same period in FY13. Higher than anticipated inward remittance flows are
expected to drive service sector growth, particularly wholesale and retail trade and social services. In contrast, industrial
activity is likely to remain lackluster due to structural constraints and to only-modest increases in public capital spending.

External Sector
Nepal is in a comfortable balance of payments position thanks to rising remittances. In the first six months of FY14,
Nepal accumulated a significant current account surplus, driven in part by a slower deterioration in the trade balance, and
a significant increase in the rate of growth of workers’ remittance transfers. In the first six months of the fiscal year,
exports of goods increased by 16 percent (against 10.2 percent at the same time last FY) while import growth was 23.3
percent (versus 24.6 percent in FY13). As a result, the trade gap continued to grow, by just under 25 percent of GDP,
albeit at a slower pace than in the corresponding period of FY13 (28 percent of GDP) – reflecting in part the impact of the
rupee’s depreciation (making Nepalese exports more attractive to Indian importers). Moreover, in parallel, workers’
remittances grew by a whopping 34.4 percent from the beginning of the fiscal year, much in excess of the already
impressive 22 percent growth registered in the first half of FY13 (in local currency terms). In FY14, the current account
surplus is expected to reach 2.4 percent of GDP (down slightly from 3.3 percent in FY13) with gross official reserves equal
to 7.8 months of imports of goods and services.

                               Exports, Imports and Trade Balance FY 2001-14 (In US $ Million)




                                                              3
                                                Nepal: Country Snapshot


                             Monthly Remittances Inflows and Movement of Migrant Workers




Inflation
Inflation remains high and will likely be close to 10 percent in FY14. Inflation stood at 9.7 percent (year-over-year)
in January 2014, driven by rising food prices, and is expected to remain just under 10 percent in FY14. This is in contrast
with FY13, when non-food items were pushing inflation up. A range of factors affected food prices during the first half of
FY14. The price of meat was driven upwards by avian-flu fears, leading authorities to impose quarantines on imports and
to destroy vast numbers of animals. Increases in the prices of cereal grains have reflected (i) high demand in the run-up to
the election in November 2013, reflecting both campaign-related expenditures and ‘stockpiling’ by households in
anticipation of possible strikes; (ii) high food prices in India, allowing (iii) hoarding of supply to the market by middle-
men. Overall, Nepal’s inflation closely ‘tracks’ the evolution of prices in India, its largest trading partner, with which it
shares a long open border.

                                                Inflation in Nepal and India




                                                             4
                                                 Nepal: Country Snapshot


Fiscal Sector Performance
Nepal’s fiscal position is paradoxical: despite ample room to manoeuver, much needed capital spending is low
and lagging. The budget is expected to be in surplus for the second consecutive year. A combination of low public
expenditures coupled with robust revenue growth accounted for a significant budget surplus and declining debt in the
first half of FY14. With a large increase in foreign grants, the overall government surplus ballooned to NRs 56 billon.
Reflecting this comfortable fiscal position the government of Nepal did not issue any fresh T-Bills in FY14 and domestic
debt fell to NRs 217.6 billion. For FY14 the government is expected to maintain a surplus of 0.3 percent of GDP, with
public debt falling to around 30 percent of GDP (31 percent in FY13).

                                        Mid-year budget execution (relative to plan)




Financial Sector
The financial sector remains fragile. In mid-2011, a financial crisis nearly erupted in Nepal. Withdrawals of deposits
from smaller financial institutions and severe liquidity constraints across the banking sector exposed the vulnerabilities
of the financial system and required urgent interve ntion by Nepal’s central bank and bank regulator, the Nepal Rastra
Bank (NRB). The World Bank, together with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), was called upon by the NRB and the
government of Nepal to provide assistance, both technical and financial, to support efforts to contain the developing
crisis, and to provide longer-term support for institutional and regulatory changes that would contribute, over time, to a
more robust system. Due to quick and effective intervention by the NRB, and thanks to a favorable environment (notably
continuing large flows of remittances which contributed liquidity to the system), a full-blown financial crisis was averted.
However, financial sector health remains fragile owing to banks’ impaired balance sheets, exposure t o real estate and to
liquidity risks. A February FSAP mission concluded that “Nepal faces heightened and serious financial sector challenges
[which] reflect a decade of political instability; lax licensing; a very poorly performing and large public bank sector; and a
growing and highly interconnected financial sector”. Stress tests carried out showed that “recognition of NPLs (non -
performing loans) could place the banking system under duress even under a benign medium term economic outlook”.



Poverty and Shared Prosperity
The “Nepal paradox” lives on, with impressive progress on poverty reduction and human development despite
modest economic performance. Nepal has been reducing poverty at an impressive rate of 2.5 percentage points per
year since 2004 and has already reached the MDG1 goal of halving extreme poverty. It has also made substantial progress
in reaching key MDG milestones and human development outcomes. Over the past 15 years, real per capita consumption
has grown by an average of 3.5 percent per year and the Human Development index has improved at a rate of 2.6 percent
per year through 1980-2010. Some 25 percent of the Nepali population still found themselves below the poverty line in
2010-11 a significant drop of about 30 percentage points from 1995-96. Using the international poverty line of PPP $1.25
per capita per day, the proportion of poor in the population halved to 24.8 percent, and Nepal is now in better shape than
both Bangladesh and India in terms of poverty prevalence.




                                                              5
                                                Nepal: Country Snapshot


                                     GDP growth and poverty headcount 1994-2011




Most of the poverty reduction occurred in rural areas, reflecting Nepal’s low level of urbanization. Nearly 92
percent of the poverty reduction happened in the rural areas of the country with rising incomes from self-employment in
farming, wage employment in non-agricultural (rural) jobs and remittance receipts accounting for three fourths of the
increase in incomes of the bottom two quintiles. With the population dependent on agriculture stable at 15 million (due to
declining family size and people moving out of agriculture) agriculture income growth (around 3 percent per year)
registered fully as per-capita income growth on the back of higher returns to agricultural inputs and rising wages in the
rural economy. Although improvements in living standards have been shared across all parts of the country (ecological
belts, regions and ethnic groups) and have in fact been faster among lower expenditure classes, poverty prevalence
continues to vary widely across areas, regions and groups, while remaining essentially a rural phenomenon. Over the
period 2004-05 to 2010-11 every expenditure class enjoyed a rise in per capita consumption with the poorer classes
experiencing the greater increase, thereby lowering overall inequality. Nonetheless important contrasts remain. Poverty
is significantly higher in rural than in urban areas (27.4 vs. 15.5 percent) and highest in the far-western development
regions (45.6 percent) and mountainous ecological regions (42.3 percent). Nearly 90 percent of the poor live in rural
areas but poverty prevalence and share in the total are otherwise inversely related, with most of Nepal’ s poor found in the
central regions (with relatively low prevalence), the Terai and Hills.




                                                             6
                                                 Nepal: Country Snapshot




                                           Poverty headcount disaggregated


    Poverty Estimates (2010-11)
                                          Incidence                                       Distribution of the
      Region                              Headcount     Poverty      Poverty gap          Poor          Total
                                          rate          gap          squared              population population
                                                        (x100)       (x100)
      Urban                               15.5          3.2          1.0                  11.7          19.0
      Rural                               27.4          6.0          2.0                  88.3          81.0

      Eastern                             21.4          3.8          1.0                  19.8          23.3
      Central                             21.7          5.0          1.8                  30.8          35.7
      Western                             22.2          4.3          1.4                  16.9          19.2
      Midwestern                          31.7          7.7          2.7                  16.4          13.0
      Far western                         45.6          10.7         3.8                  16.0          8.8

      Mountain                            42.3          10.1         3.5                  11.8          7.0
      Hill                                24.3          5.7          2.1                  42.8          44.2
      Terai                               23.4          4.5          1.3                  45.4          48.7

      Mountains                           42.3          10.1         3.5                  11.8          7.0
      Urban - Kathmandu                   11.5          2.8          1.0                  2.6           5.7
      Urban - Hill                        8.7           1.7          0.5                  1.5           4.4
      Urban -Terai                        22.0          4.3          1.3                  7.5           8.6
      Rural Hills - Eastern               15.9          2.9          0.8                  4.0           6.3
      Rural Hills -Central                29.4          8.5          3.7                  10.8          9.3
      Rural Hills - Western               28.0          5.3          1.8                  10.5          9.5
      Rural Hills - Mid and Far           36.8          8.9          3.1                  13.3          9.1
      Western
      Rural Terai - Eastern               21.0          3.7          0.9                  9.6           11.6
      Rural Terai - Central               23.1          4.1          1.1                  13.9          15.1
      Rural Terai - Western               22.3          4.4          1.4                  5.9           6.6
      Rural Terai - Mid and Far           31.1          7.2          2.5                  8.5           6.9
      Western

      Nepal                           25.2          5.4        1.8                        100.0         100.0
              Source: World Bank staff estimates based on 2010-11 NLSS.



Overall inequality is low although aggregate, consumption-based numbers hide the extent to which specific groups and
communities have fallen behind and fail to capture other, non-consumption-based patterns of exclusion. With a GINI
coefficient at 30 percent in 2010-11, Nepal is one of South Asia’s most equal countries in terms of per capita consumption,
with urban areas slightly more unequal than rural but only modest differences between the more (Eastern) and less
(Western) equal regions. At the same time, regional consumption and subjective poverty rankings differ greatly. For
instance people living in relatively less poor urban areas and the poorest mountain areas both feel underprovided in
schooling and healthcare. Among the ecological zones the sharpest poverty in public goods is felt in mountains, with over
25 percent reporting inadequate schooling against 16 percent in the Terai.

Access to public goods has also improved significantly for all, but with widening gaps between income groups.
Most multi-dimensional indicators of poverty have declined sharply over the past 15 years as public provision of
education and health infrastructure - the immediate priorities for a developing country such as Nepal - complemented the
purchase of private provision made possible by rising remittance incomes. The largest improvements were in “child out of
school”, “time taken to primary school” and “safe deliveries” while more modest gains were recorded for




                                                              7
                                                Nepal: Country Snapshot


undernourishment, sanitation and access to reasonable cooking fuels. While multi-dimensional indicators of poverty
declined for consumption-impoverished people as well, they did so at a slower pace than for the population as a whole.

Finally although fewer households than ever remain below the poverty line, many are still clustered just above
that threshold, making vulnerability to risks and shocks a salient issue. The vast majority of Nepalis consume less
than twice the bare minimum that defines the boundary with poverty. Moving to a more inclusive and resilient society in
Nepal will mean finding a growth path that maximizes gains not only for those that still live in utter deprivation, but also
for lifting the majority of the population economically and socially.

                    Nepal's population clustered above the poverty line (daily consumption / $1.25 PPP)




                                                             8
                                          Nepal: Country Snapshot



World Bank Program
Portfolio and Programs
The current portfolio comprises 20 active projects with a net commitment of about $1.506 billion (this includes 17
active IDA projects with a net commitment of about $1.375 billion and three active Trust Fund projects of $5 million
and above, with a net commitment of $87.5 million). Current cumulative IDA disbursements are $660.77 million
(about 48 percent of net commitments) and cumulative trust fund disbursements are $15.06 million (about 17
percent of net commitments). In addition, there are three regional projects with net commitments of $240 million,
of which about $24 million (10 percent of net commitments) have been disbursed (see table attached). Three IDA
projects amounting to $221.95 million closed in December 2013.

Disbursements
Recently, disbursements have significantly improved, from $83.37 million in December 2013 to $129.49 million as of
February 2014. The disbursement ratio improved, from 8.5 percent in December 2013 to 14.9 percent in February
2014, and is likely to reach 19 percent by end-March. The disbursement ratio for Nepal as of February 2014 is above
the regional average of 9.0 percent and Bank-wide average of 12.7 percent. Nepal’s annual target of achieving a 25
percent disbursement ratio is likely to be achieved. Following chart compares Nepal disbursement ratio with South
Asia region:




                                                      9
                                                 Nepal: Country Snapshot




Following chart illustrates Nepal’s disbursement ratio trend of five fiscal years:




    Overall, despite its fragile country context, Nepal has maintained a relatively stable track record in disbursements,
    better than similar IDA countries. During the past four years, disbursements averaged about 27 percent (FY11 had
    an exceptional ratio of 33.4 percent). This good progress is due to rigorous and proactive follow up by the country
    management unit (CMU) and the task teams, portfolio review meeting with the Ministry of Finance, and subsequent
    follow-ups and timely payment actions by the Bank.

    Audit Reports: As of February 2014, 17 out of 38 audit reports required for FY2012/13 audits have been received,
    which comprises about 45 percent. About 21 audit reports are now overdue, and warning letters have been issued
    providing 90-days grace period, which ends on May 15, 2014. Task teams and the CMU are following up on
    outstanding reports, in which there has been a progress in their submission, compared with previous years.

    Knowledge Products: Several key strategic pieces of TA/AAA/ESW have been undertaken or are nearing
    completion, including the Country Partnership Strategy (2014-18), policy notes for the new government, thematic
    reports on food security and nutrition, mapping local service delivery, competitive industries (CI) diagnostic, NLTA
    for hydropower scale-up in Nepal, Second Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment, etc.

    Challenges: While these are positive developments, portfolio quality and implementation progress remains a
    challenge in Nepal. Currently, there are 11 projects at risk, which comprise about 55 percent of the portfolio. Of this,
    five projects (25 percent) are actual problem projects. Generic implementation issues affecting the portfolio are as




                                                             10
                                                Nepal: Country Snapshot


    follows: (i) Delays in of approval of work plan that include procurement plan; (ii) Frequent turnover of project staff;
    (iii) Weak safeguard capacity; (iv) Weak procurement and financial management capacity; and (v) Weak monitoring
    and evaluation capacity.



    Portfolio Initiatives in FY14
        In order to improve the overall quality of the IDA portfolio and the TF portfolio, the following initiatives are
        being undertaken:

            Bi-annual joint portfolio reviews with the Ministry of Finance and project authorities;
            Coordinating the annual Nepal Portfolio Performance Review (NPPR) led by the Ministry of Finance with
             participation by other development partners and an overall objective to address generic implementation issues
             (next meeting tentatively scheduled for April 23, 2014);
            Close partnership with SARDE, Asia Learning and Loan Department to organize various training and clinics to
             both Bank staff and counterpart staff on matters related to portfolio management (e.g. results M&E, procurement
             management, financial management, safeguard management and disbursement);
            Intensive follow-ups with project officials by task teams on implementation issues;
            Proactive actions such as restructuring and cancellation of funds;
            Active follow-up by task teams on high value contracts;
            Quality review of ISRs together with SARDE;
            GAAP assessment to explore how to best integrate GAAP into overall project design;


                                        Development of IDA Portfolio FY2010-2014*



                Fiscal year                         2010        2011           2012             2013            2014*
     Number of Projects                    15                   17             18               19              17
     Net Commitments
                                           1,079              1,259           1,346            1,534            1,375
     ($ million)
     Undisbursed Balance
                                           730                  806            693              740              719
     ($ million)
     Number of Problem Projects                 3               3                2               5                5
     Disbursement Ratio (%)                  25                 31              24               2               14.9



Trust Fund (TF) portfolio: The Trust Fund (TF) portfolio consists of 17 active TFs (recipient executed), with a total
commitment amount of about $250.50 million, out of which $153.01 million has been disbursed (about 61 percent of net
commitments). Most TF commitments are in the HD sectors. A Program for Accountability in Nepal (PRAN) is under
implementation since 2010, financed through the State and Peace Building Fund (SPF) to improve governance and
institutional performance in Nepal. There are three operations supported by the Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) for
Public Financial Management (PFM) supporting the areas of cash management, strengthening of the audit function, and
strengthening the social accountability system.


IDA 16 Program and Pipeline: Under IDA16, Nepal’s indicative allocation is about $634 million (with a grant/credit
share of 45 percent to 55 percent). In FY12, only about 70 percent of the FY12 IDA allocation was used, but the FY13
pipeline was programmed to make up for this shortcoming and delivered 110 percent of the FY13 IDA resources. For
FY14, the rest of the IDA16 allocations, including funds from cancellations, have been allocated. About 67 percent of the
FY14 allocation has been committed within the second quarter and the rest is planned to be allocated in the fourth
Quarter. The pipeline planning has allowed for the absorption of whole of the IDA16 funds, including the funds from
cancellations.




                                                           11
                                                   Nepal: Country Snapshot




                                                                                       IDA16
                                                                                       Amount
   NEPAL
                                                                                       (US$              Status/Board
                                                                                       million)              Date
   Fiscal            Project Name
                                                                                       Total
   Year
                        Modernization of Rani Jamara           Kulariya   Irrigation
                                                                                                43
       2012             Schemes                                                                          Approved
                        Bridge Improvement and Maintenance Project                              60       Approved
                        Sunaula Hazar Din (Community Action for Nutrition)                      40       Approved
                        Total                                                                  143
                        Agriculture Commercialization and Trade Project (PACT)
                                                                                                40
       2013             AF                                                                               Approved
                        School Sector Reform Project AF                                        100       Approved
                        Kali Gandaki 'A' Rehabilitation                                        27.3      Approved
                        Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF) II AF                                    80       Approved
                        Financial Sector DPC                                                    30       Approved
                        Nepal-India Regional Trade and Transport Project                       39.71     Approved
                        Nepal-India Electricity Transmission and Trade AF                       39       Approved
                        Total                                                                  316.3
       2014             Strengthenign National Rural Transport Project                         100       Approved
                        Irrigation and Water Resource Management AF                             50       Approved
                        Kabeli A Hydroelectric Project                                          462      On Track
                        Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project                               71       On Track
                        Total                                                                  221
   1
     National IDA Allocation (Total $99 million)
   2
     To count against IDA17.



IFC PROGRAM
IFC's strategy for Nepal focuses on three pillars: (1) Inclusive growth: IFC is focusing its investment and advisory
programs on the base of the pyramid, rural areas, infrastructure building and improving access to finance for MSMEs, (2)
Climate change: Focus on adaptation and mitigation (including renewable energies, climate mitigation, cleaner
production, and energy efficiency financing), and (3) Global/Regional integration: Focus on financial infrastructure,
investment climate reforms, trade financing, logistics, and promoting South–South investments.

Financial inclusion support. IFC has assisted with the NRB in developing credit bureau and collateral registry and
invested in Nirdhan (a leading microfinance provider). IFC is taking the lead on WBG’s support to NRB to help develop
comprehensive payments, remittances and securities settlement systems. IFC has been providing technical assistance to
local institutions on specialized areas, such as SME banking (including a gender-focused program), risk management,
micro insurance, and sustainable energy financing.

Climate support: IFC co-manages two Climate Investment Fund programs in Nepal: (i) Pilot Program for Climate
Resilience (PPCR), with $9M funding ($6.6M in concessional loan and $2.4M in grants); and (ii) Scaling Up Renewable
Energy Program (SREP), with $10M ($9.5M for IS and $0.5M for AS).

Key areas of IFC’s IS business development are as follows:




                                                             12
                                               Nepal: Country Snapshot


Hydropower: Current processing efforts include three hydro power projects with a total volume around $140M
including: (a) Jointly with the WB, IFC is in the final stages of its pre-approval preparation for the 37.6MW Kabeli ‘A’
hydropower projects funding. A $37.9M financing (50/50 funded by IFC and IFC’s Blended Financing) is scheduled for a
Board presentation in March 2014; (b) Upper Trishuli could be committed as early as June 2014 if PDA/PPA issues with
NEA/GoN are resolved and financial closure deadline (with GoN) moved from Oct. 2013 to Oct. 2014; (c) A $2M initial
investment for the Joint Development Agreement by the IFC Infraventures for the Upper Mashyangdi was signed in
December 2013. IFC is also closely following (not yet in pipeline) three more large-scale hydropower projects. In total,
current IFC hydropower pipeline projects would generate around 3,300 MW. In addition to power generation efforts, IFC
also processing the Nepal-India Dhalkebar–Muzzafarpur cross-border transmission line project (on the Indian side where
commercial financing is needed; IDA if financing on the Nepal side). IFC in discussion with Nepali banks on wholesale
facilities for small-scale hydropower (post appraisal).

SREP financing for local banks: A $10M long-term facility each with potentially two local banks, for FY14.

GTFP: Expanded $12M in Nepal in FY13 and currently working to adding more banks – and increased utilization -- with
an anticipated FY14 volume increase to $30M.

Tourism: IFC is keen to support Nepali tourism, including ongoing discussions for IFC’s investment ($22M, including $8M
mobilization) in a five star hotel project (Sheraton), with several additional project leads.

Agribusiness: IS - IFC’s first investment in agribusiness (a $2M equity investment in feed miller P ro Biotech) in Nepal is
progressing towards the Board approval. AS – 5 initiatives are currently undertaken under PPCR: a) Resilient
Agribusiness Project; b) Promoting sustainable production of rice, maize and sugar cane to help 15,000 farmers adapt to
climate change - IFC is expected to sign cooperation agreements with 3 major agribusiness houses.; c) Facilitating
collaboration between Jain Irrigation and the GoN Department of Irrigation to develop a national micro-irrigation
strategy. d) Introducing a private-sector led fee-based extension services model to Nepali farmers. e) Strengthening the
technical skills of 4,000 poultry farmers and reducing the cost of production by 7%, though engaging with two leading
poultry firms (Avinash Hatchery and Pro Biotech Industries).

Private Equity Funds: In January 2013, FC launched a $14M SME Ventures Fund in Nepal. The mandate of the fund is to
invest in SMEs in Nepal and open up access to finance outside the traditional realms of providing collateralized loans to
SMEs. IFC AS is provided to complement the PE effort, seeking to address market's underdevelopment, cultivating certain
mindsets and helping SMEs become more investable by building their managerial and organizational capacity.




                                                           13
                                                        Nepal: Country Snapshot




                MODERNIZATION OF RANI JAMARA KULARIYA IRRIGATION SCHEME
Key Dates:
Approved: July 5, 2011
Effective: November 30, 2011
Closing: September 30, 2016

Financing in million US Dollars ( as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                   Total amount       Disbursed       Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                 48.0
Borrower                           5.0
 Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                43.0               10.74          31.18
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
The Rani Jamara Kulariya Scheme (the Rani Scheme) is one of the most prominent Farmer Managed Irrigation Schemes in Nepal, with a
cultivable command area of 14,300 hectares (the project area), of which about 11,000 ha is currently being irrigated. This scheme has been
developed by the farmers (mostly from the indigenous Tharu community) since 1896 in the Far Western Development Region, one of the
least developed regions in the country. It constitutes three independent traditional irrigation systems constructed, operated, and managed by
the farmers. Each of the systems draws water from the Karnali River (a tributary of the Ganga River) and has an extensive canal
infrastructure, with three branch and 41 sub-branch canals that have a total length of about 230 km. The project has been designed to
modernize the scheme.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project aims to improve irrigation water delivery to, and management in, the Rani Jamara Kulariya irrigation scheme, through improving
the performance of the irrigation systems and strengthening community-based irrigation management. Bank support for the Rani Scheme is
proposed in two phases. The ongoing phase one focuses on modernization of the higher-order irrigation infrastructure (especially intakes
and feeder and branch canals), enhancing the capacity of the water user associations to operate and maintain the improved or new irrigation
infrastructure, and the preparation and initiation of an agricultural development program. Phase 2 will mainly focus on the modernization of
the lower-order irrigation infrastructure (sub-branch and tertiary canals and water courses), continuation of the water user association
support program, and implementation of a comprehensive agricultural improvement program.
Results Achieved
Implementation of the Command Area Protection (CAP) works is progressing well and as planned. The works that were completed at the time
of the peak discharges in the Karnali River have performed well and were credited with avoiding serious flooding of the irrigation areas.
Several training exercises have been provided to the three water users associations (WUA) on resource generation, women's participation in
irrigation and basic account keeping. Exchange visits to other irrigation schemes have been organized. The preparatory work for the
construction of WUA offices is ongoing. A number of agricultural related activities such as: demonstrations, farmers field schools (FFS), and
seed multiplication have been carried out successfully. It has been agreed that the activities start focusing more on the introduction and
testing of on-farm water management techniques and design of cropping patterns to make the best use of irrigation water. Except for a few
packages, all major procurement has been completed. The main contract under the project for the construction of the feeder canal and the
modernization of the three main branch canals has seen some delay due to slow mobilization, delays in payment of the advance to the
contractor and in provision of designs. Targets for implementation of the contract have been set, but it is likely to stretch beyond the target
date of late November 2014 and may require one additional construction season.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Agriculture Development; Department of Irrigation




                                                                     14
                                                       Nepal: Country Snapshot




                    IRRIGATION AND WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: December 6, 2007; AF I: September 29, 2008; AF II: December 23, 2013
Effective: April, 24, 2008; AF I January 30, 2009; AF II yet to be effective
Closing: June 30, 2018

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                  Total amount        Disbursed       Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   114.24            54.62           60.17
Borrower
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  114.24            54.62           60.17
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
Two-thirds of Nepal’s population is engaged in the agriculture sector, which contributes 36 percent toward the nation’s total Gross Domestic
Product (GDP). In view of its potential to alleviate poverty and promote economic growth, the government has accorded the agriculture
sector a top priority, second only to hydroelectric power generation. With only about 28 percent of the total agricultural land under year-
round irrigation, there is a scope for both expanding the area under irrigation and improving water delivery and management efficiency. The
Agriculture Development Strategy funded under a multi- donor initiative (including the Bank), also emphasizes the need for irrigated
agriculture.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The Irrigation and Water Resources Management Project aims to improve agriculture productivity and the management of selected
irrigation schemes and to enhance institutional capacity for integrated water resources management. The primary beneficiaries are water
users of 134 farmer-managed irrigation systems covering about 20,000 hectares, mainly in the hilly regions. The project also targets the
irrigation management transfer in four agency-managed irrigation systems and essential structural improvements covering about 23,000 ha.
Through the agriculture component of the project, the project aims to ensure efficient integration of water resources and crop production to
derive full benefits from investments in irrigation. The project has four main components: (i) irrigation infrastructure development and
improvement; (ii) irrigation management transfer to water user associations in the Terai (plains); (iii) institutional and policy support for
integrated water resources management; and (iv) integrated crop and water management.
Results Achieved:
Out of 134 schemes targeted for completion by June 30, 2014, 80 schemes (including 7 groundwater schemes) have been completed and 54
schemes are steadily under implementation. Rehabilitation/construction works in Kankai and Sitagunj are near completion while works in
Narayani Block 8 and Mahakali I are likely to be carried over beyond June 2014. Activities to develop the capacity of Water User Associations
(WUAs) at these four schemes are ongoing at varying pace. Financial planning by WUAs for the upcoming operational year and their effort to
mobilize resources shows improvement in their institutional behavior. However, WUAs will still require some financial, technical and
institutional support in the future. Water Resources Information Centre (WRIC) has been established at the Water and Energy Commission
Secretariat (WECS). Altogether 32 stations of Babai, West Rapti and Karnali River Basin have been equipped with telemetry system. Among
these, nine are hydrological stations and 23 are meteorological stations. Eleven hydrological and meteorological stations have been upgraded
with the construction of observatory and fencing. Data upload from the telemetry systems to the Water Resources Information System (WRIS)
is ongoing. Agricultural yields have seen an average increase of 25-30 percent in project areas. Planned activities under the regular integrated
crop and water management program are progressing well. The additional financing of US$50 million will be used to rehabilitate and
modernize an additional 80 schemes, strengthen water user associations, update the Water Resource Information System at the central level
and consolidate the gains made in agriculture.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Agriculture Development, Department of Irrigation, Water and Energy Commission




                                                                     15
                                                        Nepal: Country Snapshot




                          NEPAL AGRICULTURE AND FOOD SECURITY PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: February 11, 2013
Effective: April 30, 2013
Closing: March 31, 2018

Financing in million US Dollars ( as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                  Total amount        Disbursed        Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   58.0
Borrower                             11.5
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA
IBRD
Trust Fund (GAFSP)                   46.5              4.0              42.50
Project Background:
On June 7 2011, the government of Nepal received a competitive grant of $46.5 million from the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) to implement the Agriculture and Food Security Project (AFSP). The GAFSP was established in April 2010 at the request of the Group
of 20 (G20) to help countries make lasting improvements through sustainable investment in agriculture and food security. Seven countries
and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation have pledged about $1.1 billion over three years, with the U.S. as the largest donor. The World Bank
is the administrator for GAFSP as well as the supervising entity for AFSP. The AFSP is a multi-sector project executed by the Ministry of
Agriculture Development to tackle food and nutrition security. It is the first project in Nepal that brings together two ministries – Agriculture
and Health – to increase agricultural productivity and improve access to and utilization of nutritious food. The project targets 19 hill and
mountain districts of mid-western and far-western regions of Nepal where the prevalence of low birth weight babies is reported at 14 percent.
Forty-six percent of the children under five are stunted and 32.6 per cent underweight. While the overall poverty rate for Nepal is 25 percent,
it increases to 45 per cent in the project area.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The goal is to enhance food and nutritional security of targeted communities in selected locations of Nepal. Key expected outcomes of the
project are: i) increased productivity of targeted crops and livestock products, and ii) access to and utilization of nutritious food to
nutritionally vulnerable groups (pregnant and nursing mothers and children between six to 24 months old).The project comprises three
components: technology development and adaptation; technology dissemination and adoption; and food and nutritional status enhancement.
The project aims to reach 162,500 beneficiaries, including 45,000 pregnant and nursing women.
Results Achieved:
The project is it is fairly early to report on the projects’ deliverables. However, the project management team has completed most of the
preparatory groundwork to move the project further rapidly. A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) has been signed between the Ministry
of Agriculture Development (MOAD) and the main implementing partners - Ministry of Health and Population and Nepal Agriculture Research
Council - to expedite implementation. The project is receiving support from the World Bank’s Development Impact Evaluation Initiative
(DIME) to design and implement an impact evaluation system to measure impact of project interventions. With the help of DIME, the project
has been able to identify the target Village Development Committees (VDCs) that need intervention. A MOU has also been signed between
AFSP and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) under which the latter will provide technical assistance related to conducting farmer
field schools and other technology/knowledge dissemination activities
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Agriculture Development
Other implementing agencies/partners: Ministry of Health and Population; Nepal Agriculture Research Council
Development Partners: Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations




                                                                      16
                                                         Nepal: Country Snapshot




             PROJECT FOR AGRICULTURE COMMERCIALISATION AND TRADE (PACT)
Key Dates:
Approved: June 4, 2009; AF: November 15 2012
Effective: November 13, 2009; AF March 18, 2013
Closing: June 30, 2018

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                  Total amount       Disbursed       Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   60.0              8.70             52.37
Borrower
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  60.0              8.70             52.37
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
Nepal’s mountainous landscape and infrastructure gaps have weakened linkages in the food value chain, exacerbating the challenges in
agricultural growth and food security. Its entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) presents new opportunities for market integration
provided the competitiveness of the agriculture sector could be significantly enhanced. It is strengthening emerging commodity value chains,
and providing local and international access to markets by forging backward and forward linkages in selected value chains.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project (PACT) aims to improve the competitiveness of project-supported smallholder farmers and agribusinesses within selected
commodity value chains by: (i) helping farmers to engage in profitable market-oriented production; (ii) creating and strengthening industry-
wide partnerships among producers, traders, processors, and other stakeholders; and (iii) strengthening the national system of sanitary,
phytosanitary (plant health) and food quality management. Component (i) supports agriculture and rural business development. Component
(ii) includes the provision of matching grants to commodity value chain actors mainly for technology support and agribusiness development.
The project also supports the identification of commercially-viable value chains and preparation of commodity-specific value chain
development plans for the promotion of high value commodities. Component (iii) aims to increase the ability of farmers and agribusinesses to
respond to sanitary, phytosanitary and food-quality standards to meet domestic and international market requirements.
Results Achieved:
In four years, PACT’s support has resulted in a significant increase in volume, sales and productivity of the selected commod ities value chains,
mainly targeting high value fruits and vegetables, cereal crops, dairy and meat products. Procurement of laboratory equipment for the
Department of Food Technology and Quality Control (DFTQC), Department of Livestock Services (DoLS) and Department of Agriculture (DoA),
and the implementation of a food analysis training program, has improved the departments’ respective capacity to conduct monitoring and
verification of quality standards. The project has generated high demand through advocacy to farmers and agribusinesses to increase
investments and seek financing through the competitive grant scheme. As a result, there is demand for agribusiness support from all parts of
the country, demand from the private sector to engage at a larger and more significant scale, and demand for increased services for quality
monitoring and certification for exports. PACT has so far supported over 124 cooperatives, 65 farmer groups, 54 private entrepreneurs and
eight producer associations, reaching out to around 42,800 beneficiaries, of which over 42 percent are women. Under the project's
competitive matching grant program, two new windows have been developed to better respond to emerging demands and enhance the
support to project objectives: (i) Micro grants of up to $ 10,000 support the integration of smallholders and micro enterprises in emerging
value chains. This window is specifically geared to districts not covered by the PACT prior to the Additional Financing. (ii) Medium size grants
of up to $ 100,000 are specifically geared to strengthening backward/forward linkages between different actors of the same value chain in any
given region (e.g., linking dairy processors with milk cooperatives and dairy farmers). The PACT is in the process of recruiting the consortium
to lead the establishment of the Agribusiness Innovation Center; technical assistance is provided by InfoDev.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Agriculture Development
Other implementing agencies/partners, NGOs: InfoDev




                                                                       17
                                                         Nepal: Country Snapshot




                                            KABELI TRANSMISSION PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: May 10, 2011
Effective: September 21, 2011
Closing: June 30, 2015

Financing in million US Dollars ( as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                  Total amount        Disbursed       Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   47.69
Borrower                             7.8
Co-financing (Community)             1.94
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  38.0              8.53             28.46
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
Nepal has rich hydropower resources that could potentially support export of hydropower to other countries in the region. However, it faces an
energy crisis of unprecedented severity (up to 18 hours/day load shedding in dry seasons) due to generation shortages and transmission
bottlenecks. IDA funding will help development of the transmission facility to exploit hydropower potential in the Kabeli River corridor, where
about a dozen private power generation projects are in various stages of development. One of them is the Kabeli A Hydropower Plant, 37.6
megawatts (MW), which receives IDA/IFC financing, with a Board date in FY14.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project aims to support the addition of transmission capacity to the Integrated Nepal Power System, and to provide access to electricity and
cooking fuel to communities in the area of the Kabeli 132 kiloVolt (kV) transmission line. The project has three components: (i) construction of
a new 132 kV transmission line in eastern Nepal, with associated substations; (ii) construction of low-voltage distribution lines and associated
infrastructure to provide access to electricity; and (iii) provision of on-grid electricity to communities in the area of the transmission line, as
well as provision of off-grid electricity and cooking fuel to selected communities for which grid extension under the second component is not a
feasible option. The first and second components are under implementation by the Nepal Electricity Authority, while the third is being
implemented under the Alternative Energy Promotion Center.
Results Achieved
Thirty-five solar home systems, three institutional solar systems and 25 bio-gas plants have been provided under the third component. No
results yet in other components as the project components are under implementation. The main contract for supply and construction of the
transmission line became effective in October 2011. Due to initial mobilization delays, the line survey was not completed until March 2013. The
final alignment avoids dense forest areas as far as possible. Yet to be prepared is the livelihood training plan, as a part of the rehabilitation
program for project affected communities. The Nepal Electricity Authority is hiring a safeguards adviser for regular and periodic review of
safeguard activities, and construction supervisors to assist the authority with transmission-line construction activities. The land for sub-
stations has been acquired and civil works started. The progress of the electrification program for the affected communities has been slow.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Energy ; Nepal Electricity Authority; Alternative Energy Promotion Center




                                                                       18
                                                        Nepal: Country Snapshot




                KALI GANDAKI A HYDROPOWER PLANT REHABILITATION PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: May 15, 2013
Effective: December 31, 2013
Closing: June 30, 2017

Financing in million US Dollars ( as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                  Total amount         Disbursed       Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   30.4
Borrower                             3.1
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  27.26             0.0              27.26
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
Kali Gandaki A is a 144 MW run-of-river plant. It is the largest single hydroelectric facility in Nepal, supplying about 25 percent of total
generation as well as six hours per day of peaking capacity. It is located on the Kali Gandaki River in Syangja district, below the confluence of
the Kali Gandaki and Andhi Khola rivers. The Asian Development Bank (ADB) funded the original plant, which cost $453 million and was
commissioned in 2002. After 10 years in operation, the plant’s available generation capacity has sharply deteriorated, due to sedimentation,
erosion and cavitation of the power turbines (from silt and floating debris). There are safety management improvement issues, as well as a
need to finalize the operations manual for the head works, including the dam.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project aims to improve the reliability of power supply from the plant, through rehabilitation and safety measures, as well as to improve
the government’s response capacity in case of an energy crisis. The project has four components: (i) civil works ($9.1 million); (ii) electro-
mechanical works ($16.6 million); (iii) technical assistance and capacity-building (US$4.7 million); and (iv) contingent emergency response
(financing would be reallocated into this component if an emergency response were required). The rehabilitation program aims to improve
the safety management of the dam; decrease the total quantity of sediment entering the powerhouse; reduce the cavitation in the turbine in
the dry season; and improve plant safety by improving the operation of the main inlet valves as well as by repairing the control systems.
Results Achieved:
The project has been effective as of December 31, 2013. Procurement for the four major activities has been cleared by the Bank and is
underway.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Energy; Nepal Electricity Authority




                                                                      19
                                                        Nepal: Country Snapshot




                NEPAL-INDIA ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION AND TRADE PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: June 21, 2011; AF: June 24, 2013
Effective: September 29, 2011
Closing: December 31, 2016

Financing in million US Dollars ( as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                   Total amount        Disbursed       Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   237.9
Borrower                             30.0
Co-financing (Others)                69.9
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  138.0             15.08            123.19
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
Nepal has rich hydropower resources that could potentially support export of hydropower to other countries in the region. However, it is
facing energy crisis of unprecedented severity (up to 18 hours/day load shedding in dry seasons) due to generation shortages and
transmission bottlenecks. While the government is seeking both public and private investments in hydropower generation and transmission
facilities, this project complements the government strategy for addressing the electricity shortages through import of electricity from India.
It will also enable the export of surplus hydropower energy to India in the long term.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The development objectives are to: (a) establish cross-border transmission capacity between India and Nepal of about 1,000 MW to facilitate
electricity trade between the two countries; and, (b) increase the supply of electricity in Nepal by the sustainable import of at least 100 MW.
The project has three components: (i) The design, construction and operation of an approximately 130 km of 400 kV double circuit north-
south cross border transmission line between Muzaffarpur in India and Dhalkebar in Nepal (DM; this line will be implemented by two
companies in Nepal and India without World Bank financing or oversight). (ii) The design, construction and operation of approximately 285
km of 400 kV double circuit east-west transmission line for the Hetauda-Dhalkebar- Duhabi (HDD) segment, together with concomitant
substations in Nepal. The Dhalkebar substation will receive electricity through the north-south transmission line under component (i) above.
(iii) Technical advisory services (a) for the Owners’ Engineer for Nepal Electricity Authority for overseeing component (ii) of the project, (b)
for preparation of a transmission system master plan for future transmission system development in Nepal, (c) for strengthening the
institutional capacity of the Electricity Authority’s transmission business, including to increase cross -border transmission links, and (d) for
the Ministry of Energy and the Nepal Electricity Authority to develop understanding of the concepts of benefit-sharing in export-oriented
hydroelectric projects.
Results Achieved:
Given the nature of the project, results will accrue after the transmission line is commissioned. A contract was awarded in February 2013 for
supply and installation of towers for the HDD 400 kV transmission line and is now being implemented. The check survey for the right-of-way
is nearing completion, and consultation with and compensation to project-affected persons will follow before construction begins.
Procurement for three substations are under review by the Bank and conductors for the transmission line is under process. Procurement for
supply and installation of the DM line (not financed by the Bank) is under progress with contract awarded to the lowest evaluated bidder. In
June 2013, the Board approved US$39 million in additional financing to provide continued support to implementing the critical transmission
lines that was not completed until the project closing time under the Power Development Project.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Energy; Nepal Electricity Authority




                                                                       20
                                                           Nepal: Country Snapshot




                                        EMERGENCY PEACE SUPPORT PROJECT
 Key Dates:

 Approved: May 6, 2008
 Effective: September 19, 2008
 Closing: June 30, 2014

 Financing in million US Dollars ( as of February 28, 2014)
 Financing source                  Total amount         Disbursed         Undisbursed
 Total Project Cost                   36.50             33.42              1.92
 Borrower
 Co-financing
 Total Bank Financing
 IDA                                  36.50             33.42              1.92
 IBRD
 Trust Fund
 Project Background:
 A Comprehensive Peace Agreement from November 2006 and a 23 Point Agreement in December 2007 included provision of allowances to
 individual Maoists in cantonments and relief and rehabilitation to families of the conflict-affected. It was in this context that the Bank
 responded to a request from the government to provide urgent support to the peace processes.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project aims to contribute to the peace process by providing interim cash transfers and services to eligible conflict-affected groups, and by
increasing transparency and accountability in benefit delivery. It is expected that 14,800 families and 4,700 widows of those deceased in the
conflict will receive cash interim relief; 25,000 conflict-affected and their family members will receive employability services, and at least half will
be placed in the job market. The project has three components: (i) rehabilitation support to conflict-affected families and individuals; (ii) cash
benefits to the families and widows of those killed as a result of conflict; and (iii) building the capacity of key institutions in support of the peace
progress. Rehabilitation support includes provision of employment and self-employment services and psychosocial counseling services to
conflict-affected people.
 Results Achieved
 The Ministry of Peace and Reconciliation has successfully completed delivery of employment and self-employment services to 14,770
 conflict-affected beneficiaries in two phases. A pilot phase covering 12 districts provides services to 3,030 beneficiaries. Phase I covering 42
 districts provided services to 11,740 conflict-affected people. Phase II that was to cover the remaining 19 districts has now been cancelled
 due to delay in procurement and the consequent lack of time to complete the activity before closing date. The ministry has finalized the
 guidelines for psychosocial counseling services. The actual delivery of psychosocial services under the project has been cancelled as it cannot
 be completed within the remaining project period. This will likely be picked up by the Nepal Peace Trust Fund. With regard to cash transfers,
 96 percent of the families of the deceased (14,200) and 98 percent of widows (4,620) have received cash benefits, against a target of 95
 percent in each category. The project has been restructured in January 2014 to cancel SDR8.45 million (approx. $13.1 million). The project is
 expected to close on time in June 30, 2014.
 Key Partners:
 Implementing agency: Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction
 Other implementing agencies/partners, NGOs: International Organization of Migration (Technical Assistance)




                                                                         21
                                                        Nepal: Country Snapshot




                                             SOCIAL SAFETY NET PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: September 29, 2008; AF May 26, 2010
Effective: January 28, 2009; October 6, 2010
Closing: September 30, 2014

Financing in million US Dollars ( as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                   Total amount        Disbursed      Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   59.15             52.37           7.83
Borrower
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  59.15             52.37           7.83
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
Nepal faces frequent food crisis in parts of the country largely due to weather conditions and natural disasters. The Social Safety Net
Program is an emergency response project to address food crisis by providing immediate relief to food insecure households (and some
flood hit households), to build the resilience of vulnerable people in the medium-term, and to build government capacity to provide safety
nets in the long-term.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project aims to enable the government help highly food- insecure households to access more nutritious food in the short- term and also
to create opportunities for improved agriculture production in food-insecure districts in the long run. SSNP takes a holistic approach
through its components focusing on (i) immediate relief to food insecure households through food- and cash-for-work programs; (ii)
medium-term response by supporting subsidization of transportation of seeds and fertilizers to food-insecure districts and the
development of seed varieties that are better suited to food-insecure areas; and (iii) a longer-term approach through strengthening of the
government’s cash transfer systems and piloting new approaches to improving the nutritional status of women and children. The Ministr y
of Federal Affairs and Local Development is the key implementing agency, with various components implemented by Department of
Agriculture, the National Agricultural Research Council, and the Poverty Alleviation Fund, and technical support from World Food Program.
Results Achieved:
Since its initiation, the project has supported over 3 million people. Under the food and cash- for- work program, over 34,000 metric tons (MT)
of food has been distributed and $3.2 million has been disbursed as cash. Over 98 percent of the supported households are reported to have
increased their ability to meet their food needs. In addition, since 2010, the Nepal Agriculture Research Center has produced over129.38 MT
of breeder seeds and 1,654 MT of foundation seeds, including seeds of varieties that are better suited to food-insecure areas. A total of 11,214
MT of fertilizers and 783 MT of seeds of improved varieties of paddy, wheat and maize have been made available in remote districts of the
country. To date, the project has directly benefitted over 168,263 individuals, of whom 58 percent are estimated to be women. Some progress
has also been made on components that support system strengthening for cash transfers and on the Community Challenge Fund for nutrition.
Most of the components are near completion with over 87 percent of project funds now disbursed. Pilot projects to test approaches for
improving the cash transfer and safety net systems in Nepal have recently started implementation. This includes a branchless banking pilot in
three districts (Baglung, Banke and Surkhet) and a nutrition pilot in 4 districts (Rautahat, Sindhuli, Sarlahi, Ramechap).
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development
Other implementing agencies/partners, NGOs, and academia, if any: Poverty Alleviation Fund, Department of Agriculture National Agricultural
Research Council
Donor Agency: World Food Program




                                                                     22
                                                         Nepal: Country Snapshot




                              ENHANCED VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING
 Key Dates:
 Approved: April 21, 2011
 Effective: August 23, 2011
 Closing: October 30, 2015

 Financing in million US Dollars ( as of February 28, 2014)
 Financing source                   Total amount        Disbursed      Undisbursed
 Total Project Cost                       60.9
 Borrower                                 10.9
 Co-financing                              0.0
 Total Bank Financing
 IDA                                     39.50          12.45            26.48
 IBRD
 Trust Fund
Project Background:
With a growing youth population and rising unemployment, the government of Nepal is implementing programs to improve access to technical
education and vocational training for the poor and disadvantaged youth. This first IDA technical and vocational training project contributes to
government programs by reaching out to more than 75,000 youths, who will get access to short-term skills training, technical education, and
opportunities for certifying their existing skills adopting appropriate targeting tools and other inclusive processes.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project’s goal is to expand the supply of skilled and employable labor by increasing access to quality training programs, and by
strengthening the technical and vocational education and training system in Nepal. The project consists of the following components: (i)
Strengthening technical education and vocational training regulatory activities and capacity building; (ii) Strengthening technical education;
(iii) Support for short-term training and recognition of prior learning; and (iv) Project management and monitoring and evaluation. The project
is providing short-term training stipends to students for technical education, and performance-based and/or matching grants to technical
institutes. The project also has provisions for certifying existing skills gained through informal methods, and for creating a larger pool of
trainers in the country.
Results Achieved:
After a significant start up delay, all project components are now moving ahead. Progress in the key performance indicators include short term
training of 7,864, testing and certification on preexisting skills of over 6,200 youths by the National Skills Testing Board, and 60 institutions
have been selected for support through matching and/or performance grants. A total of 294 skills test managers, 870 lead and assistant
trainers, and 3,827skills test assessors have been trained. The Council for Technical Education and Vocational Training has initiated work on
the establishment of a Training Management Information System, an online system for affiliation of training providers, and examination
evaluation. The systems will be fully populated with relevant data and become operational by July 2015. About 2,644 students are currently
receiving scholarship support, while around 1,500 will be selected in the next fiscal year. Voucher-based financing support is being provided to
more than 7,000 youths who have completed or are undergoing the training. A decentralized, operational management information system is
currently being used as the main tool for project monitoring. This is a problem project. Despite the progress noted, disbursements remain very
low. Low disbursements and start up delays in some of the project sub-components were issues of concern in the first half of the project period.
Based on a joint World Bank and government assessment of progress, the project was restructured (level 2) in December 2013. The
restructuring included a cancellation of SDR 6.7 million (around $10.5 million) of IDA financing, a revision of some results indicators and
targets, and changes in the prices of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs).
 Key Partners:
 Implementing agency: Ministry of Education, Council for Technical Education and Vocational Training




                                                                      23
                                                       Nepal: Country Snapshot




                                        SCHOOL SECTOR REFORM PROGRAM
Key Dates:
Approved: September 22, 2009, AF May 15 2013
Effective: December 23, 2009, September 3, 2013
Closing: July 15, 2016

Financing in million US Dollars ( as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                  Total amount         Disbursed      Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   2481.0
Borrower                             1885.0
Co-financing (Donors )               366.0
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  230.0             128.54         103.37
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
The School Sector Reform Program is a government initiative that aims to enhance access to and improve the quality of education. It covers
Grades 1–12 as well as Early Childhood Education and Development and non-formal education. The School Sector Reform Program focuses on
basic education to achieve the education Millennium Development Goals by 2015. It is being implemented through a sector wide approach, with
financial contributions from the government and a dozen development partners, including the World Bank.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project aims to support the government’s School Sector Reform Program to increase access to and improve quality of school education,
particularly basic education (Grades1-8), especially for the marginalized groups. The three main components of the program focus on (i) Basic
education (Grades 1-8); (ii) Secondary education (Grades 9-12); and (iii) Strengthening institutional capacity. The program finances both the
recurrent and the development expenditures for school educ ation, focusing on the School Sector Reform Program’s three pillars of enhancing
access, promoting inclusion, and improving quality. It supports the following areas for the three pillars referenced above: (a) Basic education,
including childhood education and development and literacy, and lifelong learning; (b) Secondary education, which includes technical education
and vocational training; and (c) Institutional capacity strengthening for delivery and monitoring of educational services and products. The key
policy reforms being supported include increased community management of schools, public private partnership for improved delivery of
textbooks, and improved learning outcomes through establishment of a standardized student assessment system.
Results Achieved:
The program has made good progress across its four performance indicators: (a) net enrollment rate (NER) for basic education, (b) basic
education completion rate, (c) gender parity index (GPI) for basic education, and (d) the completion of learning assessment for grade 8
students. Starting from a baseline of 73 percent, the NER for basic education has increased to 86.30 percent, surpassing the end of program
(2013/14) target of 85 percent. Similarly, the completion rate for basic education has reached 63.8 percent. Nepal has achieved gender parity
in net enrollment for basic education, achieving the end of program (2013/14) target, and for secondary education, with a GPI in NER of 0.99.
The assessment of learning outcomes for grade 8 students has been completed and the final report has been published. The final NASA report
for grades 3 and 5 is nearing completion. Achievement tests for grades 3 and 5 have also been completed. Original IDA financing was for five
years (2009-2013). In June 2013, the Board approved $100 million in additional financing to support the three original components and fill
the financing gap in the remaining two years of the government’s School Sector Reform Program. It supports key quality, gove rnance and
accountability challenges in the school system.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Education
Donor partners: SWAp pooling partners: ADB, AusAID, Denmark, EU/DFID, Finland, Norway, UNICEF, and Global Partnership for Education.
Parallel financing provided by Japan, USAID, UNESCO, and WFP.




                                                                    24
                                                       Nepal: Country Snapshot




                                       SECOND HIGHER EDUCATION PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: February 22, 2007
Effective: July 27, 2014
Closing: June 30, 2014

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                   Total amount       Disbursed      Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   77.4
Borrower                             17.4
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  60.0              49.46           14.65
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
Higher education in Nepal is provided by nine universities and four health academies, governed by separate Acts. The Ministry of Education
and the Ministry of Health and Population are the focal ministries for universities and health institutions. IDA has been a key partner
supporting higher education through the First Higher Education Project, the Engineering Education Project, and the Second Higher Education
Project.

Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:

The objectives of the project are (a) enhanced quality, efficiency and relevance of higher education through a set of systemic reforms, and
incentives to selected institutions; and (b) improved access for academically qualified students from disadvantaged groups in (i) higher
education and (ii) higher secondary education. The project has four components: (i) Reform grants and research funding; (ii) Student financial
assistance; (iii) Higher secondary education; and (iv) Strengthening system capacity. The first component includes incentive grants,
performance grants, and matching grants to participating universities and colleges. Student financial assistance seeks to overcome the
constraints being faced by meritorious girls and disadvantaged groups. The second component supports higher secondary education to permit
better functioning of universities by phasing out Proficiency Certificate Level programs from universities and colleges. The third component
seeks to enhance the capacity of the University Grants Commission and the Ministry of Education to improve the quality of higher education
through monitoring and evaluation, policy analysis and reviews. The project is supporting higher education policy reforms in the area of
autonomy, quality assurance and accreditation, poverty targeting, and the development of a higher education policy.
Results Achieved:
Key achievements include autonomy for four university campuses affiliated with the Tribhuvan University and decentralization of 49
campuses. Eleven institutions have already received accreditation. Twenty- six new market relevant programs have been introduced under
Tribhuvan University, with 22 papers published in refereed journals and 44 in prof essional journals. Girls’ share in higher education
enrolment has risen to 46 percent while the educationally disadvantaged dalits’ and janjatis’ share has risen by over 16 per cent. Enrolment in
project supported higher secondary schools has reached 210,100, with gender parity achieved, and enrolment share of extremely
disadvantaged groups rising to over seven percent. Over 8,300 needy students have received scholarships. Targets have already been
surpassed in all of the above result areas. The Proficiency Certificate Level has been phased out from the Tribhuvan University, and the Higher
Education Management Information System has been developed. Significant progress has also been made towards developing the Higher
Education Policy, with the first draft expected in 2013.The project, closing in June 2014, is maintaining a steady pace and is expected to
accomplish most of its objectives. Strong ownership and commitment from the government to continue with institutionalization of the
reforms is reflected in the recent request for continued higher education support from IDA.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Education, University Grants Commission




                                                                     25
                                                           Nepal: Country Snapshot




             COMMUNITY ACTION FOR NUTRITION PROJECT (SUNAULA HAZAR DIN)
Key Dates:
Approved: June 26, 2012
Effective: August 24, 2012
Closing: June 30, 2017

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                   Total amount        Disbursed          Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   40.0              2.04                37.97
Borrower
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  40.0              2.04                37.97
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
As part of the Scaling-Up Nutrition movement, the government of Nepal has realized the need to address malnutrition across multiple sectors,
and has developed and endorsed a Multisectoral Nutrition Plan for the country. The plan envisages an equal role of nutrition-sensitive and
nutrition-specific interventions in realizing the nutrition goals during the first 1,000 days of a child’s life. Motivated by this init iative, the Bank
has extended support to the implementing agency through the Sunaula Hazar Din project to address community-wide risk factors that
contribute to malnutrition.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project aims to inculcate attitudes and practices known to improve the nutrition of women of reproductive age and children under the age
of two, thereby creating demand for nutrition-related services and products. These services and products will be provided through existing
public- and donor-funded programs, and, to a limited extent, through the project directly. The Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local
Development implements the project and will roll-out a social mobilization initiative through a community-driven Rapid Results for Nutrition
Initiatives (RRNIs), where each ward in a selected Village Development Committee (VDC) will commit to a series of pre-defined nutrition-
relevant goals, each to be met within a 100-day period. The achievement of the goals will be the responsibility of RRNI teams (one for each
ward), supported by a coach who will support all RRNI teams in one VDC. The RRNI approach will be rolled out in a sequenced manner across
the 15 project districts. An impact evaluation is built into the project design.
Results Achieved
Four sub projects of 100 days each, as pilots, were completed in September, 2013. Lessons learnt have been considered while finalizing the
operations manual. The team saw that the RRNI teams of these four sub-projects and communities were just as motivated and dedicated to
work on their own subprojects as they initially were at the outset of the project. However, more initiatives have not taken off due to poor
project management, and the Bank team has stressed the need for accelerated implementation during the last supervision support. Baseline
survey for impact evaluation has been completed. The project had held three regional workshops to raise its profile and inform stakeholders
about how it would work. The client has hired two firms which will recruit the coaches who to help set up the RRNIs. A firm to train the
coaches is on board and the first round of training is expected to complete by March 31, 2014.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development




                                                                         26
                                                             Nepal: Country Snapshot




                                            SECOND HNP AND HIV/AIDS PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: April 20, 2010
Effective: October 10, 2010
Closing: July 15, 2015

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                     Total amount      Disbursed          Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                    1527.3
Borrower                              489.80
Co-financing (Others)                 908.38
Total Bank Financing
     IDA                              129.15            68.99              59.30
     IBRD
     Trust Fund
 Project Background:
 In 2004, donors moved to a Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp) in the health sector to reduce transaction costs to the government of Nepal. IDA,
 DFID and AusAID are currently pooling funds. The SWAp aims to address key challenges, including: (i) access, social inclusion and equality in
 health service utilization; (ii) making better progress on the Millennium Development Goal targets for nutrition and HIV/AIDS, which are not on
 track; (iii) sector governance and accountability; (iv) coordination across ministries concerned with water, sanitation and hygiene, nutrition
 and road safety (which all impact health status); and (v) maintaining gains in reducing maternal mortality and increasing vitamin A and
 immunization coverage.
 Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
 The project aims to enable the government to increase access to essential health care services and their utilization by the poor and the underserved,
 specifically by raising the percentage of pregnant women receiving iron and folic acid to 87 percent, children being fully immunized to 90 percent,
 and skilled attendance at birth to 35 percent by the end of the project. The project, through the SWAp format, supports the Nepal Health Sector
 Program II, which aims to increase access to and utilization of quality essential health services, reduce cultural and economic barriers to accessing
 health care services, and improve the health system to achieve universal health coverage, all in close partnership with non-state actors. The
 government has assumed a responsibility to achieve these goals by extending and sustaining coverage of essential health care services including
 reproductive health, child health, communicable and non-communicable disease control, curative care, oral health, eye care, environmental health
 and rehabilitation of disabled people. The program ensures free health care to all who access services in public health facilities at district hospitals,
 primary care centers, and health posts. It has two elements: health service delivery, and health systems strengthening.
 Results Achieved
 Nepal has made good progress on key results indicators. Two-out-of-three results indicators already exceed targets: coverage of skilled birth
 attendance has reached 46 percent (against a target of 35 percent) and iron folic acid coverage has increased to 91 percent (against a target of 87
 percent). Immunization coverage has remained at 86 percent since the last reporting period. Progress has also been made in exclusive
 breastfeeding and vitamin A supplementation for children under five. Nutritional status of children under five has improved, with a decline in
 stunting from 49 percent in 2006 to 41 percent in 2011, and in underweight status from 39 percent to 29 percent. The joint planning and review
 process is partly credited for cushioning the sector from the budget unpredictability that Nepal went through in 2012-13. Joint Annual Reviews
 and Annual Work Plan and Budget discussions are improving and have become more results-focused, and the quality of budget preparation has
 improved. There are areas where performance is lagging, requiring more attention in the coming year (e.g. contraceptive prevalence rate, equity
 of access to quality services, vacant positions). Further, procurement complaints are being filed, and an investigation by the Integrity Vice
 Presidency is underway. A detailed fiduciary risk assessment has recently been concluded, indicting a high-risk environment.
 Key Partners:
 Implementing agency: Ministry of Health
 Other implementing agencies/partners, NGOs, and academia, if any, and
 Development partners: DFID, AusAID, Germany’s KfW and GAVI




                                                                           27
                                                         Nepal: Country Snapshot




           STRENGTHENING REGIONAL COOPERATION FOR WILDLIFE PROTECTION
Key Dates:
Approved: April 7, 2011
Effective: Bangladesh: June 29, 2011; Nepal: July 20, 2011
Closing: Bangladesh: December 31, 2016; Nepal: May 31, 2016

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                   Total amount       Disbursed        Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   39.0
Borrower
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  3.0 (NP)          1.33(NP)         1.74(NP)
                                     36.0 (BD)
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
The Strengthening Regional Cooperation for Wildlife Protection project complements ongoing national and regional efforts to protect
natural habitats and biodiversity conservation by focusing attention on the control of illegal trade in wildlife and trans-boundary wildlife
conservation issues. The project was an outcome of the Global Tiger Initiative, but focuses on stabilizing and, if possible, increasing the
population and habitats of critically endangered fauna in South Asia. Each project phase is designed that each participating country would
attain regional or cross-boundary goals and also address national priorities. Nepal and Bangladesh are participating in Phase I while Bhutan
has joined Phase II.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description
The project development objective (PDO) is to assist the participating governments to build or enhance shared capacity institution, knowledge
and incentives to collaborate in tackling illegal wildlife trade and other selected regional conservation threats to habitats in border areas. The
Bangladesh program is $36 million and comprises the following components: (1) capacity building for addressing the illegal trans-boundary
wildlife trade ($8.3 million); (2) promoting wildlife conservation in Asia ($23.5 million); and (3) project coordination and communication
($4.6 million). The Nepal program is $3 million and comprises the following components: (1) capacity building for addressing the illegal
trans-boundary wildlife trade ($0.9 million); (2) promoting wildlife conservation in Asia ($1.6 million); and (3) project coordination and
communication ($0.2 million).
Results Achieved
Despite the risks of India's absence in the regional operation and implementation delays, some progress in meeting the PDO is being made
through: (i) India's commitment to cooperate on regional wildlife conservation as demonstrated by its signature of Memorandum of
Understanding (MOUs) with Bangladesh, Bhutan and Nepal; (ii) Bangladesh's decision to assume the leadership for regional collaboration in
trans-boundary wildlife protection and management by convening meetings among Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal, including those for
the South Asia Wildlife Enforcement Network (SAWEN); and (iii) the provision of institutional support to SAWEN’s secretariat under the
Nepal project. SAWEN is envisaged to be the mechanism for regional collaboration in addressing illegal wildlife trade (especially in tiger
parts) and trans-boundary conservation issues in South Asia. Since the last supervision mission of July 2013, the sluggish pace of
implementation of the Bangladesh project has reversed. The preparation and submission of sub-project proposals under the project’s
competitive funding windows (amounting to 66 percent of the IDA credit) accelerated. Commitments vis-à-vis the allocation for the funding
windows amount to 70 percent, although disbursement stands at only 14 percent of the IDA credit. The launch of large civil works under the
sub-project activities will lead to a significant rise in disbursements in the first half of FY15. Implementation of the Nepal project remains
satisfactory with disbursements at 45 percent of the total IDA grant. The allocation for the competitive funding windows (amounting to 50
percent of the IDA grant) is fully committed. The implementation of all sub-projects approved under the funding windows accelerated since
June 2013.The ratings for PDO achievement and implementation progress for APL 1 reflects the status of the Bangladesh project in view of the
latter’s larger project cost and IDA credit compared to those for Nepal.
Key Partners
Implementing agency: Bangladesh: Ministry of Environment and Forests and Bangladesh Forest Department; Nepal: Ministry of Forests and
Soil Conservation; Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation; Department of Forests and National Trust for Nature Conservation




                                                                      28
                                                        Nepal: Country Snapshot




  URBAN GOVERNANCE AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM: EMERGING TOWNS PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: May 10, 2011
Effective: October 2, 2011
Closing: July 31, 2016

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                  Total amount        Disbursed      Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   28.55
Borrower                             5.0
Co-financing (GIZ)                   3.0
    (Municipalities)                 2.1
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  18.45             7.14             10.99
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
The project marks the re-engagement of the World Bank in the urban sector in Nepal after an absence of more than 10 years. It aims at
developing a sustainable approach for strengthening the planning, implementation, and revenue-raising capacity of six emerging towns (each
30,000-70,000 population) located in the Western and Eastern regions of Nepal. The municipalities have been selected based on their growth
potential and their strategic location along the North-South transport corridors (highways).
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The original goal was to improve delivery and sustainable provision of basic services and priority infrastructure in the participating
municipalities. A project restructuring in July 2013 realigned the goal to improving the institutional capacity of the municipalities, helping
them better plan, implement and fund urban development activities. The project has three components: (i) strengthening municipal planning
capacity through provision of grants to the municipalities; (ii) provision of financing for municipal infrastructure sub-projects to improve
municipal capacity to implement infrastructure investments; and (iii) institutional development and project management support to the
participating municipalities and project agencies.

Results Achieved

The project experienced significant implementation delays in its first year. There has been recent progress with the preparation of the
municipal sub-projects. Three municipal sub-projects have entered construction phase, and procurement notices for four additional sub-
projects have been published. Construction phase of three sub-projects will start by mid-April and the procurement process for all municipal
sub-projects is expected to be completed by July 2014. The municipalities have utilized the municipal grants to carry out small works such as
road upgrading, with at least 35 percent of these grant resources earmarked towards activities benefiting women and disadvantaged groups.
The project has experienced significant implementation delays since approval. Proactive measures have been taken to address the
shortcomings including: (i) establishing effective institutional and coordination mechanisms, (ii) finalizing the pipeline to advance preparation
of the municipal infrastructure sub-projects, (iii) building implementation capacity of the Project Coordination Office and the Town
Development Fund, which provides loans to municipalities for infrastructure projects, and (iv) provision of adequate staffing in the Project
Coordination Office. The project restructuring, along with a reduction in project scope with a cancellation of $6.6 million for the municipal
infrastructure sub-projects to reflect the lower than expected borrowing and implementation capacity of the municipalities, has been
completed to realign the outcomes and results framework to the institutional capacity of the municipalities. In line with the new project
objective, the restructuring has provided funds for enhanced institutional development support for the six municipalities.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Urban Development, Municipalities
Donor partners: GIZ




                                                                      29
                                                        Nepal: Country Snapshot




                      PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT- Multi-Donor Trust Fund
Key Dates:
Approved: December 2010
Effective: December 2010
Closing: June 30, 2015

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                   Total amount       Disbursed        Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   10.2              6.3              3.9
Borrower
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA
IBRD
Trust Fund (MDTF)                    10.2              6.3              3.9
Project Background:
Public Financial Management (PFM) is a key element of the government’s strategy for strengthening public service delivery and ensuring
inclusive and broad-based development form a central part of the public financial management process. The PFM agenda has also been a top
priority for Nepal’s development partners to promote efficient and effective public service delivery. As part of this effort, a multi-donor trust
fund to support PFM was established in December 2010.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project aims to strengthen the performance, transparency and accountability of public financial management in Nepal. The trust fund has
four components: (i) strengthening PFM systems and capacity (including by implementing a Single Treasury Account, raising public sector
accounting standards, and strengthening the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Secretariat); (ii) enhancing accountability in
PFM (by strengthening the Office of the Auditor General and strengthening the use of social accountability); (iii) deepening knowledge related
to PFM (by undertaking analytical work for knowledge dissemination (ongoing analytical works include a Public Expenditure Tracking Survey
in the education sector and an Operational Risk Assessment); and (iv) program management and administration.

Results Achieved:

The key results expected are: (1) improved resource management as a result of strengthened PFM systems and processes; (2) increased
awareness and oversight of government PFM processes; and (3) better knowledge of value for money challenges and PFM governance gaps,
contributing to improved design of PFM interventions at the country and sector levels. Under the first component, the Treasury Single Account
(TSA) has been successfully implemented in 75 districts, covering about 99 percent of the budget, and capturing around 99 percent of
budgeted expenditures and 97 percent of the receipt transactions of the central government. Key areas of concern are frequent staff turnover,
delays in recruiting consultants for implementing public sector accounting standards, and delays in starting-up the Public Expenditure and
Financial Accountability assessment. Under the second component, efforts to strengthen the Office of the Auditor General are on track, moving
it toward a risk-based approach, and building upon the benefits of a recent visit to the UK’s National Audit Office. Under the third componen t,
the project is extending grants to civil society organizations to create awareness about PFM. In addition, an analysis of how audit
recommendations are implemented in Nepal was completed in 2012 and the education Public Expenditure Tracking Study will be completed
in March 2014. An operational risk assessment on PFM reform concluded in August 2013.

Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Office of the Auditor General, Public Expenditure Financial Accountability Secretariat, Financial Comptr oller General’s
Office
Other implementing agencies/partners, NGOs: Program for Accountability in Nepal (PRAN); Canadian Centre for International Studies and
Cooperation(CECI)
Donor partners: Australia, The UK Department for International Development (DFID), Denmark, Norway. (Potential partners include the EU,
SDC).




                                                                      30
                                                          Nepal: Country Snapshot




                                                ZOONOSIS CONTROL PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: April 30, 2012
Effective: July 5, 2012
Closing: March 31, 2014

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                  Total amount        Disbursed          Undisbursed
Total Project Cost
Borrower
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA
IBRD
Trust Fund                           10.0              5.06                4.94
Project Background:
Like other countries in Asia, Nepal risks the spread of infectious disease, like avian influenza, that transmits from animals to humans. Ensuring that
this risk is mitigated will help to protect and increase livestock productivity and strengthen the livelihoods base for food-insecure communities.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The Zoonosis Control Project aims to enhance Nepal’s capacity for the prevention and control of infectious diseases that transmit between
animals and humans (zoonoses), under a One Health approach. Building on the avian influenza prevention and control mechanisms developed under
the IDA-financed Avian Flu Control Project (AICP), this project aims to expand the scope to key zoonotic diseases under a One Health approach, with
particular emphasis placed on the country capacity for overall coordination, preparedness, and prevention by strengthening the capacities of the
Department of Livestock Services (DoLS) and the Department of Health Services (DoHS). The project will also develop early warning mechanisms to
mitigate livestock disease risks induced by climate change. The project includes four components: (i) animal health (ii) climate sensitive disease risk
mitigation (iii) human health and (iv) communication. The direct beneficiaries of the project are the farmers and rural population whose livestock is
affected by zoonotic diseases and who depend on livestock for their livelihoods, food security and nutrition.
Results Achieved
Signed in July 2012, the project, at the onset, suffered delays due to delayed release of budget from the government of Nepal. However, in the last one
year, the project has made progress. Under the animal health component, a total of 11,270 samples have been collected and 4,275 samples tested
and analyzed. Under the Nepal Agricultural Research Council, a total of 4,158 fecal samples (for internal parasites) and 2,611 serum samples (for
zoonotic disease) have been collected and the testing is underway. Vector analysis of Blue Tongue, identified as one of the priority viral disease
indicators for climate sensitive disease, is being carried out immediately. Out of nine construction works, the Veterinary Epidemiology Centre at
Kathmandu is now completed and handed over. District Livestock Service Office, Standard Drug and Administration Office and Laboratory at
Kathmandu; Avian Disease Investigation Laboratory at Chitwan; warehouse cum regional veterinary laboratory at Biratnagar; training hall and
dormitory at Duhabi and Janakpur; and model quarantine check post at Bhairahawa are nearing completion. Similarly, renovations of three
quarantine check posts at Kakarvitta, Birtamod, and Gadduchowk; Veterinary Council Office and Rabies Vaccine Production Centre in Kathmandu;
and the installation of a three-phase electrical power supply in six laboratories in Janakpur, Pokhara, Dhangadi, Surkhet, Biratnagar and Chitwan are
close to being completed. A level 2 restructuring in November 2013 made provision for culling and compensation operations to control Avian Flu.
With the availability of funds, the project was able to successfully execute stamping out operations of 191 (H5N1) Avian Flu outbreaks in 18 affected
districts, without a single human mortality. Since the project closes in March 2014, the project management teams are working towards completing
all the agreed/outstanding activities.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Ministry of Agriculture Development Department of Livestock Services; Department of Agriculture and the Department
of Health Services




                                                                         31
                                                           Nepal: Country Snapshot




                                         ROAD SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
Key Dates:
Approved: December6, 2007; AF June 2, 2011
Effective: February 21, 2008; AF July 8, 2011
Closing: June 30, 2015

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                   Total amount       Disbursed           Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   176.6
Borrower                             58.5
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  117.6             89.32                27.98
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
Nepal has the second lowest road network density in the region. Only two-fifths of the population has access to paved roads within a 20 minute
walk. The substantial lack of accessibility to economic centers and social services in the remote areas is seen as one of the main impediments to
poverty reduction and economic development. By 2016, the government of Nepal aims for 86 percent of the population to live within two hours
(in the plain districts) or four hours (in hilly districts) walking distance to a paved road. Connection of all district headquarters with all-weather
roads has been one of the key elements of the Road Sector Priority Investment Plan of 2007. The Road Sector Development Project has been
designed against this backdrop to support the Strategic Roads Network.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project seeks to provide all season road access to the residents of beneficiary districts, reducing travel time and improving access to economic
centers and social services. The project aims to connect eight remote district headquarters in the mid-western and far-western regions of Nepal.
The original project outlay was approximately $43 million with additional financing of $75 million. The components are: (i) road development
(utilizing 83 percent of the funding); and (ii) institutional strengthening and policy reform.
Results Achieved:
Progress towards the achievement of project goals has been moderately satisfactory. Results of a socioeconomic impact study report (October
2011) show that two results indicators have surpassed targets for roads under the original project scope. A survey carried out in end-2012
showed that 11.3 percent of paved Strategic Road Network roads are now in poor condition; the target was to reduce this to 15 percent.
Achievements against project indicators will be fully assessed through a final socio-economic impact study (planned in 2014). Intermediate
results indicators under the road development component are likely to be achieved. All intermediate results indicators under the institutional
development component are also likely to be achieved except one: the road asset management tools used for prioritization of road maintenance
and upgrading works. The Bank team has been working with the project team to update the road inventory and conditions of roads, which will
provide the key inputs for the implementation of road asset management tools. Implementation progress deteriorated substantially in recent
months after the untimely transfer of key project officials. Performance slowed in almost all areas including implementation of road works, social
and environmental safeguards, and financial management. The Bank raised concerns with senior government officials and the situation has
started to improve. However, the performance of the project in recent months has improved considerably. A detailed performance analysis will be
conducted in the next review, which is due in end-March, 2014. The project is expected to achieve its physical output targets. All major road works
contracts are now procured and are under implementation.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Department of Roads
Donor partners: Department of International Development has recently agreed to finance the road safety related works under the project
through a Trust Fund (Global Road Safety Facility). This is now being processed. The DFID funding will help making the RSDP roads safer.




                                                                          32
                                                           Nepal: Country Snapshot




                          BRIDGES IMPROVEMENT AND MAINTENANCE PROGRAM
Key Dates:
Approved: June 28, 2012
Effective: December 2012
Closing: December 15, 2017

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source                  Total amount        Disbursed           Undisbursed
Total Project Cost                   69.0
Borrower                             9.0
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                                  60.0              14.44               44.91
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
The existing bridge stock in Nepal is over 35-40 year old and in urgent need of rehabilitation and maintenance. There are still many gaps in the
Strategic Roads Network caused by lack of bridges contributing to a substantial lack of physical access to economic centers and social services,
particularly in remote areas. Nepal’s topography and geology also complicates efforts to provide adequate transport infrastructure. The lack of
physical access is seen as one of the root causes of the high level of poverty incidence in remote areas. The Bridges Improvement and Maintenance
Program has been designed by the government to address these issues.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project aims to provide safe, reliable and cost effective bridges on Nepal's Strategic Roads Network. The project supports the government’s
initiative under the Program for Results lending instrument (the Bank’s first such advance through IDA, and the first infrastructure project to use this
instrument). The overall program outlay is $150 million and the Bank’s share is roughly 40 percent. The scope of the project encompasses three
primary activities: (i) planning, technical design and quality control of bridges; (ii) major and minor maintenance of existing bridge assets; and (iii)
new bridge construction.
Results Achieved:
The program plans to finance major maintenance of 330 bridges, minor maintenance of 95 bridges and new construction of 121 bridges. It also plans
to support the development and management of the Bridges Maintenance System and the development and operation of a new approach to
addressing grievances. The Bridges Improvement and Maintenance Program has started operations. Two of the three results indicators will be
assessed at the mid-term of the project. The other indicator is a disbursement-linked indicator (DLI).There had been a delay in the program start up.
This is due to the non-fulfillment of an effectiveness condition Initially the program encountered teething problems, such as delays in streamlining
budget allocation procedures and delays in the procurement of technical support consultants. However, program performance has deteriorated
considerably in recent months due to the poor program management. The Bank has raised this issue with senior government officials. That said,
there are a number of achievements. They include: the development of a five-year bridge-by-bridge plan program to help guide the achievement of
physical disbursement-linked indicators, continued progress on realizing the Program Action Plan, full adaptation of the Bridges Maintenance
System to prioritize maintenance of program bridges, and the revision and approval of the Environmental and Social Management Framework
that included bridge related issues. An impact evaluation has been designed and funding secured.
Key Partners:
Implementing agency: Department of Roads




                                                                         33
                                                       Nepal: Country Snapshot




                STRENGTHENING THE NATIONAL RURAL TRANSPORT PROGRAM
Key Dates:
Approved: December 23, 2013
Effective: Not yet effective
Closing: July 15, 2019

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source              Total amount       Disbursed         Undisbursed
Total Project Cost               175.4
Borrower                         63.9
Co-financing (DFID)              11.51
Total Bank Financing
IDA                              100               0                 100
IBRD
Trust Fund
Project Background:
Over the past decade, poverty has reduced significantly (over 90 percent) in rural areas of Nepal, where 83 percent of the population lives.
In order to maintain this positive trend and to achieve significant development gains it is necessary to continue the effort to improve
transport connectivity in rural areas. Nepal’s topography and geology, combined with rural population distribution, significa ntly
complicates efforts to provide all weather transport links to many rural communities. Improving connectivity throughout Nepal is key to
ensuring that economic growth reaches rural areas. The project has been designed to enhance physical access to markets, social and
economic services, and assistance during emergency events. Initially, 33 districts are eligible to participate under the project, which
covers more than half of the total population of Nepal. The project is the third IDA operation to support Nepal’s rural trans port sector over
the past 15 years. The design of this operation reflects lessons learned from sustained engagement. The project has a distinct philosophy:
maintenance first. One of the sub-components of the project (rural road maintenance) has also adopted an output-based disbursement
approach. Project activities will be implemented at the district level.
Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
The project development objective is to enhance the availability and reliability of transport connectivity for rural communities in
participating districts. Component A: institutional strengthening and technical assistance ($19.7 million). Component A will fund three
categories of activities. They are: (i) institutional strengthening and technical assistance; (ii) beneficiary monitoring of physical works
under Component B of the project; and (iii) an impact study of selected project interventions. Component B: civil works ($155.7 million).
Component B will support districts to implement physical works needed for: (i) upgrading or rehabilitating rural transport infrastructure;
and (ii) maintaining rural transport infrastructure.
Results Achieved:
No results achieved as the project has yet to go into effect. However, the client has already initiated preliminary activities linked to the
project’s implementation.
Key Partners:
Implementing Agency: Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development (MoFALD)
Donor Partner : Department for International Development , UK (DFID)




                                                                    34
                                                       Nepal: Country Snapshot




                        BUILDING RESILIENCE TO CLIMATE RELATED HAZARDS
Key Dates:
Approved: January 15, 2013
Effective: June 20, 2013
Closing: November 30, 2018

Financing in million US Dollars (as of February 28, 2014)
Financing source              Total amount       Disbursed         Undisbursed
Total Project Cost               31.3
Borrower                         0.3
Co-financing
Total Bank Financing
IDA                              31.0              6.0               25.0
IBRD
Trust Fund
 Project Background:
 Nepal is prone to a range of hydro-meteorological (hydromet) hazards such as floods and droughts, the frequency and intensity of which
 are expected to increase with climate change. The poorer sections of the country – namely women and rural populations – are typically
 the worst-affected and have the least capacity to deal with such risks. A well-functioning hydromet network, forecasting and early
 warning system is crucial for strengthening resilience to such risks. The existing network is mainly manual, with limited real time data
 collection, transmission and storage, and there is no system for issuing authoritative warnings for weather-related disasters to
 government authorities, key user groups, or communities at risk. Improved agro- meteorological information is also an urgent priority for
 the agricultural sector. The Building Resilience to Climate-Related Hazards Project is one of five projects financed through the Nepal Pilot
 Program for Climate Resilience under the Strategic Climate Fund.
 Project Development Objective and Brief Component Description:
 The project’s main objective is to enhance government capacity to mitigate climate -related hazards by improving the accuracy and
 timeliness of weather and flood forecasts and warnings for climate-vulnerable communities and to support development of agricultural
 management information system services to help farmers mitigate climate related production risks. The project has four components.
 The Department of Hydrology and Meteorology under the Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment will implement three
 components, namely, (i) institutional capacity strengthening within the department, (ii) modernization of hydro- meteorological
 observation networks and forecasting, and (iii) enhancement of the department’s service delivery system. The Ministry of Agr icultural
 Development will implement the fourth component, namely, (iv) creation of an agriculture management information system.

Results Expected:

By financing modernization of Nepal’s hydromet observation network, supporting improvements in the accuracy and timeliness of
weather and flood forecasts and capacity strengthening of responsible institutions, the project is expected to strengthen the resilience of
climate vulnerable communities. The project will help improve access to agro-meteorological information to farmers in 25 districts so that
they can better manage climate related risks at the farm level, by financing development of an agriculture management information
system. The project will help establish early warning system in two river basins in the western and eastern parts of Nepal.

 Key Partners:
 Implementing Agency: Ministry of Agricultural Development; Department of Hydrology and Meteorology
 Donor Partner: Asian Development Bank and International Financial Corporation.




                                                                    35
