                                                   87000




                     DOCUMENT OF

                    THE WORLD BANK

                 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY


INDIA: Maharashtra Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
                    Program
              (Program-for-Results)
                        2014-2020



   Fiduciary Systems Assessment

                         FINAL

                     February 2014




                       Prepared by

         South Asia Sustainable Development Unit

                    The World Bank

                   South Asia Region
                                                                       Table of Contents

A.         Executive Summary and Background ....................................................................................................... 1
     I.       Procurement Systems ............................................................................................................................ 1
     II.      Financial Management Systems ........................................................................................................... 2

Table 1: Program Audit Arrangements ............................................................................................................. 2
     III.        Governance and Accountability Systems .......................................................................................... 2

B.         Fiduciary Systems Assessment ................................................................................................................. 3
     I.       Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 3
     II.      Sector Overview .................................................................................................................................... 4

Table 2: Expenditure in RWSS Sector in Maharashtra .................................................................................... 5
     III.        Fiduciary Systems Overview ............................................................................................................. 5
     IV.         Financial Management Assessment .................................................................................................. 6
     V.       Procurement Management Assessment................................................................................................. 9
     VI.         Fraud and Corruption Risk Mitigation in the RWSS Sector in Maharashtra ................................. 12
     VII.        Program Actions ............................................................................................................................. 15

Table 3: Key Program Actions ....................................................................................................................... 15

Table 4: Other Actions.................................................................................................................................... 16

Table 5: Fiduciary Risk and Mitigation Measures .......................................................................................... 16

Table 6: Indicators - Financial Management .................................................................................................. 17

Table 7: Indicators - Procurement .................................................................................................................. 17




                                 Maharashtra Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program
                     Fiduciary Systems Assessment

                      ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ACB     Anti-Corruption Bureau
BRC     Block Resource Center
C&AG    Comptroller and Auditor General of India
CAFO    Chief Accounts and Finance Officer
CEO     Chief Executive Officer
DLIs    Disbursement-Linked Indicators
FSA     Fiduciary Systems Assessment
GoI     Government of India
GoM     Government of Maharashtra
GP      Gram Panchayat
GSDA    Groundwater Surveys and Development Agency
IDA     International Development Association
INT     Institutional Integrity
M&E     Monitoring and Evaluation
MIS     Management Information System
MJP     Maharashtra Jeevan Pradhikaran
NBA     Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan
NRDWP   National Rural Drinking Water Program
PAP     Program Action Plan
PWD     Public Works Department
RA      Running Account
RTI     Right to Information
RWSS    Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
STA     State Technical Agencies
SWSM    State Water and Sanitation Mission
ToR     Terms of Reference
VWSC    Village Water and Sanitation Committee
WSSD    Water Supply and Sanitation Department
WSSO    Water Supply and Sanitation Organization
ZP      Zila Parishad
A.      Executive Summary and Background

1.      A Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) was carried out to evaluate the arrangements
relevant to the Program and to determine whether they provide reasonable assurance that the
Program funds will be used for their intended purpose. Taking into account the improvements
required and the agreement on the actions required to strengthen the systems (which are reflected in
the PAP), the overall fiduciary framework is considered adequate to support Program management
and to achieve desired results.

2.      GoM has a well-developed budgetary framework that ensures allocation of adequate
resources to all departments and programs. There is sufficient predictability in the availability of
resources; however, to maintain transparency in GoM’s financing, an exclusive budget line has
been allocated to this Program – as is usually done by GoM for externally aided projects. Funds
will initially be released by the state treasuries; however, procurement actions will be taken and
final payments will be made by SWSM, MJP, GSDA, ZPs and GPs, which operate outside the
budgetary system1 and use commercial banking channels for financial flows and payments.

3.      Fiduciary arrangements in the sector are guided by several rules and legislations, including
the state financial rules, Public Works Department (PWD) Manual, Store Purchase Rules, MJP Act,
ZP Account Code and the Bombay Panchayat Rules. The existing governance and accountability
arrangements in WSSD include the Anti-Corruption Bureau, which enforces the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988; Audits by the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India, the
country’s premier auditor; Right to Information (RTI) Act - 2005; and WSSD’s vigilance function
and its grievance redress system (E-Pani). Issues identified under the FSA, as summarized in the
following paragraphs, will be addressed through the PAP, and other technical assistance and
capacity building measures.

I.      Procurement Systems

4.      The state has a reasonably well established procurement system for works, which are
described in the PWD Manual, including: detailed bid documents that meet the requirements of
standard conditions and evaluation criteria; a well-developed evaluation process; and an acceptable
performance of an average of 45 days for processing contracts. For procurement of goods, which is
limited to the establishment of rate contracts for pipes, the ‘Stores Purchase Rules’ of GoM apply.
Services procurement, which is used rarely, is handled under procurement procedures for works.

5.      The assessment of the existing procurement management system and arrangements
identified certain areas for improvement through Program support: rules and guidelines that are
spread across multiple documents and frequently issued circulars leading to a lack of
comprehensive instructions for all steps of the procurement process; inadequate regulations for the
procurement of services; possible entry barriers for contractors imposed by the mandatory
registration of contractors; need for alternative dispute resolution mechanisms; procurement


1
 These entities receive funds from the state in form of grants through the Treasuries and then make payments using
commercial banks (with the exception of GSDA).
                                                        -    1   -
planning; contract administration; standards for disclosure/transparency; system for procurement
monitoring (MIS); and oversight over procurement processes.

II.    Financial Management Systems

6.      The annual expenditure on the RWSS sector totals about US$355 million, of which a
significant portion (65- 80 percent) is spent through GPs. The balance is spent predominantly by
MJP, whose mandate is to cover all large/multi-village schemes. Financial flows have a defined
route and funds are periodically released by the Finance Department to the expenditure-making
entities, such as MJP, GSDA, and ZPs. ZPs, in turn, release funds to GPs for making payments to
contractors. Basic accounting records are maintained at all levels, except at GPs where record-
keeping is irregular and weak. Independent and regular audits are conducted at all levels: by the
C&AG at state-level institutions; the Local Fund Auditor (attached to the Finance Department) at
the ZP level, and firms of Chartered Accountants at the GP level.

7.      Financial management performance is constrained by several issues: MJP follows a single
entry system of accounting, which is not guided by clear rules; MJP audit reports show several
recurring observations, in addition to the audits being regularly delayed; the level of ZPs’ oversight
and control over GPs (need for fiduciary controls without being burdensome, but allowing
independence of GPs); all releases to GPs are recorded and reported as expenditure, although
expenditure may be incurred after weeks/months; and, at the GP level, audit acts only as a post
control measure and the audit process is not standardized.

The audit arrangements which are applicable for the Program are shown in Table 1:

                                Table 1: Program Audit Arrangements
 Scope of Audit                                   Responsibility    Remarks
 Financial Statement Attest Audit                 C&AG              Audit of Program financial
                                                                    statements
 Other state-wide audit mechanisms which would also review this Program:
 Annual C&AG audits of GoM accounts –               C&AG            Financial statements and
 certification of financial statements, opinion and                 performance aspects
 observations on performance of the state,
 performance audit of select departments/
 schemes
 Local Fund Audit of ZPs                            Local Fund      Audit covering financial
                                                    Auditor         statements and propriety aspects
                                                                    of ZPs
 Audit of GPs by Chartered Accountants              Chartered       Audit of sub-project
                                                    Accountant      implementation as per standard
                                                    firms           ToR


III.   Governance and Accountability Systems

8.    The Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) has jurisdiction over all employees of the state
government. The ACB has only an investigative mandate and conducts inquiries into cases referred
                                                 -    2   -
by government departments, the state Ombudsman (Lok Ayukta) as well as complaints filed by
citizens on bribery, corruption, criminal misconduct, embezzlement of government money and
other corrupt practices by public officials.

9.     Each line department or ministry is required to conduct preliminary enquiries on
misconduct by its employees. Only a few departments in Maharashtra, such as the Public Works
and Water Resources Departments, have assigned this fiduciary responsibility to a Vigilance
Officer, based on the GoI model. WSSD does not have a similar vigilance cell. WSSD handling of
corruption cases internally is neither codified/formalized nor recorded/disclosed. The PAP
proposes identification of an officer, with a clear mandate and designated responsibility for
handling any allegation of fraud and corruption, supported by an established cell. The Terms of
Reference (ToR) of the officer, along with an annual report on the discharge of the vigilance
function, will be disclosed regularly. All allegations of irregularities under the Program will be
conveyed to WSSD.

10.     Other governance and accountability mechanisms include: (a) C&AG audit, the scope of
which includes both the prevention and detection of fraud and corruption; (b) WSSD will disclose
information and respond to requests for information in line with the RTI Act of 2005, through its
head office and a network of more than 250 Public Information Officers across the state; and (c)
WSSD’s grievance redress system (E-Pani) records and responds to complaints relating to the
sector and the Program will strengthen the same as appropriate. The PAP addresses strengthening
of the vigilance function and the grievance redress mechanism (see Table 5, Action #1).

11.     Applicability of Anti-Corruption Guidelines of the Bank for the Program. Reflecting its
long-standing commitment to transparency and accountability, Maharashtra is fully committed to
ensuring that the Program's results are not tainted by fraud or corruption. Through the Program's
legal documents, India (as the recipient of the IDA financing) and Maharashtra are formally
committed to the obligations under the Anti-Corruption Guidelines for PforR operations. In
particular, in the context of this Program, Maharashtra has agreed to report to the Bank any
credible and material allegations of fraud and/or corruption regarding the Program as part of the
overall Program reporting requirements. The Bank will inform the recipient and Maharashtra about
any allegations that it receives. Maharashtra has also agreed to ensure, through regular Program
audits, that persons or entities debarred or suspended by the Bank are not awarded a contract under
the Program during the debarment or suspension period.

12.      The Bank’s right to investigate allegations regarding the Program's activities and
expenditures, and the related access to required persons, information, and documents will be
observed in accordance with the standard arrangements for this purpose between GoI and the
Institutional Integrity (INT) unit of the Bank.

B.     Fiduciary Systems Assessment

I.     Introduction

13.   The Bank is partnering with GoM to support the RWSS program of the state. As part of
Program preparation, in accordance with OP/BP 9.00, the Bank carried out a Fiduciary Systems
Assessment (FSA) of the RWSS sector, to determine whether the fiduciary systems provide
                                               -   3   -
reasonable assurance that Program expenditures will be used appropriately to achieve the intended
purposes. The FSA is broadly based on work done by a consulting firm and the World Bank staff
working on procurement, financial management, and governance systems.


II.    Sector Overview

14.    The current institutional framework of RWSS abides by the decentralized framework for
service delivery which is empowered by the 73rd Constitutional Amendment and the emerging
needs of the sector. Key stakeholders involved in the RWSS sector include WSSD, WSSO, MJP,
GSDA, ZPs at the district level, and concerned beneficiary GPs at the village level. The sector is
governed by the State Water Supply and Sanitation Mission (SWSM) at the state level, which is
mandated to make policy, and approve and monitor scheme implementation. SWSM’s role is to
support and monitor the overall implementation setup in the state.

15.     WSSD is the key department responsible for the implementation of schemes/projects in this
sector at the state level and through its offices at the ZP level. A majority of the schemes are
implemented by beneficiary GPs under the aegis of the concerned ZPs. MJP and GSDA are the
State Technical Agencies (STAs) for Maharashtra, each with its separate mandate – MJP for
complex and large multi-village RWSSs (apart from urban water supply schemes which are also its
domain, outside of the RWSS structure), and GSDA with a mandate for water source identification,
certification and strengthening. ZPs and GSDA support VWSCs (under the GPs) in implementing
schemes by providing technical supervision and control. Districts and sub-districts monitor
implementation and provide support to the VWSCs. While the block level (sub-district) does not
have any operational or fund routing role, it is functionally the closest to GPs and provides support
on social issues, as well as monitoring schemes being implemented. BRCs have been formulated at
the block level to undertake capacity building and impart training on procurement, accounting,
social awareness, dispute resolution, record keeping, etc.

16.     Accountability arrangements for the sector are based on several guidelines and rules, in line
with the institutional framework. These include the Maharashtra financial rules and budget
guidelines which guide planning, budgeting and release of funds. However, expenditure is
significantly impacted by rules laid down in the guidelines of two GoI schemes: NRDWP for water
and NBA for sanitation. These guidelines specify funds flow and cost sharing arrangements
between GoI and the state/community. The two key expenditure-making entities (MJP/GPs,
VWSCs) are guided by the MJP Act and the Bombay Panchayat Rules (applicable to
GPs/VWSCs).

17.    Table 2 presents existing sectoral expenditure patterns. Since GSDA and the ZPs transfer
funds to GPs for expenditure, GPs are responsible for a significant part of the state program.




                                                -   4   -
                                Table 2: Expenditure in RWSS Sector in Maharashtra
                                     Expenditure in RWSS Sector in Maharashtra
                                                                                                   Rs in Crores
                                        2011-12                      2010-11                   2009-10
 Agency                            Releases   Expenditure       Releases   Expenditure    Releases   Expenditure

 MJP                                 269.35       253.55             582.23     396.52     431.17        405.32

 GSDA                                161.44       180.56             107.02     116.85      62.78         42.78

 Zilla Parishads (ZP)                973.87       817.88             784.15     826.39     768.89        661.81

 Total                              1,404.66     1,251.99           1,473.40   1,339.76   1,262.84      1,109.91

 GSDA & ZP as % of total                        80%                            70%                     63%
       1   Crore = 10 million


III.       Fiduciary Systems Overview

18.        Key aspects of Program fiduciary arrangements include:

a)         Periodic release of funds by the Finance Department drawing on an exclusive budget line.
b)         Procurement of works by MJP and GPs (VWSCs) using existing GOM systems.
           Procurement of most Consultancy services is done at the state level by SWSM/
           WSSO/MJP. GoM is developing systems for these and they would be included in the
           procurement manual.
c)         Implementation and payments by SWSM, MJP, GSDA, ZPs and GPs using (strengthened)
           country systems.
d)         Compilation of expenditure information and uploading on website by WSSO/SWSM on a
           quarterly basis, and reporting to the Bank on an annual basis.
e)         Annual Financial Statements (Attest) Audit by the C&AG. Once these reports are in, the
           reported expenditure would be reconciled with expenditures certified by audit.

19.    The FSA evaluated the capacity of relevant institutions to implement the proposed Program
while providing adequate fiduciary assurance on the use of Program funds. The assessment
highlights several pertinent issues that have been discussed with GoM and the agreements reached.
While some solutions (e.g., development of Manuals) will be effective in the short term, others will
be implemented (and regularly monitored) in the medium term. The assessment provides
reasonable assurance that the overall fiduciary framework for the Program is adequate to support
Program management and to achieve the desired results.

20.    Key performance indicators are linked to PAP actions and will be monitored during
program implementation as per Table 3 of this Note.




                                                            -   5     -
IV.    Financial Management Assessment

21.     Funding for the Program will be provided in the GoM budget under WSSD in an exclusive
budget line, separate from the other budget line items through which GoM finances the RWSS
sector. This is as per the general practice of GoM, wherein it creates separate budget lines for
external funding. Bank funds will flow to GoI and then flow through GoM Treasury and, along
with GoM budgetary allocation for the Program, will be disbursed to various agencies
implementing the Program. Maharashtra Treasuries will monitor performance against this budget
line and this will be reported through the existing Budget Estimation, Allocation & Monitoring
System. Normally the state budget is approved by the State Legislature before commencement of
the financial year on April 1 of each year.

22.      Delay in transfer of funds to implementing entities has been a common problem faced by
the entire state; no funds are transferred by the Finance Department in the initial (one to two)
months of the financial year and further a significant part of the funds are made available in the
second semester. This risk is mitigated by the implementing entities (since they operate outside the
treasury systems) carrying over some balances at the end of each financial year which are used in
the initial months of each financial year to make payments. Secondly, though departments prepare
budget estimates, the practice of departments preparing a procurement plan with details of quantity,
time schedule for award/completion, and estimates as part of their annual action plan is yet to take
root.

Assessment of Institutions

23.    SWSM / WSSO. SWSM has been constituted as a Society and is currently being used by GoI
for routing funds under NRDWP/NBA. State level expenditure/payments are made by SWSM,
which maintains the required accounts and records.

24.    MJP. Planning and budgeting processes of MJP are defined by the MJP Act, Government
Resolutions of the Finance Department and WSSD. MJP’s multi-village schemes take
approximately one year to be approved from the date of application by the GP. This time is taken in
the analysis of the scheme at the block level, including certification of the source, preparation of
surveys and project estimates, as well as the administrative and technical approval of schemes.
There is a need to streamline this process to enable a more efficient and faster approval process.

25.     Release of funds by MJP to its district offices is based on demand submitted by the latter
which, in turn, is prepared on the basis of approved contractors’ bills. The fund flow is managed
internally (through commercial banking channels), thereby exposing the system to possible
weaknesses in internal controls.

26.     MJP does not have finance and accounts guidelines; therefore, there is a possibility of
inconsistency in financial treatment of events. District offices maintain accounts on single-entry
basis and send monthly information to MJP Headquarters, which maintains accounts on a double-
entry basis. This system currently does not provide a reliable basis for the preparation of accounts
and for monitoring. Annual Financial Statements are prepared as per the format prescribed in the
MJP Act, 1976 and are in a combined form, including the accounts of the 45 sub-units. Though
there is an audit by a firm of Chartered Accountants, the statutory audit is conducted by the C&AG.
                                               -    6   -
This report is regular but delayed.2 The audit process is robust but certain observations appear each
year, suggesting that not all audit findings are being addressed in an appropriate manner.

27.     Considering the central role of MJP in Program implementation, the following actions
would need to be prioritized: development of a fiduciary manual and switch-over to a double-entry
system of accounting; timely completion of audit; and addressing, in a satisfactory manner, the
significant observations made in the C&AG audit reports.

28.     ZPs. While the ZP budget is forward looking in terms of demand for new projects, there is
no defined approval time frame at the ZP level for a request for new schemes received from GPs.
The gap between the date of application by the Gram Sabha to the date of technical sanction ranges
between two months to two years, depending on the executing agency. The budget for “spill-over”
water supply projects at the GP level is not revised as per changes in Schedule of Rates during the
preparation of next year’s budget, thus leaving the project vulnerable to increased cost. The fund
release process to GPs varies across the state, primarily with respect to the involvement of the
Chief Accounts and Finance Officer [CAFO (Finance Department)]. In some districts, the CAFO
approves only the release and expenditure of projects which are funded through the state
government budget, whereas in other districts the CAFO is involved in the approval and release of
GoI funds as well. There is a need to follow a uniform practice across the state on the involvement
of the CAFO in the approval process for the release of funds to GPs.

29.      Contractor payments are made by VWSCs as per Running Account (RA) bills approved by
the ZP. The ZP also issues a release order which permits the VWSC to make payments to the
contractor; this seems to be an unnecessary impediment, which could cause delays. A Utilization
Certificate is submitted by the GPs while requesting for each subsequent installment. The most
significant weakness in the ZP-level accounting framework is recording/classification of all
releases to the GP level as expenditure at the time of release. Each installment released by the ZP is
unutilized at the time of release and there is a significant time gap between the release and
utilization of funds by the GP.

30.     Audit of NRDWP funds at the ZP level is undertaken by a firm of Chartered Accountants.
Financial statements are collated using information recorded in books such as the cash book, grant
register and other record books; these are prepared based on releases to VWSCs, but neither take
into account the GP audit undertaken by the firm of Chartered Accountants nor provide any GP-
level information with regard to expenditure or balances.

31.      Considering the role of ZPs in Program implementation, the following actions would need
to be prioritized: simplification of the process of release of funds to GPs, and uniformity across the
districts regarding the role and responsibilities of the CAFO.

32.    GPs and VWSCs. GPs are involved in the identification of needs and requesting for
schemes, but are not involved in the detailed cost estimation for the schemes, which is a technical
function handled by district/sub-district offices. GPs and VWSCs depend on ZPs/BRCs for
guidance and technical appraisal of the schemes. The GP’s role in planning includes expressing felt
needs and making decisions through Gram Sabhas. Though final payment to contractors is made by

2
    Report for FY 2009-10 was issued 19 months after the close of the year.
                                                          -    7   -
the VWSC, fund availability at VWSC is dependent upon the approval of each RA bill by the ZP,
thus making the entire fund release process vulnerable to delay. Overall, there is a constraint due to
the limited technical (as well as book-keeping) capacity of VWSCs. A single-entry system of
accounting is in use and the task of updating records/preparation of financial statements is linked to
the release of the fourth (that is, the final) installment, only for which an audit of the VWSCs’
books of account is a pre-requisite. The audit is conducted by a firm of Chartered Accountants
drawn from a panel established by each ZP; however, a ToR for GP/VWSC audits does not exist,
leading to a lack of uniformity in audits, as well as non-adherence to standards established by the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. Further, the audit is conducted after 90 percent of the
expenditure has been incurred and the fourth and final installment is reached, making it much less
effective as a tool for pre-control.

Program Actions

33.    Considering the role of GPs/VWSCs in Program implementation, the following actions
would need to be prioritized: regular compilation of information on expenditures as drawn from the
books of account of each VWSC/GP, standardizing and formalizing audit (that is, use of a standard
(ToR) and introducing a requirement for audit much earlier during scheme implementation. The
Key Program Actions and other actions to address the gaps through Technical Assistance and
capacity building measures are listed in Table 3.

Auditing Arrangements for the Program

34.     Audit arrangements will include an annual financial statement attest audit by the office of
the C&AG as per a well-established ToR. Other state-wide audit arrangements, which would also
cover this Program, include:

a)     The audit conducted by the C&AG for the state of Maharashtra includes a certification of
       its financial statements, including a confirmation of the financial flows under the
       Department.
b)     The above certification is supplemented each year by an audit report, which covers
       significant observations relating to all departments and schemes implemented by the
       departments.
c)     ZPs are periodically audited by the Local Fund Auditor, who comprehensively reviews their
       financial performance, and also looks into propriety aspects.
d)     GPs (sub-projects) are audited by firms of Chartered Accountants as per standardized ToRs.

Risks and Performance Indicators

35.   Table 5 provides the key risks and mitigation measures related to Financial Management
Systems, and Table 6 provides Indicators to measure financial management performance.




                                                -    8   -
V.      Procurement Management Assessment

Procurement Systems

36.     Major items procured by the RWSS sector in the state comprise procurement of works. At
the state level, a limited quantity of goods is procured by WSSD, WSSO and GSDA. At the district
level, procurement of works is carried out by ZPs and MJP, and at the village level by GPs.
Procurement is carried out in accordance with three separate guidelines: PWD Manual, Store
Purchase Rules and Zila Parishad Account Code. The guidelines require open competitive bidding
for procurement for all contract values above INR 50,000. Below this threshold, direct contracting
from Central Stores and Purchase Office, Rate Contract and Shopping is permitted for procurement
of goods, while Item Rate Contracts and Percentage Contracts are permissible for procurement of
works. Mandatory negotiations with L1 bidder is a universal rule for all procurement methods.

37.    Bidding documents such as B1 tender document and D tender document are used as
standard bidding documents for procurement of works and for procurement of goods respectively.
These bidding documents meet the standards of upfront declaration of essential terms and
conditions and evaluation/qualification criteria.

38.    The assessment finds that the existing procurement management system and arrangements
have the following gaps:

a) Goods and Works. Rules and guidelines related to procurement are spread across multiple
   documents with no clear and comprehensive instructions for all steps of the procurement
   process.
b) Services. No guidelines/regulations are in place for procurement of services. Evaluations of
   proposals are based on pass/fail criteria such as registration details, earnest money deposit,
   turnover, and number of years of experience. There are no specific guidelines for qualitative
   evaluation of technical proposals. Presently, the B1 tender document used for works
   procurement is also used for procurement of services.
c) Registration of contractors is a prerequisite condition to be fulfilled for participation in the
   bidding process, which may act as an entry barrier and restrict many bidders from participating.
d) No alternative dispute resolution procedure or written processes for a complaint/grievance
   handling mechanism exist besides the jurisdictional avenue during the bidding process. The
   assessment did not come across any documentation of complaints received.

39.      GoM has developed and deployed an e-procurement system and made it mandatory since3
January 2012. The e-procurement platform used was developed and deployed by the National
Informatics Centre of GoI. This being a Government-led action (being implemented but some
districts have been provided relaxation), it is assumed that all procuring offices will have the
required infrastructure, and associated actions (such as training and capacity building of
procurement staff to undertake e-procurement, as well as workshops to the bidder community)
would be carried out during the first year of Program implementation. Handholding support would
be provided at the districts where the Program will be implemented.

3
 For Procurement of Goods costing more than INR 100,000 (US$1,600) and works costing more than INR 500,000
(US$8,100)
                                                    -    9   -
40.     The present system only allows for e-tendering, where uploading of bid documents and bids
are facilitated electronically, while evaluation of the bids is carried out offline. The state IT
Department revamped the system in October 2102 to include features such as active tender notices,
contract closures, online evaluation of bids, MIS reports, and payment gateways for Earnest Money
Deposit. With the successful deployment of e-procurement, a significant increase in competition is
being witnessed and a reduction in collusion among bidders is expected.As per the current policies
of GoM, MJP is responsible for procurement and awarding contracts at the district level wherein
the estimate cost of single village schemes is above INR 5 crore and that for regional schemes,
above INR 3 crore. Majority of contracts are given on single responsibility basis. In few contracts,
MJP provides materials (pipes etc) to the contractor.

41.      Across entities, there is a need to enhance procurement capacity. This is important at
district/GP level as a large number of works contracts are handled at this level. All institutions in
the state have capacity constraints related to skills and competencies required for efficient and
transparent procurement. In most situations, procurement processes are mainly dealt with by
technical staff with little formal training in procurement and contract management. It is crucial to
strengthen the capacities of key staff dealing with procurement on subjects related to procurement,
contract management, record keeping, quality control, and transparency. With the state government
making it mandatory to use the e-procurement portal, additional IT staff is being deployed through
RDD for handholding the e-procurement process at the GP level.

Procurement Performance

42.     Procurement performance was assessed at the GP level and at the state level at MJP -- the
two places where most Program procurement is expected to take place. Based on the information
and data analyzed from 33 projects at the GP level, in 85 percent of the cases the procurement
process was completed within 45 days, with another 7 percent taking more than 90 days.
Dissemination of bidding opportunities is through advertisements, usually in local newspapers at
the district level or even at the taluka (sub-district) level. Data regarding advertisements/quotations
sought were available in 75 percent of these villages. Of these villages, 63 percent published
tenders in newspapers, while for the remainder quotations were sought for supply of
materials/goods. In all cases except one, bids/quotations were received from at least two or three
bidders. In almost all cases contracts awarded were at par with the project cost estimate, with the
price quoted by bidders being within 10 to 15 percent on either side. Construction delays were
observed in 20 percent of the cases.

43.   Other key observations on the overall performance of procurement and contract
management at GP and MJP levels are:

a)     Procurement Planning. Departments prepare budget estimates. However, the practice of
       preparing a procurement plan, with details of quantity, time schedule for award/completion
       and estimates as part of the annual action plan, is yet to take root in the system;
b)     Participation. Key contracts awarded for procurement of goods at the state level are Rate
       Contracts for pipes, which are administered by MJP. The Rate Contract process is open
       only to manufacturers from within the state, resulting in participation of only two to three
       bidders in the past few years. Bids for works at the district and GP levels also attract less
                                                -    10   -
      than three bidders. Other potential bidders active in different states are not participating in
      the bidding process.
c)    Contract Administration. Rate Contracts for pipes are contracted centrally by the MJP head
      office, while they are implemented and monitored by MJP district offices. In such cases, the
      contractual obligation of the supplier is to the state level, while contract implementation is
      the responsibility of the district authority. Under this arrangement contract monitoring and
      implementation by MJP district offices can become an accountability issue, which can lead
      to late delivery of goods, inferior quality, delay in payments, poor performance of the
      contractor, etc.
d)    Disclosure. There is a need to develop and practice rules/guidelines for disclosure of
      contract award information to promote transparency. The state needs to formulate and
      implement a disclosure policy for procurement, such as award, achievement of targets and
      expenditures, at various levels to maintain transparency in the system and also meet RTI
      obligations.
e)    Procurement Monitoring Information Systems. Information related to the procurement plan,
      procurement process followed, name of the winning bidder, and performance monitoring of
      contractor/supplier is not organized or consolidated at the district or state level to help make
      appropriate management decisions. There is no defined framework for dissemination of
      procurement-related information such as budget and expenditure, bidders’ participation,
      price comparison, and bidders’ performance etc. The revamped e-procurement system
      being implemented is expected to have provision for detailed MIS reports and tender-wise
      information for various departments to monitor procurement at the central level with
      linkages to budgetary allocations.
f)    Oversight and Control. Procurement process monitoring and oversight currently rests
      within the hierarchies of the procurement management system. A separation of functions
      for independently assessing and ensuring the integrity of the process and the system is not
      yet in place. Further, there is a need to establish and institutionalize a post-procurement
      review process to be conducted annually to assess the degree of adherence to agreed norms
      and guidelines and the integrity of the procurement process. In the case of assets created,
      independent quality inspection should also be carried out.

Actions Agreed for Improvements in Procurement Management

44.   The following actions will be taken by GoM to address the above gaps:

a)    A Procurement Manual, which collates rules and regulations which are spread out in
      different documents for works and goods (but also addresses issues of blacklisting,
      negotiations, disclosure of awards, etc.,) will be prepared by Year 1. The procurement
      manual would also include the selection of consultants, including the development of the
      standard request for proposals.
b)    Procurement post-review will be conducted on a regular basis, covering at least 15 percent
      of contracts issued in each year and the report will be shared with the World Bank by
      September 30 each year.
c)    The complaint handling and redress system, including procurement issues, will be covered
      in the PAP.
d)    A Procurement MIS module, which can be integrated with the e-procurement system, will
      be developed.
                                               -   11   -
Program Actions

45.    Based on the assessment and agreements reached with GoM (use of e-procurement systems,
control and oversight through the annual post review, and the integrated complaint management
and M&E systems) procurement systems under the Program offer reasonable assurance of value for
money with integrity. The key Program Actions and other actions to address gaps identified
through technical assistance and capacity building measures are listed in Table 3.


Risks and Performance Indicators

46.    Attachment 5 provides the key risks and mitigation measures related to procurement
systems, and Table 7 provides Indicators to measure procurement performance.


VI.    Fraud and Corruption Risk Mitigation in the RWSS Sector in Maharashtra

The State Anti-corruption Framework

47.     In India, law and order is the responsibility of the states. Neither GoI nor central nodal anti-
corruption agencies, such as the Central Vigilance Commission, have jurisdiction on corruption
issues in the states, except for investigating and prosecuting central government employees. India’s
supreme audit institution, the C&AG, is the only federal institution which has a mandate to help
mitigate the risk of corruption in the implementation of any public policy or program across the
country through its financial, compliance or performance audits.

The Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB), Maharashtra

48.     The ACB was established in 1957 to enforce the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, by
investigating “bribery, corruption, criminal misconduct, embezzlement of Government money and
other venal practices by public servants.” Although employees of the central government fall under
the ambit of the Central Bureau of Investigation, the Maharashtra ACB has jurisdiction over all
employees of the “State Government, of the statutory Corporations of Bodies set up and financed
by the State Government, and of the Municipal Corporations, Nagar Parishads, Zilla Parishads
and Panchayats in the state.” ACB is part of the state Home Department and has only an
investigative mandate. Its staff is mostly made of some 200 police officers seconded from the state
police. It conducts inquiries into cases referred by government departments, the state Ombudsman
(Lok Ayukta) as well as complaints filed by citizens on bribery, corruption, criminal misconduct,
embezzlement of government money and other corrupt practices by public officials. As per the
Constitution of India, the ACB cannot investigate any ‘Class I’ (highest ranking) officers of the
state government without the government’s concurrence. ACB discharges its mandate in two ways:
(i) by trapping public servants accused of demanding bribes; and (ii) by investigating assets
disproportionate to known sources of income amassed by a public servant. In 2012, the Bureau
received 135 cases related to disproportionate assets and caught 513 officials asking for a bribe,
only one of whom was from an agency of the RWSS sector.


                                                 -   12   -
Vigilance Function in the RWSS Department

49.    Each line department or ministry is supposed to conduct preliminary enquiries on
misconduct by its employees. A few of them in Maharashtra, such as the Public Works and Water
Resources Departments, have assigned this fiduciary responsibility to a Vigilance Officer,
following the GoI model, where the Vigilance Cell in every line ministry or department is
compliant with the ToR issued by the Central Vigilance Commission. In the Maharashtra PWD, the
Vigilance Cell is placed under the authority of the Chief Engineer (Head of the Department), has
branches at the district level and is responsible for the prevention and detection of fraud and
corruption, a mandate it fulfills through surprise checks (for quality assurance) and by addressing
complaints received by the administration/government.

50.     WSSD does not have such a vigilance cell and its vigilance function is neither codified/
formalized nor recorded/disclosed. Ideally, an officer with a clear mandate and support from an
established cell should be assigned the responsibility of handling any allegation of fraud and
corruption. The ToR should be disclosed and an annual report on the discharge of the vigilance
function within the department should be prepared for review by any stakeholder. The mandate and
contact details should be made publicly available and any referred allegation should be kept on
record. The PAP includes an action to address this.

Decentralized Vigilance Function

51.     There is an established system by which the CEO of a ZP can trigger police investigation
(by filing a First Information Report in the local police offices) against VWSCs and contractors for
fraud, embezzlement and corruption. Such an investigation can also be triggered by the local
administration whose vigilance role has recently been strengthened.

52.      In 2011, GoM established Committees for Eradication of Corruption at District, Divisional4
and Taluk (sub-district) level (respectively chaired by the District Collector or the deputy at the
district level or the divisional commissioner at the divisional level) for handling complaints against
public officials related to delays, irregularities, incompetence and corruption. These committees
comprise public officials and representatives of civil society appointed for two years. In addition to
conducting preliminary enquiries on complaints, these committees are mandated to hold quarterly
reviews of complaints received, remedial actions taken and to suggest methods to expedite
processes. They are also expected to collect further information on sectors where corruption is
prevalent and to suggest mitigating measures.

53.     Each line department is also mandated to establish a Vigilance Squad under the aegis of its
most senior officer at the district level. As part of strengthening the vigilance function, this
decentralized vigilance mechanism will be an integral part of the WSSD vigilance function and
will be operationalized under the Program.

54.     The WSSD vigilance function will also ensure that allegations of fraud or corruption
pertaining to the Program raised by or referred to ZP officials are recorded and monitored by the
Department. These measures will be supported under the Program.

4
    A group of districts is administered at the Divisional level by a Divisional Commissioner.
                                                           -    13   -
Mitigating the Risk of Fraud and Corruption through External Audit

55.     The Program will be subject to external financial audit by the C&AG (through the state
Accountant General). Both prevention and detection of fraud and corruption fall within the
C&AG’s jurisdiction: "examination of system for detection and prevention of fraud and corruption
will be an integral part of all regularity audits and also of performance audits, whenever it forms
one of the audit (sub) objectives. Audit must evaluate and report on the adequacy of the systems in
place and competence with which the management (of the audited entity) has discharged its
responsibility in relation to prevention, detection, response and follow-up/remedial measures in
relation to fraud and corruption. Reports of individual cases of suspected fraud and corruption
should be confidentially addressed, in the first instance, to the controlling authority concerned.
More serious cases should also be confidentially reported to the Secretary of the Administrative
Departments (where they are not the controlling offices) concerned and the investigative authorities
like Central/State Vigilance Commission, Lok Ayukta, etc."

56.     C&AG guidance to staff also includes the following specific provision on externally-funded
projects, which reads: "Audit is (supposed) to identify matters relating to inadequacies in systems
and control, cases of fraud and presumptive fraud, wasteful expenditure and failure of
administration to take corrective action on recommendations contained in the earlier report."5.

Other Accountability Mechanisms

57.     Broader accountability mechanisms, beyond external auditing, that also help mitigate the
risks of fraud and corruption and strengthen fiduciary control, are:

a)      Transparency. Under the RTI Act, 2005, any public entity is bound to proactively disclose
        information of general interest (listed in section 4 of the Act) and answer any request for
        information in a timely manner. The RTI Act grants citizens the right to “i) inspect works,
        documents, records; ii) take notes, extracts or certified copies of documents or records; iii)
        take certified samples of material; and iv) obtain information in form of printouts, diskettes,
        tapes, video cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through printouts of information
        related to public.” The RTI has become an effective accountability mechanism and millions
        of applications for information are being filed every year. There is empirical evidence that it
        is a more effective tool for citizens to obtain the service they are entitled to than to bribe
        their way through red tape. The Maharashtra State Information Commission, which
        oversees the implementation of the RTI Act within the state, has recently highlighted to the
        state line departments that they have to comply with Section 4 of the Act on voluntary
        disclosure of information. WSSD has committed to abide by the law and to significantly
        strengthen its public information system. WSSD is well equipped to answer requests for
        information, thanks to a network of 258 public information officers spread over each RWS
        Division of ZPs, with 119 first appellate officers and a next level of Appellate Authorities
        appointed by the WSSD Chief Information Commissioner in each of its six divisions.
b)      Village level committees, including VWSCs, do not fall under the RTI Act, but it has been
        agreed that in order to ensure comprehensive disclosure of information pertaining to the

5
 http://saiindia.gov.in/english/home/Our_Process/Audit_Methology/Guidelines_Notes/Book_Fraud_Corruption.pdf
                                                    -    14   -
        implementation of the Program, a system will capture information pertaining to the
        activities of VWSCs, including (but not limited to): (a) village assemblies’ resolutions,
        administrative and technical sanctions; (b) technical details of schemes sanctioned (designs,
        plans, estimates); (c) funds released to VWSCs; and (d) completion certificates/audit,
        information on Gram Sabha resolutions, administrative approval, technical approval, costs
        of projects, and contractors. Such information will be captured in the strengthened M&E
        system of the sector, and aggregated on the WSSD website.

Social Accountability Mechanisms

58.     Social accountability mechanisms (VWSC accountability, social auditing) are detailed in
the Environmental and Social Systems Assessment. The WSSD grievance redress mechanism (E-
Pani) will be strengthened to capture, record and handle allegations of fraud and corruption
pertaining to the Program, and improve its access and effective use by stakeholders, including
beneficiaries. A follow-up mechanism is being put in place to handle grievances that are not
resolved at the village level. Like any state department, WSSD is also meant to draft and disclose
citizen’s charters (under the recently revived state Performance Management and Evaluation
System).

VII.    Program Actions

59.     The anti-corruption framework can be construed as potentially effective. However, two
mechanisms call for significant strengthening: (a) WSSD’s vigilance function needs to be codified,
formalized and consolidated; and (b) grievance redress mechanism (E-Pani) needs to be made more
accessible and comprehensive, and allow for the capture and handling of allegations of fraud and
corruption. The Key Program Actions, and other actions to address gaps through technical
assistance and capacity building measures, are listed Table 3 (extracted from the PAD).

                                      Table 3: Key Program Actions
       Cross-cutting actions
 1     Strengthen existing complaint and grievance redress and vigilance mechanisms within WSSD at the
       state level to handle complaints related to procurement, financial management, service delivery,
       environmental and social fraud and corruption issues under the Program. Information on complaints
       received and remedial actions taken will be aggregated annually and publicly disclosed.
       Fiduciary Actions
 2     Compile the rules and procedures on procurement, including for selection of consultant services, into
       a comprehensive procurement manual for the RWSS sector and adopt it.
 3     Conduct procurement post-review on a regular basis, covering at least 15% of contracts issued each
       year in the RWSS sector.
 4     Establish double-entry accounting system at all levels in MJP, including simplification of formats for
       annual audited financial statements and development of an entity Financial Management Manual.
 5     Establish a system to report information on expenditure (not releases) at GPs/VWSCs. Carry out
       district and GP level audits as per a specific ToR.




                                                    -   15   -
                                              Table 4: Other Actions
       Other Actions                                                                       Links to PAP/DLIs

       Fiduciary Issues

       Develop a Procurement Management Information System module, drawing on              DLI #1
 1
       the e-procurement system.
       Include complaints handling related to fiduciary issues under the                   PAP – Action#1
 2
       comprehensive complaint handling and redress system of WSSD.
       Strengthen institutional capacity in terms of staffing, staff training and          DLI#2
 3     orientation, review of rules/guidelines, and simplification of procedures.
       Address critical issues and improve the effectiveness of audit.
       Governance and Accountability Issues
       Strengthen/codify/formalize WSSD’s vigilance function and codify, formalize         PAP – Action#1
 4
       and consolidate information on vigilance issues.
       Make the grievance redress mechanism (E-Pani) more accessible and                   PAP – Action#1
 5     comprehensive, and allow for the capture and handling of allegations of fraud
       and corruption.

                             Table 5: Fiduciary Risk and Mitigation Measures
Risk                                           Mitigation Measure

MJP’s accounting is on a single-entry          Issuing MJP’s fiduciary manual, which will ensure use of
basis and does not have a defined              Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, including the use
accounting framework/manual.                   of a double-entry accounting system. System study and
                                               development of manual (Year 1); Revised system rolled out
                                               and ability to generate entity financial statements (Year 3).
MJP audits regularly delayed and audits        Improve timeliness of MJP accounting and audit; create a
contain recurring observations.                taskforce to address past audit observations.
Variation across districts in terms of         Uniformity in procedure – ensure adequate fiduciary
procedure for release of funds (ZP to          coverage across the state.
GP).
Additional layers of review at the ZP          Simplification of procedure and empowerment of GPs.
level leading to delays in payments to
contractors by GPs.
Reporting of GP level expenditure based        Expenditure data captured on a systematic and regular basis.
on releases by the ZPs.
Lack of staff capacity at lower levels,        Mandatory use of e-procurement, with already provided IT
coupled with multiplicity of instructions,     staff for handholding and the development of the Manual to
and delays in procurement process and          assure consistency and predictability for staff as well as the
outcomes.                                      bidding community.
Governance issues, including petty             Mandatory use of e-procurement and establishment of a
corruption, collusive practices, etc., with    complaint handling and redress management system.
no clear dispute resolution mechanism,
could impact the integrity of the process.
Lack of independent control and                Mandatory procurement planning at state and entity levels,
oversight mechanisms could lead to             integration of procurement MIS as part of the integrated

                                                      -    16   -
inefficient procurement management,        M&E system and an annual post review of procurement
leakages and losses.                       contracts awarded.
GP audits delayed (only after incurring    Bring GP audits early on in the scheme cycle and regulate the
90% of scheme expenditure) and not         audit process by defining ToRs and adherence to standards.
standardized (no clear ToR for audit).
Fraud and corruption: lack of a            The WSSD vigilance function and its grievance redress
formalized vigilance function at the       system (E-Pani) will be strengthened. WSSD vigilance
department level; beneficiaries lack       function will be codified, formalized and consolidated. E-
access to grievance redress mechanism.     Pani will be made more accessible and comprehensive, and
                                           allow for the capture and handling of allegations of fraud and
                                           corruption.


                              Table 6: Indicators - Financial Management
Risk                       Performance Indicator          Baseline                   Recommended Standard

Reporting of               Accurate and uniform           Single-entry system of     A fiduciary manual which
expenditure at MJP         reporting of                   accounting and no          ensures use of Generally
level.                     expenditure.                   framework to guide         Accepted Accounting
                                                          financial management.      Principles, including use
                                                                                     of double-entry
                                                                                     accounting system.
Reporting of program       Expenditure reported           Reporting of GP level      Expenditure data captured
expenditure at GP level.   based on payments              expenditure based on       through ‘Priasoft’ or
                           made by the VWSC/GP.           releases by ZPs.           similar software.
District-level audit.      Streamlining district          Separate audit reports     Specific audit ToR and
                           level audit.                   issued for different GoI   consolidation of Audit
                                                          schemes.                   Reports.
Audit framework at GP      Standardization and            GP audit not guided by     Specified ToR made
level.                     uniformity in GP audits.       any framework.             mandatory, including
                                                                                     adherence to the Institute
                                                                                     of Chartered Accountants
                                                                                     of India guidelines.


                                   Table 7: Indicators - Procurement
Risk                       Performance Indicator            Baseline                 Recommended Standard

Procurement plan.          Implementation agencies          None of the agencies     Annual procurement plans
                           prepare procurement              prepares a               are prepared.
                           plans.                           comprehensive
                                                            procurement plan.
Use of e-procurement.      All procurement is               60 days                  Timely conclusion of
                           undertaken through e-gp                                   contracts within initial
                           system and time taken for                                 validity period; lower
                           procurement process.                                      repeat bidding; and lower
                                                                                     bid cancellations.
                           Checking GoM and World Not always done.                   Done in all cases before
                           Bank debarment list                                       award.
                                                      -    17   -
                           before contract award.
Average number of          Number. of tenders sold       2 bidders                 Improvement in level of
bidders.                   and bids received.                                      participation and
                                                                                   competition.
Number of contracts        Cost increases due to         Contracts not             Quality of process,
with cost increases over   amendments or change          completed within          documents, specifications;
award amount.              orders.                       awarded amount.           quality of competition.
Processing of contractor   Average time taken for        70% payments are          Improved efficiency of
payments.                  release of payment from       made within the           contractor payments.
                           date of validation of         agreed timelines in
                                                         contracts.
                           Measurement Book and
                           date of bill raised by
                           contractor.
Contract                   Average time taken for        20% of contracts are      Improved time efficiency
administration/time        completion of project         delayed from the          in project execution.
over-runs.                 from date of award of         contract duration
                           contract and difference       stated in the contract.
                           between estimated date of
                           completion as per contract
                           and completion date.




                                                     -   18   -
