                                                                                     87056
 Capacity Building for Local Treasurers on the Statement of Receipts and Expenditures System
                  Decentralization and Local Government (DIALOG) Trust Fund

            Summary Report – Capacity Building Program for Local Treasurers

I.       Introduction

A. Background

     In 2008, the Bureau of Local Government Finance (BLGF) completed substantial technical
     reforms to the Statement of Income and Expenses (SIE) system, which had been the
     standard financial performance reporting system for local government units (LGUs) since its
     launch in 2001. Supported by technical assistance from the Asian Development Bank (ADB),
     the revised Statement of Receipts and Expenditures (SRE) system was designed to
     harmonize with the Commission on Audit-New Government Accounting System (COA-NGAS)
     accounts and to incorporate additional data requirements to evaluate the fiscal capacity,
     level of debt, borrowing capacity, creditworthiness and overall financial performance of
     each LGU. BLGF circulated a new SRE manual in 2009 to guide the local treasurers in
     implementing the new reporting system. Beginning in 2009, the reports produced by the
     LGUs reflected the new SRE reporting format.

     The SRE generally conforms to the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). It
     reports current year expenditures of the LGUs from both current and continuing
     appropriations, and provides specific data on the level of local capital outlays. More
     importantly, the system allows the BLGF to review the flows of funds and fund balances of
     the LGUs, facilitating improved monitoring of the performance of local treasurers. With the
     goal of harmonizing charts of accounts across local government fiscal reports, the new
     system now requires local treasurers to utilize data from documents and forms prepared by
     other local fiscal officer, particularly the local accountants and budget officers.

     Recent changes made by COA to its charts of accounts have led to difficulties for local
     treasurers in accurately reconciling the SRE reports with the trial balances of the local
     accountants. Discrepancies have been noted between the SRE and the COA-NGAS accounts
     in terms of grouping, classification, and treatment of certain accounts, timing of recording
     transactions, and the use of terminologies. The new system also requires local treasurers to
     maintain comprehensive SRE databases for their respective LGUs, which is something that
     the previous system did not require. Hence, for the SRE System to produce consistent,
     accurate, and timely LGU financial reports, technical assistance is needed to strengthen the
     capacities of local treasurers to fully adopt the new requirements and processes.

     In response to this need, BLGF developed a capacity building program to support
     improvements to the accuracy, consistency, and timeliness of sub-national fiscal data
     reporting by: a) strengthening the capacities of local treasurers to adopt the requirements
     of the new SRE System; and b) strengthening the capacities of the BLGF central and regional
     offices to effectively provide correct and timely guidance to local treasurers in implementing
     the SRE system.
   In support of BLGF’s efforts to improve sub-national financial reporting, the Decentralization
   and Local Government (DIALOG) Trust Fund implemented the Capacity Building of Local
   Treasurers on the SRE System project on March to July 2012 to assist BLGF in implementing
   a comprehensive capacity building program through the following:

   1. Production of Training Manuals and References – This included the reproduction of the
      SRE manual entry guide and training guidelines for distribution to local treasurers and
      BLGF central and regional offices.

   2. Capacity Building of BLGF Staff – This included the implementation of capacity building
      workshops for central and regional office staff to: a) provide guidance to local treasurers
      on the completion of the SRE reports; and b) monitor the compliance of local treasurers
      in the implementation of the new SRE system.

   3. Capacity Building of Local Treasurers – This included the implementation of capacity
      building workshops for local treasurers from provinces and cities on the preparation of
      the quarterly SRE reports. Importantly, officers from LGU accounting and budgeting
      offices were included as participants in the workshops to ensure the harmonized
      adoption of the new SRE reports across the fiscal offices of the LGUs.

   The support given to the BLGF under this component extended to the local fiscal officers of
   provincial and city LGUs. BLGF has committed to cascade the training to the remaining
   municipal treasurers by leveraging on the trained regional BLGF staff, provincial treasurers,
   and city treasurers.

B. Development Partner Support

   The DIALOG Trust Fund is a World Bank-managed trust fund that was established in January
   2010 to serve as a catalyst for furthering reforms under the Philippine Development Forum,
   Working Group on Decentralization and Local Government (PDF-WG). The DIALOG Trust
   Fund provides a mechanism for pooling resources from various development partners to
   support the implementation of the work-plan of the PDF-WG. The trust fund has been
   funded with initial contributions from the Australian Agency for International Development
   (AusAID) and the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA).

   This Capacity Building of Local Treasurers on the SRE System is strongly consistent with the
   first development objective of the DIALOG Trust Fund, namely, to “ Accelerate
   decentralization and local governance reforms in strengthening local public finance and
   management, improving overall LGU performance, and strengthening the legal and
   institutional environment for local governance; through capacity development and analytical
   activities.” The project seeks to support important reforms in local government fiscal
   reporting that are expected to strengthen: a) the institutional environment for LGU
   accountability through an improved monitoring system for LGU revenues and expenditures;
   and b) the capacity for LGUs to more effectively manage public finances.

   This project further supports the second development objective of the trust fund, that is, to
   “Intensify government and development partner support for decentralization and local
   governance reforms, through improved coordination and harmonization of resources and
      systems” by building on technical reforms already undertaken by the BLGF with the
      technical assistance of ADB and by following through with the comprehensive roll-out of the
      new SRE System.

II.       Summary of Capacity Building Program Implementation

A. Workshop Goals

      While the SRE system was designed to conform to the financial statements prepared under
      the NGAS, the revised SRE reporting format includes new account titles that have no
      equivalent accounts in NGAS. The inclusion of these new account titles was necessary in
      order to provide additional information and to establish financial indicators for economic
      forecasts, to evaluate the LGUs’ operating performance, and to respond to other needs and
      demands of the various users and stakeholders of the SRE report. Some of the SRE account
      titles were also modified to allow for accurate description of the transactions.1 Likewise, the
      preparation and presentation of SRE reports were designed to conform to the principles of
      the IFRS and the Philippine Financial Reporting Standards (PFRS).

      The SRE is widely used by various government offices to evaluate and monitor LGU financial
      performance, as the basis for LGU loan and grant applications, for statistical analysis, and for
      the analysis of revenue collections and borrowings vital in decision making processes. The
      SRE is also used by the Senate and Congress for legislation, by private financial institutions
      for credit application, and by development partners.

      With the goal of harmonizing charts of accounts across local government fiscal reports, the
      capacity building workshops were designed to train a team of local government treasurers,
      accountants, and budget officers to understand the different reports required and the
      accounts and terminologies used in the process of reconciling the SRE accounts with the
      COA-NGAS accounts. The workshops sought to promote uniformity in accomplishing the
      SRE reports among LGUs as well as to improve the quality of the SRE report in terms of
      efficiency and timeliness of submission.2

B. Workshop Coverage and Participants

      The capacity building program targeted the local treasurers, accountants, and budget
      officers for all the cities and provinces of the country as the participants for the workshops.
      A total of nine regional workshops were organized, clustering between eight and 22 cities
      and provinces per workshop. Consequently, BLGF will cascade the training to the remaining
      municipal treasurers, accountants and budget officers, taking advantage of the trained
      regional BLGF staff and provincial and city treasurers, accountants, and budget officers.

1
  Specifically, the following are the items included in the new SRE format: a) collection for advance
payment of real property tax; b) supplemental budgets approved by the Sanggunian Bayan during the
year; c) other non-income receipts; d) other non-operating expenditures; and e) payments for
expenditures arising from continuing appropriations.
2
  As directed by Sections 352 and 315 of the Local Government Code, the SRE should be posted within 30
                                                                                                        th
days from the end of each fiscal year and the submission of detailed SREs should be on or before the 15
day of July of each year.
      Appendix 1 provides the composition of BLGF staff for each of the nine workshops. BLGF’s
      detailed plan for cascading the training to the remaining municipal treasurers, accountants,
      and budget officers can be found in Appendix 2.

  C. Workshop Design

      The three-day workshop program was focused on harmonizing the SRE accounts of the local
      treasurer with the COA-NGAS accounts of the local accountant and the accounts of the local
      budget officer. The training also emphasized the importance of quality and timely
      submissions of the SRE. The first day of each workshop was spent discussing an overview of
      the SRE, the changes it has undergone, its present characteristics, and its possible uses for
      the public sector as well as for the private sector and development partners. On the second
      and third days of the workshop, the participants were coached on the process of reconciling
      the latest SRE account of the local treasurer with the COA-NGAS account of the local
      accountant. Each workshop culminated in the practical application of the training wherein
      local treasurers were tasked to prepare harmonized SRE reports that reconcile the SRE
      accounts with those of the local accountant’s COA-NGAS accounts. The local treasurers
      were asked to present their workshop outputs to their fellow participants and both the
      workshop facilitators and other participants were invited to provide feedback.

      A sample copy of the three-day program can be found in the Appendix 4. Appendix 5
      contains all the presentations and training materials utilized during the workshops.

  D. Summary of Workshop Implementation

      The first of the nine workshops was held from March 20 to 22, 2012, at the Graceland Estate
      and Country Club in Tayabas, Quezon, while the last of the workshops was held from July 10
      to 12, 2012, at the Oasis Hotel in Clark, Pampanga. The list of workshop clusters, locations,
      implementation dates, and the number of LGUs follows below.

                                                                               Target Number of LGUs
     Workshop Clusters                    Locations                Dates
                                                                               Provinces     Cities
Cluster 1: Regions I & CAR        Baguio City (Hotel Supreme)    June 26-28        10          11
Cluster 2: Regions II & III         Manila (Bayview Hotel)       June 13-15        12          16
                                 Tayabas, Quezon (Graceland
Cluster 3: Regions IV-A & IV-B                                   March 20-22      10          16
                                   Estates and Country Club)
Cluster 4: Regions V & VIII       Manila (Bayview Park Hotel)     June 5-7        12          14
Cluster 5: Region VI              Manila (Bayview Park Hotel)    May 22-24        6           16
Cluster 6: Region VII            Cebu City (Cebu Grand Hotel)    May 9-11         4           16
Cluster 7: Regions IX, X &
                                 Cebu City (Cebu Grand Hotel)     May 8-10        16          21
CARAGA
Cluster 8: Regions XI & XII       Davao City (Apo View Hotel)    April 24-26      10           12
Cluster 9: NCR                   Clark, Pampanga (Oasis Hotel)   July 10-12       0            16
                                                                  TOTAL           80          138

      Of the 138 cities and 80 provinces in the country, all but two cities (Laoag City and Vigan
      City) and three provinces (Batanes, Siquijor, and Sultan Kudarat) sent representatives to the
      workshop. Given the target participants composed of local treasurers, accountants, and
      budget officers, the capacity building program expected 645 participants in total (net of the
     five LGUs that were unable to send participants). However, only 459 of the targeted
     participants were eventually able to attend, representing an attendance rate of 71.5
     percent. The workshops were also attended by an additional 643 participants, the majority
     of whom were deputy officers and staff of the LGU fiscal offices. These additional
     participants also included 15 provincial governors, vice governors, and governors-in-charge,
     as well as 22 city mayors and vice mayors.3 The following table provides a summary of the
     participants from each region.

                       Number of LGUs                Expected                            Number of
                                                                     Actual Target
    Region                                            Target                             Additional
               Province      City       TOTAL                        Participants
                                                    Participants                        Participants
          I        4            7          11             33               26                57
         II        4            3           7             24               21                29
        III        7           13          20             60               49                75
      IV - A       5           14          19             57               21                58
      IV - B       5            2           7             21               7                 35
        V          6            7          13             39               11                57
        VI         6           16          22             66               54                73
        VII        3           16          19             57               51                27
       VIII        6            7          13             39               17                47
        IX         6            6          12             36               26                18
        X          5            9          14             42               41                21
        XI         4            6          10             30               23                10
        XII        5            6          11             33               26                20
       CAR         6            2           8             24               24                33
    CARAGA         5            6          11             33               25                22
                                  4
       NCR                    17           17             51               37                61
     TOTAL        77          137         214            642              459               643

     The ratio of actual local treasurers, accountants and budget officers to the expected number
     of target participants was lowest for Region 5, where the actual number of participants was
     just 11 compared to the 39 expected target participants, yielding a ratio of 28 percent. This
     was followed closely by Regions IV-B and IV-A with attendance percentages of 33 percent
     and 37 percent, respectively. On the other hand, CARAGA had a perfect attendance and this
     was closely followed by Region X, with a 98 percent attendance of local treasurers,
     accountants, and budget officers. Please refer to Appendix 3 for a more detailed
     consolidated list of participants.

E. Summary of Workshop Outputs

     Of the 214 LGUs that participated in the capacity building workshop, only 97 LGUs were able
     to successfully reconcile the SRE accounts with the COA-NGAS accounts, representing a
     success rate of just 45.3 percent. The shares of LGUs that were able to successfully
     reconcile the accounts ranged from a low of 29.4 percent for the NCR cluster to a high of
     68.4 percent for the Region I and CAR cluster. The table below provides a summary of the



3
  The project funded the attendance of the local treasurers, accountants, and budget officers for the
entire three-day workshop along with the attendance of provincial and city local executives. Additional
participants from the LGU fiscal offices were funded by the LGUs.
4
  The municipality of Pateros was included in the workshop for NCR LGUs.
   performance of the local treasurers in successfully preparing the final outputs for the
   workshops.

                                                    Number of LGUs      Percentage of LGUs
                                    Number of
        Workshop Clusters                           able to correctly     able to correctly
                                      LGUs
                                                   reconcile accounts   reconcile accounts
     Cluster 1: Regions I &
                                        19                13                  68.4%
     CAR
     Cluster 2: Regions II & III        27                 9                  33.3%
     Cluster 3: Regions IV-A &
                                        26                12                  46.2%
     IV-B
     Cluster 4: Regions V & VIII        26                16                  61.5%
     Cluster 5: Region VI               22                8                   36.4%
     Cluster 6: Region VII              19                7                   36.8%
     Cluster 7: Regions IX, X &
                                        37                13                  35.1%
     CARAGA
     Cluster 8: Regions XI & XII         21               14                  66.7%
     Cluster 9: NCR                      17               5                   29.4%
               TOTAL                    214               97                  45.3%

   Many of the reconciling problems stemmed from differences in the treatment of accounts.
   It became clear to the local treasurers after undertaking the exercise, especially those who
   recently took on their positions, that SREs were cash-based accounts and, as such, could
   vary greatly from the accounts of the local accountants. Common reconciling items between
   the SRE accounts and the COA-NGAS accounts were depreciation, bank credit without
   receipt, bank charges, bank interest, real property tax collection differences due to time
   period treatment, and inventory adjustments. For a more detailed list of workshop outputs,
   please see Appendix 8.

F. Summary of Workshop Evaluation

   BLGF administered evaluation forms for the participants at the end of each workshop. The
   table below shows a perfect submission rate for all clusters except for Clusters 5, 6, and 7.

                                       Number of           Number of
                                                                               Submission
      Workshop Clusters            Participants Given   Evaluation Forms
                                                                               Percentage
                                   Evaluation Forms        Submitted
   Cluster 1: Regions I & CAR              105                105                100.0%
   Cluster 2: Regions II & III              96                 96                100.0%
   Cluster 3: Regions IV-A &
                                          78                   78                100.0%
   IV-B
   Cluster 4: Regions V & VIII            105                  105               100.0%
   Cluster 5: Region VI                    66                   54                81.8%
   Cluster 6: Region VII                   60                   48                80.0%
   Cluster 7: Regions IX, X &
                                          111                  108                97.3%
   CARAGA
   Cluster 8: Regions XI & XII             66                   66               100.0%
   Cluster 9: NCR                          87                   87               100.0%
              TOTAL                       774                  747                96.5%

   Overall, the participants gave good evaluations for the workshop, with the evaluations
   averaging 8.78 on a 10-point scale. The four main aspects of the workshop – Facilitation,
   Course Design, Program Coordination, and Training Materials – received uniformly high
   ratings, with Facilitation receiving the highest average rating of 8.86. A summary of the
evaluation forms can be found below. Appendix 6 contains a more detailed report on each
workshop cluster while a copy of the evaluation form can be found in Appendix 7.

                                  POINTS TO RATE                                  AVERAGE
                                           FACILITATION:
       1. The lecturer/facilitator was well-prepared and displayed mastery
       of the subject matter                                                        8.89
       2. The lecturer/facilitator effectively motivated our group’s                8.87
       3. The lecturer/facilitator communicated effectively with us                 8.88
       4. The lecturer/facilitator effectively used the training                    8.81
       5. Efforts were made to relate the subject/topic to real life situations     8.84
                              FACILITATION AVERAGE                                  8.86
                                          COURSE DESIGN:
       1. The program’s objective were clearly stated and easy to
       understand                                                                   8.81
       2. The topics were complete, relevant and applicable to my specific
       needs                                                                        8.78
       3. The sequencing of the topics displayed good flow, logic and
       organization                                                                 8.75
       4. The methodologies used enhanced my understanding of the
       subject matter                                                               8.78
       5. The time allotted for each module was appropriate                         8.77
                            COURSE DESIGN AVERAGE                                   8.78
                                   PROGRAM COORDINATION:
       1. Prior to my attendance, I was fully informed of the program’s
       schedule, venue, objective, description and requirements                     8.77
       2. The house rules given clarified our expectations regarding the
       conduct of the program                                                       8.82
       3. Extra effort was exerted to satisfy the special request of our
       group’s members.                                                             8.72
       4. The venue was conducive and appropriate to the methodologies
       used                                                                         8.79
       5. Efforts were made to determine the effectiveness of the program
       and its applicability to my work                                             8.91
                      PROGRAM COORDINATION AVERAGE                                  8.80
                                      TRAINING MATERIALS:
       1. All training materials satisfactorily addressed the program’s
       objectives                                                                   8.71
       2. All training materials were properly prepared, well-organized and
       user-friendly                                                                8.70
       3. The contents of all training materials were up-to-date, accurate
       and error-free                                                               8.61
       4. All needed training materials were complete and issued on time            8.74
       5. The design used for hand-outs or manuals looked professional,
       and their materials were of high quality                                     8.71
                        TRAINING MATERIALS AVERAGE                                  8.69
                                OVERALL AVERAGE                                     8.78


The high ratings from the evaluation forms were reinforced by the qualitative feedback from
the participants, which supported these results. Comments included the following:
“articulate and effective resource speakers and facilitators,” “resource materials are timely
and complete,” and “course design is clear and understandable.” Participants agreed that
the workshop was very timely given the practical experiences of the participants in
encountering differences in the treatment of accounts by the treasury and the accounting
offices.
       In terms of areas for improvement, activity reports indicated that the participants
       commented on the need to provide hard copies of the forms used for reconciliation. The
       participants also felt that the facilitators should find better ways to motivate them to
       improve their reconciliation output instead of relying on the non-credible threat of not
       letting them go home from the workshop.

III.       Lessons from Capacity Building Program

A. Quality Reporting

       Most of the SREs presented by the workshop participants were rejected, and returned to
       them for correction and resubmission. This was a necessary learning experience as the
       workshop helped the budget officers and accountants understand the importance of the
       SRE, what it was about, and what the treasurers needed from them to be able to submit
       quality and timely SREs. Treasurers also understood the need for continuity. With the
       present turnover rate, the treasurers felt the need to make sure that what they learned
       from workshops such as these was passed on to their successors. This highlighted the need
       for a clear and systematic transfer of knowledge and information from one generation of
       treasurers to the next. There was also a need for treasurers to be well trained and
       knowledgeable of the definitions and the nuances of the SRE accounts. The workshops also
       raised an important question regarding the technical skills of treasurers – whether or not
       the treasurers possessed the technical skills needed to efficiently and effectively implement
       the new SRE system.

B. Checks and Balances

       According to the SRE Manual prepared by the BLGF, SRE reports done by LGU treasurers are
       checked and verified twice – first by the BLGF regional office and second by the BLGF central
       office. If either office discovers an error or a discrepancy in the report, the report is sent
       back to the LGU for revision. Below is a flowchart that indicates how the SRE is prepared.
In many LGUs, treasurers made use of encoders in the preparation and submission of their
SRE reports. The problem with this system of relying on encoders was that it lacked the
proper checks and balances. This problem extended to the provincial levels where reports
were automatically submitted once received, again without the proper checks and balances.
According to the BLGF manual, SRE reports are supposed to be verified by the BLGF regional
offices and approved by the BLGF central office. If reports are rejected either by the BLGF
regional office or the BLGF central office, reports are sent back to the LGU for revision.
However, not all reports are checked. As a result of the sheer number of reports submitted,
      the BLGF central office randomly draws SREs for checking. In the future, LGUs that habitually
      submit incorrect or inaccurate SREs will be asked to submit a reconciliation output.

C. Coordinated Effort

      A coordinated effort is needed among the treasurers, accountants and budget officers.
      There appeared to be a lack of clear and effective coordination, which affected the accurate
      preparation of SREs. One important effect of the workshop is that it has successfully fulfilled
      the need to inform the accountants and the budget officers about the requirements of the
      treasurers in the creation and submission of their SREs. For the treasurers, the workshop
      has impressed upon them the importance and urgency of their SRE reports. Overall, by
      bringing together the treasurers, accountants and budget officers, the workshop was able to
      make that crucial step to bringing about an awareness of the necessity of closer
      collaboration and coordination among them.

IV.       Recommendations

A. Proper Checks and Balances

      One method to check the accuracy of the treasurers’ report is to recommend an annual use
      of the Statement of SRE reconciliation for all LGUs. As suggested by the BLGF, LGUs that
      habitually submit inaccurate SRE reports will be asked to submit the Statement of SRE
      reconciliation. This will serve the twin purpose of: (1) ensuring that the treasurers’ accounts
      are correct, while (2) providing an incentive for accurate reporting.

B. Seal of Good Housekeeping

      Another incentive for quality and timely submission of the SRE reports is the Seal of Good
      Housekeeping (SGH), an award given by the Department of Interior and Local Government
      (DILG) to deserving local government units that get high scores on planning, budgeting,
      revenue mobilization, and financial management, among other categories. One of the
      requirements for the award of the Seal of Good Housekeeping is the accurate and timely
      submission of the SRE reports. However, when the DILG validates the requirements for SGH,
      the validation is done at the LGU level and not with BLGF. This may lead to misinformation
      regarding the actual submission of the SRE reports. There can be instances when the LGU
      presents an SRE report to the DILG, which, in fact, has not yet been submitted to the DILG.
      Hence, there is a need for more stringent qualifications for the awarding of the SGH. To
      date 110 out of 138 cities and 70 out of 81 provinces have been awarded the SGH.

C. Future Training

      Another important step is the cascading of the capacity building to municipal treasurers,
      accountants and budget officers not covered by the capacity building workshops. The
      support to BLGF only extends to the capacity building of provincial and city treasurers. BLGF
      will cascade the training to the remaining municipal treasurers by taking advantage of the
      trained regional BLGF staff and the provincial and city treasurers, accounts and budget
      officers. BLGF’s detailed plan on how to cascade the training to the remaining municipal
      treasurers, accountants and budget officers can also be found in the appendix.
D. Continuity

   It is imperative to create a system of continuity in the treasury department. Outgoing
   treasurers should not be cleared until all materials from all workshops attended have been
   handed over and properly explained to their successors. The workshop has brought to light
   actual examples of treasurers who were not aware that an SRE manual existed. This may
   have resulted from a lack of continuity of information and knowledge from one generation
   of treasurers to the next. The importance of a system of continuity will be further
   highlighted when the soon-to-be-rolled-out enhanced eSRE system is implemented.
                                    List of Appendices

Appendix 1 – Composition List of BLGF Staff

Appendix 2 – Memo to All Regional Directors Regarding the Capacity Building of BLGF
Regional Offices to Municipalities

Appendix 3 – Detailed Consolidated List of Participants

Appendix 4 – Workshop Program

Appendix 5 – Training Materials

Appendix 6 – Detailed Evaluation Report

Appendix 7 – Evaluation Form

Appendix 8 – Workshop Outputs
