                                                                                        87100

                   IMPROVING THE RESPONSE TO HIV/AIDS IN SOUTH ASIA

                                          (P131032)

BACKGROUND

While overall national HIV prevalence in South Asian countries remains low, the size of the
regional population means low prevalence translates into large absolute numbers of people
living with HIV. Low national prevalence also masks higher HIV prevalence and incidence rates
in certain geographical areas and among key populations at higher risk. The majority of new HIV
infections are concentrated among population groups at higher risk including people who inject
drugs, female and male sex workers and their clients, men who have sex with men and
transgender people.

The Bank is committed to achieving MDG Goal 6 of halting and beginning to reverse the spread
of HIV by 2015. The Bank is also committed to helping countries achieve universal health
coverage – including access to HIV treatment. Over the past two decades the Bank has
harnessed its multi-sectoral reach to work across relevant sectors to improve health and reduce
the risk of HIV. Recently, at the opening of the 2012 International AIDS Conference in DC, World
Bank President Jim Kim pledged that "the World Bank will work tirelessly….to drive the AIDS
fight forward until we win".

Today the Bank supports HIV prevention activities in a stand-alone investment project in India
(US$255 million) as well as through health sector programs in Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan and
Afghanistan.

As one of the ten cosponsoring organizations of UNAIDS, the Bank works together with other
cosponsors and the UNAIDS Secretariat under the UNAIDS Unified Budget, Results, and
Accountability Framework (UBRAF). The UBRAF is an instrument to catalyze country level action
against AIDS within a broader development context while maximizing the coherence,
coordination and impact of the UN’s response to AIDS. For CY2012-2013, the South Asia Region
received US$531,000 of UBRAF funding to address our objective of “improving and accelerating
the response to HIV, tailored to the epidemic dynamics of each country in the South Asia region
by coordinating and supporting AAA, providing strategic TA to operations, fostering
internal/external partnerships, and sharing knowledge and tools on HIV.”

OUTPUTS

A variety of activities were supported under this task over calendar years 2012-2013:

  i.   Pakistan: The Naz Male Health Alliance (NHMA), Lahore implemented the project
       “Capacity building of MSM/TG Groups to Prevent HIV and Promote Sexual H ealth
       amongst MSM/TG in Pakistan”. The project aimed to develop the capacity of NMHA in
       the key and interlinked areas of rights’ awareness, promotion and empowerment. The
       assistance provided by the World Bank through this project helped to create a more
       sustainable and effective response to improving sexual and reproductive health and
       further reducing the spread of HIV among MSM and TG populations in Pakistan. The
       project had two components: 1) Strengthen technical support ability of NMHA staff and
       its partner organizations through participation in exposure visits, training programs and
       conferences in order to improve NMHA’s capacity to provide technical assistance. The
       trained staff were better able to provide technical support to groups funded under the
       Global Fund’s project DIVA; 2) Develop educational and technical ability of the trans-
       gender community. This component focused on basic literacy training for trans-gender
       (TG) people. TG specific training materials were developed in the local language. In total,
       98 TG were trained.

ii.    India: The University of Manitoba and the Karnataka Health Promotion Trust
       implemented the Sabala project (ongoing) in the South Indian state of Karnataka. The
       goal of Sabala is to improve the quality of life of adolescent girls from vulnerable and
       marginalized communities in two districts of Karnataka by delaying their marriage,
       sexual debut, and entry into sex work. Project objectives include increasing the
       percentage of adolescent girls entering formal secondary education and increasing the
       percentage of adolescent girls that continue secondary education until Standard 10. The
       project addresses structural barriers and builds capacity of schools to positively
       influence gender socialization and roles. The project leveraged Government of India
       funds through the Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls.


iii.   India: The report “Charting a Programmatic Roadmap for Sexual Minority Groups in
       India” was drafted and disseminated. The report goes beyond the narrow confines of
       health problems confronting gender and sexual minorities and develops a fuller
       understanding of the barriers that confine their realization of civil liberties and inclusion
       in terms of ability, opportunity and dignity. The report has galvanized discussion within
       the Bank regarding rights and the economic cost of exclusion of sexual and gender
       minorities. Further work in that area is now being financed by the Nordic Trust Fund.


iv.    India: In an effort to learn from India’s success in preventing HIV among specific
       populations through the use of targeted interventions (TIs), the Bank undertook a case
       study. The study analyzes the process of adapting TIs for HIV prevention among female
       sex workers (FSWs) in the North and South states in response to changing contextual
       factors. The case study identifies the implementation “binding constraints” for
       prevention of HIV among FSWs in two sets of states, collects the evidence generated
       and used for the decision making that led to the adaptation of the TIs, describes the
       process of adaptation, including the role of different players, during implementation,
       and identifies the enabling factors and drivers as well as the lessons learned by
       comparing the implementation processes and results between the two sets of states.
 v.    Afghanistan: In cooperation with the Ministry of Education, a vocational training
       program was developed for 194 injecting drug users (124 male and 70 female), most of
       whom were enrolled in a pilot program of opioid substitution therapy (OST) in Kabul.
       The trainees developed general life skills and specific vocational training in the areas of
       sewing, tailoring, carpet weaving, embroidery, beautician, house wiring, welding and
       plumbing. Unfortunately, due to lack of cooperation of the Ministry of Counter-
       Narcotics the OST pilot itself (not financed by UBRAF) could not be scaled up and instead
       was discontinued when its original financing dried up.


 vi.   Nepal: The Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity (SOGI) project was implemented by
       the Blue Diamond Society (BDS). It addressed exclusion and bullying of LGBTI people in
       educational facilities. BDS developed and field tested a toolkit which was used for a
       training of trainers (TOT) of 176 teachers. Altogether 30 trainings were conducted for a
       total of 600 teachers trained from different districts of Nepal.


vii.   Regional: The Naz Male Health Alliance-Lahore organized the participation of 27
       MSM/TG from seven South Asian countries in the 11th International Congress on AIDS
       in Asia and the Pacific (ICAAP 11) in Bangkok, November 2013. These participants
       contributed pro-actively to the success of ICAAP 11 through:
               MSM preconference sessions
               E-poster presentations
               Oral presentations in various sessions to promote inclusion of sexual
                 minorities in HIV programming across the region
               Contributions and representation at LGBT booth organized by APCOM at the
                 conference venue
               Moderating the session of virtual participation of TG/MSM youth from
                 Pakistan in a session organized by Youth Voices Count.


The deliverables for each of the above-mentioned activities have been filed in WBDocs under
P131032 and TF012430. They are also uploaded in the Operations Portal under P131032.

LESSONS

The key lessons learnt include:

                 There is significant variability in the capacity of national civil society
                  organizations across the region. As these are the organizations that are
                  closest to – and often members of – population groups at higher risk of HIV
                  infection, it is important to note they may not have much experience or skill
                  in proposal or report writing or monitoring and evaluation. Furthermore,
                  they may face financial constraints that make it difficult for them to work on
                  a fully reimbursable basis.
                  Stigma and discrimination remain important barriers to accessing treatment
                   and services.
                  There are important cross-cutting areas and scope for inter-sector and inter-
                   ministerial collaboration (Home Affairs/Prisons, Social Protection, Narcotics,
                   etc.)
                  There is demand for south-south learning and collaboration within the region
                   and with south-east Asia.

These lessons are being incorporated into our work in various ways. In Nepal, an independent,
third party firm was hired to provide monitoring and evaluation support and assistance to civil
society organizations who are implementing HIV targeted interventions for key populations on
behalf of the government. In India, the Bank is working together with the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare and the National AIDS Control Organization to establish a center that will
coordinate the dissemination of knowledge generated by the national HIV program with an
emphasis on south-south exchanges. In Pakistan, the recently approved Punjab Health Sector
Reform Project has a subcomponent which finances the fight against HIV. The project will likely
work with the NMHA for the implementation of this component. In Afghanistan, vocational
training will become an integral part of all programs with groups at high risk of HIV infection.

IMPACT

It is still too early to assess impact in terms of outcomes of the activities supported under this
task, and in some cases the work is still on-going (i.e. the Sabala project in India). However, in
Pakistan our work with the Naz Male Health Alliance enhances the implementation of the
GFATM funded DIVA project, which had no fund allocation for capacity building of Naz. The
UBRAF funding for Afghanistan further incentivized the IDU to remain compliant with the OST,
according to the implementing NGO (Médecins du Monde).


COST AND TASK TEAM

The total amount of the Trust Fund was US$531,000. The core task team included Kees
Kostermans (Lead Public Health Specialist), Phoebe Folger (Operations Officer), and Alejandro
Welch (Team Assistant). Country specific inputs were received from Sameh El-Saharty (Sr.
Health Specialist), Amith Nagaraj (Operations Officer), Inaam Ul Haq (Lead Health Specialist),
Manav Bhattarai (Health Specialist), Tawab Hashemi (Health Specialist), Iffat Mahmud
(Operations Officer), Ghulam Sayed (Senior Health Specialist), and Aliya Kashif (Health
Specialist).
