                                       87300




Textbook Development in Low Income Countries:
A Guide for Policy and Practice

By

Richard A. B. Crabbe & Mary Nyingi
with Helen Abadzi
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World
Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.



Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of
its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as
full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the
Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                                                                       2
Textbook Development in Low Income Countries:
A Guide for Policy and Practice




                                            3
Introduction

Since 2003, over 220 million books have been distributed in primary schools in GPE countries.1
Despite this, a few years ago, a World Bank study highlighted the fact that there simply aren't
enough textbooks for most students in Africa, and what is available is too expensive.2 At the
secondary level, this is a greater challenge. This e-course responds to this challenge.

The main objective of the this course is to equip anyone in a position to advise, administer or
design a book provision project with the necessary knowledge in order to make the appropriate
input and right decisions. The focus throughout is on how to get affordable books to school
children when and where needed. It is designed to be a practical resource that covers the key
issues encountered in textbook provision, ranging from authorship through national publishing
infrastructure to pricing, and distribution.

The course is organized in 12 modules under four sections—Understanding the Textbook
Industry; Book Acquisition Strategies; Distribution Strategies; and Policy and Practice. It is by no
means prescriptive. Rather, it draws on examples from around the world to highlight missteps
as well as successes. Each module may be taken on its own or as part of the full course. In this
way, practitioners can use this as needed for individual study or in group format. Further, each
module ends with an exercise to challenge participants to engage with the content according to
their context.

Participants will be provided with functional knowledge of the workings of the book industry
and its role in supporting learning and education. This will include detailed study of the work
that publishers, printers, and distributors do. Additionally, participants will learn about the how
the book industry costs books and the methods and trade-offs governments have to make in
financing textbooks and supplementary readers.

Once participants have gained this understanding of industry and costing methods, they will
learn how to use this knowledge within a country context. Capacity for book provision ranges
from weak (what we find in fragile and conflict-afflicted states) to very good (Kenya, Nigeria
and Ghana). By taking the country context into account when designing a book provision
project, participants will learn how to create realistic (and practical) designs that not only get


1
 https://www.globalpartnership.org/results/10-results-on-the-ground/
2
 Trucano, Michael (2012). What happens when all textbooks are (only) digital? Ask the Koreans!
http://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/korea-digital-textbooks



                                                                                                  4
the desired books into the hands of students in a timely manner, but also sustainable systems
that will result in long term book provision.




                                                                        Development of
                                              Provide                   a public-private
                Equip                      participants                 partnership and
           participants                  with knowledge                  an in-country
          with knowledge                 of how to make                   system that
          to Understand                      the Right                     effectively
             the Book                       Decisions                       supports
              Industry                     according to                    increase in
                                         country context                     learning
                                                                            outcomes




Appropriate decisions mean that there is no one-size-fits-all strategic model for all countries.
Rather, each country’s needs should be assessed and a strategy customized for its context.

Part of making right decisions based on the country context involves asking how the industry
can become a strategic partner with Government to fulfill a national education mandate. This
decision-making process will make accommodations for trade-offs. For example, if capacity
(publishing, distribution, procurement) in Country X is weak because it is a fragile and conflict-
afflicted nation, how can we help the country to acquire books to meet its immediate as well as
medium- to long-term needs? Immediate goals may involve acquisition using single book per
subject per grade level option. The project can then include steps to build capacity in the
country towards multiple book option in the future.

The knowledge acquired by participants will enable them to design book provision projects that
will effectively support children’s increased learning outcomes.

The Global Partnership for Education (GPE) is the only multilateral partnership solely devoted to
getting all children enrolled in school for a good quality education. GPE provides grants in
support of education priorities, but we are not just about financing. Our approach is different
because it convenes and builds consensus on education issues—at the global and country
levels—to help our 58 developing country partners develop effective education sector plans,
and promote aid that is coordinated and aligned with these plans.

Together, we create a plan for the education sector in each developing country—led by the
government—and provide technical expertise and financial resources. The partners work


                                                                                                5
together to develop programs such as training teachers, educating girls, building schools,
supplying books, school feeding programs, and improving education systems.




                                                                                        6
Acknowledgments
This work was prepared by Richard A. B. Crabbe and Mary Nyingi under the supervision of
Helen Abadzi. The content is based on presentations made at the Community of Practice
Workshop: Getting the Right Books to the Kids, organized by the Global Partnership for
Education (GPE) http://www.globalpartnership.org and held in Washington, DC on October 17-
19, 2012.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the following presenters: Helen Abadzi, Vincent Bontoux,
Nancy Clark-Chiarelli, Paul Frank, Maggie de Jongh-Abebe, Sami Gabriel Féghali, Birger
Fredriksen, Alaleh Motamedi, Shwetlena Sabarwaal, Radhika Sharma, Aliou Sow, and Scott
Walter.

The manual benefited from invaluable comments and suggestions made by peer reviewers
Isiaka Almaroof, Elliott Agyare, Vincent Bontoux, Roel de Haas, Craig Esbeck, Paul Frank, Lily
Nyariki, Willy Rangira, and Eduardo Velez Bustillo. Other key input came from Alfonso F. de
Guzmán, Maggie de Jongh-Abebe and Hans M. Zell.

In addition, the team received insightful comments and constructive feedback from technical
discussions with GPE and World Bank colleagues Koli Banik, Luis A. Crouch, Deepak Dogra,
David Evans, Catherine Henny, Deepa Srikantaiah and Aglaia Zafeirakou.

Thanks and gratitude are due to the management of the Global Partnership for Education (GPE)
for their support in finalizing these materials and depositing them in the archives of the World
Bank.

For more information, please contact Richard Crabbe, rcrabbe@worldbank.org;
rabcrabbe@yahoo.com, Mary Nyingi, mnyingi@globalpartnership.org or Helen Abadzi,
habadzi@gmail.com.




                                                                                               7
How to Use this Manual
This manual is intended as an accompanying publication to the Power Point™ presentation of
the course modules. It incorporates the slides and their notes, and provides additional text and
resources for further study.


Course Content
Understanding the Textbook Industry
   • Module 1: Overview of the Key Issues
   • Module 2: Publishing
   • Module 3: Printing
   • Module 4: Costing

Book Acquisition Strategies
   • Module 5: Preparing for a Textbook Acquisition Strategy—Deciding What To Pay For
   • Module 6: Preparing for Textbook Development—Essential Steps

Distribution Strategies
    • Module 7: Distribution Strategies: How to Get the Books to Students
    • Module 8: Alternative Book Distribution Channels

Policy and Practice
    • Module 9: Procurement Methods
    • Module 10: Fraud & Corruption
    • Module 11: Book Policy—the Why and the How
    • Module 12: The Textbook Specialist in Action: What a Program manager/Task Team
        Leader Needs to Know.




                                                                                              8
Understanding the Textbook Industry
Module 1: Overview of the Key Issues


Slide 5

Learning Objectives
In this module, we will:
• Explain how textbooks support Learning for All initiatives;
• Introduce participants to the impact that textbook challenges in low income countries has
    on learning;
• Highlight challenges to book provision; and
• Suggest methods for solving the textbook crisis.


Slide 6




The number of students attending schools has rapidly increased in recent years as developing
countries have taken steps to meet the UN’s Millennium Development Goal of Universal
Primary Education by 2015 (http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/education.shtml).




                                                                                          9
Slide 7




Unfortunately, the high primary school enrollment rate has not translated into an increase in
learning achievement. Although there has been great progress in recent decades in getting
children into school, evidence shows that many children and youth leave school without having
learned the basic skills needed for life and work.

Many students are leaving schools without acquiring basic reading and math skills. 3          An
estimated 250 million kids are not able to read and write.4

Initiatives such as Learning for All have pledged to increase learning in school particularly
poorest, marginalized countries who are most affected by this (See Learning for All document).
However, combined test score data from three learning assessment programs compiled by
Majgaard and Mingat show that “students in low-income sub-Saharan Africa countries have, on
the average, learned less than half of what was expected of them.”5 The goal then is not just to
get students into schools but also to ensure that they are also learning and acquiring the
necessary cognitive skills needed in order to secure their future economic success.




3
    Majgaard, 2012.
4
    See “What Will It take To Achieve Learning For All?”: http://blogs.worldbank.org/education/
5
    Majgaard, Ibid.

                                                                                                  10
Slide 8




Of all of these inputs, textbooks have been identified as the most cost-effective input for
improving learning achievement.6



Slide 9




What happens in classrooms without textbooks? Slow transcription/dictation, boredom for
students and teachers results in lack of learning. Unfortunately in many low income countries
students are attending schools without textbooks and other learning material. These students
end up spending valuable class time copying notes from blackboards or taking down dictation
from their teachers instead of learning crucial curriculum material. They are reduced to




6
    Majgaard 2012

                                                                                          11
conducting low-level learning primarily composed of rote-memorization of information that is
often inaccurate.7


Slide 10




The question becomes then, if textbooks are a crucial learning input and are the most cost-
effective input, why are there no textbooks in the classrooms? The answer to this question is
complicated because of the difficulty of pinpointing the exact reasons why countries are unable
to provide textbooks for their students, particularly since every country often has its own
unique set of challenges that affect textbook provision.


Slide 11




7
    Askerud, 1997.

                                                                                            12
Challenges to Book Provision

1. High Cost: The common challenges experienced by majority of low income countries
   include production of expensive, unaffordable textbooks. This could be due to the lack of
   knowledge and skills to produce quality, affordable books. As a result, books are produced
   at prohibitive prices – as seen in these examples from Malawi (2009). Given the gross
   national per capita income of $880 (<$75/month) in 2012, parents would not be able to
   afford books at a cost of US$9.50 or more per book.

   In discussing affordability, we need distinguish between affordability to parents, as in Côte
   d’Ivoire for instance, where parents have to purchase textbooks , or to governments, in
   systems where textbooks are free to families but being overpaid by governments.


Slide 12




2. Weak governance/Corruption: The textbook industry is big business in lower income
   countries. The huge sums of money involved in production and distribution create avenues
   for corruption that complicates manufacture of the final products and their availability.
   When publishers and suppliers pay bribes to officials, the money is recouped by raising
   prices or producing low quality books. We will discuss fraud and corruption in textbook
   provision in Module 10. Weak governance/Corruption also arises from the following:
       • Challenges of procurement procedures lead to contracts being awarded to “highest
           bidder” or to cronies.
       • Funds meant for textbook development and purchase are diverted for non-
           education purposes.
       • Unqualified staff involved in vetting process may “approve” unsuitable textbooks.

All these factors result in insufficient quantities and poor quality of books in schools.




                                                                                             13
Slide 13




3. Inadequate supply: This is linked partly to high cost. high cost. A second aspect of
   inadequate supply is the fact that, in some countries, even if governments wanted to
   purchase textbooks, they are not available, i.e., no one has developed textbooks for a
   specific curriculum; books are in languages that the pupils can't read, or there are some
   textbooks but they are poorly written and ineffective and so no one wants them. Teachers
   may hoard books or lock them up in boxes due to concern that they will not be replenished.

4. Distribution problems: Books that are produced do not make it to their final destination
   due to inefficiencies such as book leakage as books meant for free distribution find their
   way in the market for sale to parents and students. Books may also be destroyed or lost
   due to poor packaging and warehousing before they reach their final destinations. Getting
   books from the national to the district/regional level is one challenge. In Uganda, there was
   a case where lower primary resource books were produced in different local languages, but
   the books were sent to the wrong language communities. Yet no one noticed it until they
   were already out in schools, at which point it was virtually impossible to bring them all back.
   There is also distribution from the district to the school level. In some district offices one
   can find supply rooms full to the brim with books that never reached the schools due to a
   variety of factors. Finally, there are distribution problems at the school level where head
   teacher keep books under lock and key and teachers have a hard time accessing them and
   are punished or held financially liable if any get lost or damaged.

5. No policy framework: In the absence of policies to guide the development, production and
   distribution of textbooks, there are no enforceable standards for evaluating quality of
   content, manuscript approval, and book selection. Also, defective teacher training policy


                                                                                               14
   results in ill-equipped teachers who do not know how to effectively use books in the
   classroom.

6. Poor planning: This is tied to the absence of policies. Plans for providing textbooks are
   sometimes not synchronized with curricula changes and the school year or with availability
   of funding. Government, for example, may also not have a long term plan on how to sustain
   book provision without donor funds. Lack of planning also means a lesser utilization of the
   books since teachers do not know when the next “distribution wave” will come, if any. They
   therefore tend to keep new book supplies in storage (cupboards or locked boxes) and reuse
   outdated textbooks.



Slide 14
“Business as usual” models for solving textbook scarcity are not working

Increased funding and off-the-shelf purchasing (mainly from Western publishers) are often
employed to solve textbook shortages, but these practices have not proved effective solutions,
even in the short term. Donors and governments invariably tend to focus on financing, pumping
more and more funds to increase supply of books. But textbook scarcity persists in many low
income countries. Why? The “devil” is in the operational details—how books are written,
designed, printed and delivered to students. This course discusses multiple sources of potential
problems given the inter-relations between the different stages shown on the slide.




                                                                                             15
Slide 15




How are textbooks produced?

The book production process involves the book chain, named for the linkage and relationship
between the segments. There are:

•   Multiple specialties involved from curriculum development and manuscript preparation
    through to reading;
•   Multiple stakeholders, often with conflicting agendas— For example, profit-making (private
    publishers) versus supply (government goal);
•   Issues such as bribes and kickbacks along the chain; and
•   Unclear demand at the consumer levels—what type of books are needed, when and where.

This course will help you to understand the roles played by the different entities, their inter-
relationships, and how to effectively engage them for textbook provision. We will discuss how
the book chain functions in Module 2.



                                                                                             16
Slide 16




How Can We Solve Book Provision Challenges?

1. Use/Strengthen the existing book chain

As we have seen, the challenges to book provision are many and diverse. Studies have shown
that in most countries, government alone cannot handle everything. Also, the entire book
production and distribution process—the book chain—operates in such an interconnected way
that a problem in one link creates a ripple effect along the rest of the chain. To address the
problems of getting quality books to schoolchildren, we need to have a holistic problem-solving
approach rather than solutions aimed at solving individual problem areas only. A piecemeal
approach may strengthen one link to the neglect of other parts of the book chain. And a
holistic approach demands an understanding that the book industry can be a strategic partner
with government.


Slide 17




                                                                                            17
2. Explore beneficial partnerships: government, private sector, and civil society.

Effective collaboration involving the public sector, private industry and civil society can be a
powerful catalyst for enabling book provision (give examples). It is therefore important to
explore how to do this effectively. Can you think of how you can creatively harness the abilities
of each of these constituencies to make book distribution more efficient and effective in your
country?


Slide 18




3. The Case for E-books

How about using new technology, including the internet and mobile devices to deliver
textbooks to students? This has the potential to reach millions of children at relatively little cost
compared to textbooks. The current reality is that for several countries, this is easier imagined
than possible. Issues to consider include hardware costs, power supply, internet connectivity,
and copyright licensing issues regarding content. It seems that the widespread use of mobile
phones in low income countries could provide a platform for textbooks, similar to what has
been achieved for money transfer, and this is currently being explored. What looks more
promising is the potential for using mobile technology and the Kindle, Nook or similar tablet
device to provide lesson guides for teachers, and other general reading material for students.
Read the articles discussing these developments in the Resources section.

“There is no doubt that the landscape of and business climate for ‘educational publishers’ is
changing radically in much of the world, and that this change is being fueled in large part by the




                                                                                                  18
increased distribution and adoption of a variety of disruptive technologies, which are
increasingly to be found in schools and local communities, even in some of the poor est.”8


Slide 19

Summary
In this module we:

•   Established that books are a crucial and cost effective input for improving learning;

•   Identified challenges to book provision in low income countries;

•   Argued for a re-think of the current models for solving/addressing book scarcity, and

•   Suggested considering alternative models for dealing/tackling with this issue.



Slide 20

Exercise

•   What other consequences of book shortage or challenges to book provision in developing
    countries can you think of that were not discussed in this module?

•   If you have experience working in a country that has faced textbook shortage, describe
    what you observed and how the situation was dealt with.



Slide 21

Resources

For further study:

1. Askerud, P. (1997). A Guide to Sustainable Book Provision. Paris, UNESCO.
   http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0011/001106/110638eo.pdf

2. Majgaard, K. & Mingat, A. (2012). Education in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Comparative Analysis.
   World Bank. (p. 122–154). http://www-
8
 Trucano, Michael (2012). Textbook policies in an increasingly digital age.
http://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/textbooks


                                                                                            19
   wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2012/07/13/000333037_
   20120713003549/Rendered/PDF/709790PUB0EPI0067926B09780821388891.pdf

3. Trucano, Michael (2013). Calculating the costs of digital textbook initiatives in Africa.
   http://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/calculating-costs-digital-textbook-initiatives-africa

4. Mobile Learning is growing big time in the Global South.
   http://thejournal.com/articles/2013/02/25/unesco-mlw.aspx

5. What Will It Take To Achieve Learning For All?
   http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2013/04/15/what-will-it-take-to-achieve-
   learning-for-all

6. World Bank Education Strategy 2020: Learning for All.
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/ESSU/Education_Strategy_4_12
   _2011.pdf

7. Worldreader: Taking the E-Book Revolution to Africa.
   http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2012-09-06/worldreader-taking-the-e-book-
   revolution-to-africa

8. Zell, Hans M. (2013). Print vs. electronic, and the ‘digital revolution’ in Africa.
   http://www.academia.edu/2514725/Print_vs_Electronic_and_the_Digital_Revolution_in_Africa




                                                                                               20
Understanding the Textbook Industry
Module 2: Publishing

Slide 5

Learning Objectives
In this module, we will:
• Define book publishing and discuss the role publishers play in textbook provision;
• Identify and discuss the links in the book development process, referred to here as the Book
    Chain;
• Analyze the weak links in the Book Chain of a low income country in order to identify areas
    for system strengthening;
• Compare the advantages and disadvantages of public versus private textbook development;
    and
• Discuss how recent technological innovations in the publishing industry have altered the
    traditional book chain and may provide solutions for textbook provision in low income
    countries.


Slide 6

The History of Publishing: From Scrolls to Ebooks
You have probably been buying and reading books for a number of years and have perhaps
even switched from reading traditional paper books to reading e-books on a device like the
Kindle, Nook or iPad. Have you ever wondered how the material for a book comes together?
Publishing has evolved from ancient ways of writing on scrolls to today’s e-books. Early on,
individuals produced each copy by hand. Today, the entity responsible for overseeing the
process of producing books for the public is called a publishing company or a publisher.




                                                                                           21
Slide 7




Publishing companies, commonly referred to simply as publishers, undertake the financial risk
to develop, produce, and distribute books. Book production is a capacity intensive industry that
requires the skilled labor of professionals such as editors, graphic designers and illustrators.
Publishing covers all areas of book production from the origination of the book idea to the
point that the book is made available to the public in print or digital format. In that regard, a
publishing company works with what is called the book chain.

As with any industry, there are different types of publishers specializing in different types of
publishing. There are, for instance, newspaper publishers, magazine & journal publishers, and
book publishers. Further, among book publishers, some specialize in publishing educational
material such as textbooks, library books, and other learning material like posters, maps, and
workbooks. In recent times, we have witnessed the rise of electronic books (e-books) and
publishing on the internet. The latter frequently does not involve a traditional publisher, and
raises concerns about quality of content in the absence of formal reviews of content.

Publishing in Sub-Saharan Africa in the 1980s was dominated by large international publishers.
By the mid-1990s, many countries had achieved appreciable local capacities that enabled them
to publish books locally. Some multinationals created local operations such as Oxford
University Press East Africa operating in Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya. In some countries,
indigenization led to national companies carved out of multinationals as happened in Kenya—
for example, Longman became Longhorn.9




9
    (Bgoya, Development Dialogue 1997)

                                                                                              22
Most publishers in low income countries are small- to medium scale, with low capital. Since
textbook publishing involves large quantities of books and high cash outlay, it is difficult for
publishers from low income countries to compete with the larger ones during tenders for
procurement of textbooks.

Slide 8




The name, book chain, is derived from the relationships between the different stakeholders in
the book publishing and distributing process. A book chain identifies the key steps in developing
a book, beginning with the author’s idea and ending with the book in the reader’s hand.
Understanding each of the steps in the book chain and how each step is linked to the others is
important. If these relationships function well, the result is successful book provision and a
thriving publishing industry. If the chain is broken at any point, this will affect the effectiveness
of the other stakeholders and the industry as a whole. You can use your knowledge of the book
chain to analyze weaknesses in a book supply system and determine how to repair it.


                                                                                                  23
Introducing . . . the “members” of the Textbook Chain

We will now proceed to consider the different roles in the publishing process. As noted before,
in some low income countries, the MoE functions as a publisher for textbooks.




Slide 10

The Ministry of Education (MoE)
In most countries, the MoE is the main government agency responsible for textbook policy,
curriculum development, procurement, and supply to schools.

Some low income countries do not have a well-established book publishing industry. Some
countries with small populations such as the Pacific Islands (Vanuatu, Fiji, etc.) and others like
Papua New Guinea, Timor Leste, Togo, Benin and Lesotho naturally have small markets that
struggle to sustain a book publishing industry. Different settings defined by different levels of
resources call for different measures. For such countries, the Ministry of Education may
become a de facto publisher. In such cases, the ministry usually does everything in-house:
commission teams of writers for subjects, handle editing, illustrations, layout and design, and
then contract printing of textbooks.

A recurring problem in such situations is that those tasked with the job sometimes do not have
the requisite professional skills or to evaluate what they may commission. Also, we may have
another section of the same ministry doing evaluation of content, which easily leads to conflicts
of interest that influence approvals. All this can result in low quality books. Some MoEs
therefore decide to contract the entire process, putting it up for tender. Instead of opting for a
do-it-yourself program that results in low quality textbooks, it is advisable that MoEs faced with
taking on the role of publisher should secure the services of a consultant to guide the
publishing process.




                                                                                               24
Slide 11




Authors
Authors develop the text or content. This content may be their original idea or they may be
paid (commissioned) to develop content by a publisher. For children’s books, sometimes
illustrators are authors as well. An author can contact a publisher directly with a completed
manuscript, a process called querying.
Textbook authors require skills and knowledge that are different from other authors. These
include knowledge of the subject matter, curriculum goals and skills to be achieved, pedagogy
and different methods for teaching urban and rural students. Such skills may be in limited
supply in low income countries.
Textbook authorship is a collaborative process that involves:
1. Subject specialists – to ensure that approach and explanations are accurate
2. Curriculum experts – to ensure that books are consistent with curriculum goals
3. Teachers with extensive classroom experience. Teachers are particularly important as they
     have understanding of the level that books should be written; this includes vocabulary,
     content and exercises.
Textbook authorship differs in developing countries. In some countries such as Bangladesh, the
National Curriculum and Textbook Board, an autonomous organization, is responsible for
authoring of textbooks for the Ministry of Education. In Albania, the private industry
(publishers) works with authors to develop textbooks for the ministry.

What is the situation in your country? Who writes textbooks—is it teachers, MoE teams or
people working with publishers?




                                                                                           25
Slide 12

Publishers
Traditionally, a publisher has been the primary link between an author and multiple readers.
This relationship is now undergoing changes because of information and communications
technologies. The development of electronic books (e-books) is changing the way content is
developed and distributed. Unlike traditional textbooks, digital textbooks may, for instance,
contain video or animated content that students can interact with on their e-readers or mobile
technologies.

The publishing process begins with the author, who compiles ideas into a manuscript, which is
then acquired by a publisher. A publisher can also seek out an author to prepare a manuscript
in a process called commissioning. In this case, the author may get a one-time fee and/or
receive an advance on royalties against future sales. The publisher evaluates the manuscript
content for quality, relevance, and timeliness. Once a publisher decides a manuscript should be
published as a book, every step of the process and the relationships involved in the book chain
has to be coordinated in order to get the book to the intended reader as needed. In the
publishing industry, this role falls to the publisher, who also finances the entire book production
and distribution process. Simply put, the publisher provides financing and assumes all risks for
publication.

Slide 13




Publishers also coordinate relationships between the various links in the Book Chain. Because
each link is important to the successful production of a book, it is important for us to
understand what they do and also the relationship they have with each other. In textbook
publishing, especially when tenders are floated, all kinds of persons and companies surface to
                                                                                                26
participate because it is a lucrative market. In many lower income countries (especially in
Africa), educational publishing makes up over 90% of the overall publishing market.10

It is important, to assure quality and professionalism, that the MoE knows whether it is dealing
with bona fide publishers, publishing agents, or simply “briefcase publishers” -- people fronting
as publishers, but whose companies do not function as such except during tenders. Such people
are often accused of bribing MoE officials in charge of tenders to be awarded contracts. A quick
check with the national publishers association can confirm those registered and operating as
genuine professionals.

The same holds for booksellers. Where such associations do not exist, it is advisable to check
company registrations for ownership to ensure that MoE or other government officials may not
be using these as fronts. That may constitute conflict of interest (discussed in detail in Module
9: Procurement). It is also helpful to request companies to submit samples of recently published
books, with proof that it is actually their work, and not “borrowed” from other companies.

Slide 14




Public vs. Private Publishing
Publishing capacity varies from country to country. The decentralization trends of the 1990s
saw the textbook publishing role move more and more from the state to the private industry in
10
     (Trucano 2012)

                                                                                              27
many developing countries. The move was prompted partly by the failure of the state to
provide quality, cost effective books and the desire to move decision making further away from
the bureaucracy of the central office and more towards the district and school levels in the
hope that it would result in increased in transparency and efficiency.11

The choice to go for public sector (government) publishing is not really linked to the size of the
country, but it is more of a political option by the government. Timor Leste is tiny and is
working under private publishing, so are Swaziland and Lesotho. Conversely, Sudan is huge and
is still producing its textbooks via various government agencies.



Slide 15

Intellectual Property and Copyright
The author, whoever it may be, as originator of content for the book, is recognized as the
owner of the intellectual property of the work produced and therefore, has the copyright to it.
An author may assign his/her intellectual property to another person or organization (usually a
publisher) to produce copies of a work in return for payment of a royalty. Copyright may also be
vested in the publisher or the one who commissions a manuscript. For example, where a
ministry commissions content, ownership belongs to the ministry. Often the publisher, not the
author, owns copyright.

Ownership of intellectual property is important as it factors into the overall costs of book
production. If the Ministry of Education develops content, it should ensure that it retains
copyright as it would help to reduce the overall cost of books, especially when reprints are
needed. This is because if the Ministry of Education owns the rights to the content of a
textbook, for example, it does not need to pay royalties for reproduction of the material.
In many low income countries there is little or no intellectual property protection. This causes
weakness in the book chain, leading to:
    • Piracy:
    • Loss of income for publishers (and authors)
    • Discouragement of creativity (new works).

We will discuss copyright in more detail in Module 6.




11
     (Devas 2005)

                                                                                               28
Slide 16




Editors
The next “member” in the book chain is editors, who primarily work with authors, and are
responsible for commissioning and acquisition of manuscripts. Editors select the most
appropriate material and shape it to enable the audience to understand it. Editors need a
specialized skill set. In the case of textbooks, content editors ensure that any work meets
necessary curriculum and pedagogical requirements. An expert in the subject may be consulted
to review and validate the content. An editor also works with an art director and illustrator to
select appropriate images/photos and fonts. Copy editors ensure that the text conforms to
recognized standards for grammar and spelling. Additionally, they check content for coherence,
and checks grammar, appropriate language, presentation format and quality, and relevance to
the target audience.

The editor is frequently responsible for the book project, from planning through
commissioning, production (design, typesetting, illustration, proofing), and printing.
Generally, while there is seldom shortage of manuscripts in low income countries, it is
sometimes difficult to find good editors and quality editing is often passed over in order to cut
costs.12 As a result, poor editing is evident in many textbooks. For example, in an English
textbook published in an African country, the word “hallo” is misspelled as “hallow,” and
“using” appears as “uisng.” Despite these serious errors (among many others) the book was
selected and listed on the country’s official textbook list.




12
     (Walter 2012)

                                                                                              29
Slide 17

Art directors
Art directors create the look and feel of a book, and oversee design of the entire book. To
achieve this goal, they work with designers to select fonts for the interior text, the type of
illustrations and where they should be placed on a page. They also create the front and back
book covers. Finally, the art director works with an illustrator, who provides images to support
the text and overall design as appropriate for the intended educational (pedagogical) level.

It is important that art directors (graphic designers) pay attention to issues such as gender
representations in textbooks to avoid communicating bias. There are many instances where
girls are represented only in the context of the home and not in professional arena; boys are
shown accomplishing difficult tasks while girls shy away from them.

Good design enhances readability and comprehension of a final product (book). Poor design
adversely affects student performance because the reader has to struggle to extract meanings,
due to poor organization of a page, for example.
To ensure that the book is printed exactly as designed, the art director provides the final
instructions, called specifications (specs)—dimensions (size), colors, fonts, type of paper, and
desired binding, packaging, etc.—to the printer.

Slide 18




Printers
After the designer’s work is done, the printer manufactures the book based on the instructions
and specifications provided by the designer. Specialized equipment and skills are required to
deliver the specifications for textbooks.
See Module 3 for more information on Printing.

                                                                                             30
Slide 19




Distributors
It is important to arrange for distribution when planning a book acquisition strategy, otherwise
the books will simply sit in storage due to lack of funds for freight forwarding to get the books
to schools.

Once the printed book is completed, it needs to get to the targeted audience. This is done by
distributors, found mostly in countries with large publishing industries. In some countries
government does the distribution of textbooks itself. By definition, book distributors are
generally wholesalers who transport finished books from the printer or publishers to the
market. The printer delivers the books to the distributor, who then moves them on to
booksellers, who as in many francophone African countries, where the students buy at
booksellers’; or cases, such as in Rwanda or Namibia, where distributors bring the books to the
schools’ doorsteps.

Modules 7 & 8 focus on Distribution.




                                                                                              31
Slide 20




The bookseller gets books to readers
Booksellers play an important role in book distribution as they are the direct link between
distributor and the customer/reader, the author’s target audience. They supply textbooks and
supplementary readers to students or schools. In some countries schools place textbook orders
with bookstores, which then deliver the orders to the schools e.g. Kenya where schools are
given funds to purchase textbooks from booksellers.

In low income countries, booksellers are crucial to the distribution process because of their
proximity to school in small towns and villages. Distribution to small towns and villages can be
challenging, due to bad roads, for example. Additionally, publishers and printers focus on their
expertise, and do not have storage space or personnel to carry out this task. However, for many
book provision programs, booksellers are deemed unnecessary and expensive middlemen and
bypassed. The long term effect is the weakening of the book distribution infrastructure, which
could be used to supply other learning materials—stationery, supplementary readers, etc.
In many countries, bookstores are located in urban areas or large towns—20,000+ inhabitants.
There are, however, many cases where small retailers stock books for a short period usually at
the beginning of the school year to make them available for students in rural areas. In Burkina
Faso (pictured), for example, a bookseller’s main business often focuses on office stationery
and school supplies, with new and used books added in. The displays are not as elaborate as
those we saw previously. Books may sometimes be displayed on dusty pavements. Yet these
small stores play a vital role in getting books to readers, as they are located closer to schools in
small towns and villages.

Distributors and booksellers are an important source of market feedback to the publishers (and
the author) regarding the quality of production and content of books, because they are better


                                                                                                 32
positioned to know which titles are selling well and which books are likely to sell well in specific
localities.

We will discuss the role of booksellers in book distribution strategies in detail in Modules 7 & 8.



Slide 21




Readers/Students
Readers/students are the final link in the book chain. Students can access books directly from
booksellers either through vouchers or parents’ purchasing. Schools can purchase books on
behalf of students with government funds or receive books directly from government for
distribution to students. There is evidence to support the effectiveness of 1:1 book to student
ratio especially in the early school grades.13

Readers provide crucial feedback when it comes to piloting of new books. Pilot programs for
new manuscripts can provide crucial information on content and organization of books (like or
dislike about a book). They may suggest changes to the content or request that prices be
lowered. In the public sector, government would probably get feedback on materials they
developed through a pilot with a small number of pupils only. In a public sector model feedback
may also have been obtained through a pilot but sales by schools become a stronger indicator
of end-user satisfaction with the textbook. In practice, many private publishers do not pilot
their textbooks, but rely on evaluation committees to assess quality and relevance.




13
     (Majgaard 2012, 132-134)

                                                                                                  33
It must be noted that in some low income countries, readers (including students, teachers, and
education administrators) are less likely to complain about poor quality materials or even be in
a position to evaluate them since they may have little interaction with any textbooks at all.

Slide 22




Books Image courtesy of Adamr/FreeDigitalPhotos.net
eBooks Image Credit: © Markus Gann/Dreamstime.com


Innovations in Publishing
Before concluding this module, we need to consider how innovations are changing the book
publishing industry. Since the invention of the printing press by Johannes Gutenberg in 1450,
paper has been the main medium for manufacturing books. Innovations in publishing have
revolutionized the book chain to bring books directly to readers but skipping traditional
printing, distribution and sales. In recent years, the electronic format has also become part of
the book market. An e-book, the digital format, used to be prepared after the book had been
printed. More and more publishers are digitizing the content at the same time as it is made
available for printing. If needed, e-books can be printed by a process called print-on-demand. If
a book is published only as an e-book, for example, a printer would not be needed. Starting in
2010, Worldreader (www.worldreader.org) piloted its e-readers with students Ghana and
collected data on how increase in reading material affected learning and teaching methods.14

For e-books, partnerships – international/local, and publishers/tech firms – are increasingly
important. How might this be an opportunity for low income countries? What do you think are
the constraints for your country?

We will discuss the role of printers in textbook provision in Module 3.


14
     (iRead Ghana Study: Final Evaluation Report 2012)

                                                                                              34
Slide 23

Summary
In this module we:

•   Defined book publishing in the context/lens of the book chain;
•   Identified the various links in the Book Chain, and described the role that each of plays in
    textbook publishing and distribution; and
•   Noted how innovations taking place in the book publishing industry could radically alter
    traditional modes of production and distribution.



Slide 24

Exercise
• What role do publishers play in the book development process?
• Identify the links in the Book Chain and describe the key links that need strengthening in
   your country.
• Would you prefer a public or private textbook development model in your country? Why? If
   not, why not?
• Describe how new technologies have revolutionized the publishing industry and the impact
   they may have in textbook development in your country.



Slide 25

Exercise
Country Y is a small Sub-Saharan country with a centralized public service system. The
government has revised the curriculum to reduce the number of required core subjects from 10
to 8, and added family life education as a core subject in effort to reduce the dropout rate of
girls from the education system. The Ministry of Education and Science (MoES), is proposing to
take on the role of producing and distributing free textbooks to schools to support these
curriculum revisions. The Ministry believes that it will save book production costs by excluding
the private book industry from this process.

•   Considering what we have learned about the role of the publisher and the various
    stakeholders in the book chain, if Y were your country, what advice would you give to the



                                                                                             35
   MoES regarding its proposed role? Which parts of the book chain would you foresee the
   MoES experiencing difficulty with the most and why?



Slide 26

Resources
For further study:

1. An E-Reader Revolution for Africa?
   http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303768104577462683090312766.html

2. Blumberg, Rae L. Gender Bias in Textbooks: A Hidden Obstacle on the Road to Gender
   Equality in Education. Paris: UNESCO, 2007. Background paper prepared for the Education
   for All Global Monitoring Report 2008: Education for All by 2015: will we make it?
   http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0015/001555/155509e.pdf

3. Clark, G. and Phillips, A. (2008). Inside Book Publishing. London: Routledge, 2008.

4. Managing Intellectual Property in the Book Publishing Industry. Geneva: WIPO. Publication
   No. 868.

5. Mobile Learning: http://www.unesco.org/new/en/unesco/themes/icts/m4ed/

6. Lee, Marshall (2004). Bookmaking: Editing, design, production.

7. Sosale, Shobhana (Ed.). Educational Publishing in Global Perspective: Capacity Building and
   Trends. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 1999.
   http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/0-8213-4254-1

8. Textbooks and School Library Provision in Secondary Education in Sub-Saharan Africa.
   Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 2008.
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTAFRREGTOPSEIA/Resources/OtherTextbooks.pdf

9. Trucano. “Textbook policies in an increasingly digital age.”
   http://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/edutech/textbooks




                                                                                             36
Understanding the Textbook Industry
Module 3: Printing

Slide 5

Learning Objectives
In this module, we will:
• Describe what printing involves and explain some common printing processes;
• Present various ways to save printing costs; and
• Explain how to select the right printing house for a print job.



Slide 6

Introduction

In the publishing industry, an establishment that provides printing services is referred to as a
“printing house” or a “printer.” In countries where the publishing industry is functional,
publishers contract printers to print books for them. In others, it would be the MoE that does
so. There is an assumption that publishers and printers are the same entity, but that is not the
case. There was a time that most publishers also owned printing presses, but today most
publishers contract out the task. It is common now to find both small and large publishers
having their books printed in countries such as China, India, and Mauritius.



Slide 7




The printing process begins when a graphic designer forwards the finished book to a printer.
The book is usually forwarded in the form of an electronic file such as a PDF. The printer begins
a three stage printing process that begins with Pre-press, followed by press and finally post-
press.

                                                                                              37
Pre-press: This stage implements the instructions specified by the designer, and covers all the
preparatory work that takes place before the actual printing occurs. This includes: download
of client files, preflight (checking the files for problems such as formatting); imposition (putting
pages in the right order); proof (running a test print to see if documents need color correction);
plate-setting (imprinting of image from digital content onto a plate or cylinder).

Press: This is the actual printing of the books. The printing process produces multiple copies of
the book as specified by the designer, ranging from a few copies to millions as needed. The
total number of books produced in one printing is referred to as a “print run.”

Post-press: This stage involves folding of printed sheets, trimming, binding and packing the
books for warehousing or distribution.



Slide 8

Virtual Tour of a modern Printing House

What really takes place in a printing house? We will now proceed on a virtual tour of a printing
house to see various printing processes in action.


Click on the video link to start your tour.

XXXXX (Insert play button for Blue Tree/Paarl Media video)

Give credit for video--also in Acknowledgments It’s from Paarl Media/BlueTree Group




                                                                                                 38
Slide 9




You have seen what goes on in a printing house to get books produced. The quality of finished
product—the printed book— depends to a large extent on the instructions given to the printing
house by the designer. These are called technical specifications or “specs,” for short. This is a
point where all the hard work in preparing and evaluating textbook content can be messed up.
Technical specs for textbooks should be designed to ensure that the printer produces durable
textbooks with book life of about 5-6 years. This is a cost-reduction measure for developing
countries which often have limited funds for educational books. The four key factors listed on
the slide should be included in technical specifications for durable textbooks.



Slide 10

Technical Specifications (2): Paper Quality

Paper: The weight of paper is measured in grams per square meter—gsm in the Metric system,
or pounds in America. The higher the gsm, the more durable and expensive the paper. It is
important to choose based on a balance between weight and cost.

At the lower end of paper, weight is 45-48gsm paper or newsprint, used to print newspapers.
This paper is composed of short fibers mostly from recycled paper that interacts with the
atmosphere and tends to yellow after a couple of days. In the middle is 80-90 gsm paper, the
best of which is made from spruce wooden pulp found in Scandinavian countries. At the top
end is wood-free paper, 100 gsm or higher. This is composed of chemical pulp that is not prone
to yellowing due to the composition of the fibers. This paper is very good but also very
expensive.



                                                                                              39
Textbooks are usually printed on 60-80 gsm paper. When designing books, it is important to
aim for the total page count as a multiple of 16, called a “signature.” This is simply an accepted
industry practice related to how a printing press folds the paper that is fed into it. If this is not
done, there could be significant wastage. This may take the form of blank pages at the end of a
book or unused paper for which the client is charged anyway, because the printer has to order
in bulk to cover all the printing required.

For information on how paper is made, and the various types of paper on the market, such as
wood-free, coated and uncoated, watch the videos listed in the Resources section of this
Module.



Slide 11

Technical Specifications (3): Binding

Binding: This is method in which the pages of a book are held together. Animal or hide glue,
resin and hot melt glue are the three main kinds of glue used in bookbinding. There are several
ways of binding books. The printer’s task is to choose the correct binding method to ensure
that books do not fall apart. The right type of binding can extend the life of a book.
Some of the major commercial bookbinding techniques are:

Hardcover: Some hardcover books have the pages sewn together before the rigid (hard) cover
is attached. This method is time consuming and expensive and may not be ideal for textbooks.

Punch and bind: Spiral binding is one example, commonly used for atlases and other
publications where it is necessary or desirable to be able to open the publication completely
flat without breaking the spine.

Stitched/Sewn: A sewn book is constructed in the same way as a hardbound book, except that
it lacks the hard covers. An example is saddle-stitching, which involves wire stapling (sewing) on
the spine of book. It works well for books with not more than 48 pages, such as workbooks.

Thermally activated binding: A common type is Perfect/adhesive binding, which works well for
paperback or softcover books, even those with more than 400 pages, using hot melt glue such
as PUR. This type of glue is good for educational books because it is durable in different types of
weather. PUR is better than standard hotmelt adhesives for many reasons, the most important



                                                                                                  40
of which are its superior adhesion and the ability of a PUR-bound book to lie flat when open.
Most textbooks have perfect binding.



Slide 12




Color: The printed color we see is actually a combination of the four main printing colors —
Cyan, Magenta, Yellow and Black. Mixing all three theoretically results in black, but imperfect
ink formulations do not give true black, which is why the additional K component is needed.
Color printing typically uses ink of four colors: cyan, magenta, yellow, and key (black). When
CMY “primaries” are combined at full strength, the resulting “secondary” mixtures are red,
green, and blue.15

Most textbook printing is black text on white paper. Textbooks for lower classes, science and
mathematics generally have more color than other subjects.



Slide 13

Technical Specifications (5): Dimensions

Dimensions: The specs for the size of a book must include the measurements for the length,
width and the spine. The width of the spine indicates the space available for any text and helps
to determine the choice of binding.




15
     Wikipedia

                                                                                             41
Slide 14




Understanding the cost drivers in printing can be useful in identifying factors that will bring
down overall costs of books. The following are 10 specific factors to pay attention to.

Size of print run: generally, the higher the print run, the lower the cost per copy produced,
known as the “unit cost”. The savings on cost, however, plateaus at about “35,000 -50,000
copies for 4-colour printing.” (DFID Practice Paper Guidance Notes, p.25).

Paper: In countries where paper stock is imported it is expensive, this is more pronounced if a
printing house does not have the purchasing power to buy in bulk to get it at good rates. The
cost of paper and any paper wastage is borne by the customer. Paperback books generally cost
less than hardcover books of the same number of pages.

Physical dimensions of book: The size of the book, total number of pages, and number of
pages that fit on a sheet of paper all affect pricing. Pages not used for text constitute wastage.

Taxes: Many raw materials for printing including paper and ink attract customs duty and taxes
when imported. Additionally, in many countries, taxes are levied on the finished books when
manufactured locally. In contrast, the same countries may allow finished books to be imported
duty-free and tax-free, due to international conventions such as the Florence Agreement [See
article in the Resources Section]. This is a major reason why local textbook printing is expensive
in many countries.

Delivery schedule: Rush jobs attract higher charges. This means advance planning has to take
this into consideration when books are being procured. A printing house may agree to take on a
job, but may be unable to realistically meet a delivery deadline, because the equipment it has
cannot handle that volume of work in that time period. This point is discussed further later in
this module under “How to choose a printing house.”


                                                                                               42
Slide 15




Color production: Each color is set-up individually and it takes time to find the right the right
color balance. In recent years, the cost of color printing has fallen considerably, and with large
printing volumes—as done for textbooks—the difference in cost between one color (black) and
full color has narrowed significantly. See above point on size of print run.

Machine time: Make ready time, overheads of machines – repair and maintenance, plates and
cylinders.

Skilled labor: Unskilled labor increases print costs through human error, for example, in
counting and quality control, and taking more time than machines to complete a job. Skilled
labor operates modern equipment, shortens delivery time, and improves quality of final
product. So, while it may be nationalistic to prefer to use local printing houses, as a means to
boost local business development, the quality of final product (books) and the cost difference
when compared with printing externally should factor in a final decision.

Utilities: While these may not be an issue in middle and high income countries, availability and
cost of water and electricity are often major factors in the cost of running a printing house. In
the absence of regular and uninterrupted power supply, printing houses are forced to purchase
and operate on-site electrical plants. Water becomes a significantly high expense as well.

Access to finance: Printing is a cash-intensive business. It is important to have continuous
access to finance orders. When a printing house finds it difficult to access loans or has to pay
high interest rates, this leads to higher costs, which are passed on to the customer. In many
countries, it is common for a printing house to ask for pre-payment (up to half or more of the
total cost of a print run) before printing begins. Where government finances printing, this does
not pose a problem. However, this becomes an important issue when government tasks local


                                                                                               43
(national) publishers/printers to produce local language and supplementary readers for the
open market.



Slide 16




Selecting a printing house for a specific print job16
What type of printing house do you need? Here are key factors to consider when selecting a
printing house for an educational books project.

1. Capacity: Does the printing house have the equipment, manpower and skills to print the
   volume of books needed within the required timeframe? As discussed earlier, for many
   countries this means printing overseas. In others, it might mean using a government-owned
   printing house within the country.

2. Delivery: Will the printing house be able to print the books on time? This is important in
   ensuring that books are delivered to students in time for the start of a new school semester
   or year, for example.

3. Quality: Does the printing house have a track record of producing books of high quality? If
   samples are submitted, how do they compare with other materials produced by the same
   company?

4. Cost: How does the printing house’s pricing compare with others in terms of value for
   money? This is especially pertinent in deciding between printing locally versus
   internationally or using a government-owned printing house versus a privately-owned one.

16
     This is a task where one might use the services of consultants who have expertise in assessing print capacity.

                                                                                                                      44
   This decision point can invite corrupt practices such as collusion or even fraud. This is
   discussed further in Module 9 (Procurement) and Module 10 (Fraud & Corruption).

5. Finance: Does the printing house have the ability to pre-finance at least part of the project?
   In practice, a cash-strapped government will find this attractive, but it has been used to set
   high unit costs for books manufactured. The result is excessive costs for a gover nment’s
   textbook program and fraudulent profit for the printing house.



Slide 17




Printing houses have their areas of specialty. For example, in low income countries most
printing houses have equipment that can only produce posters, pamphlets, booklets or
newspapers but not textbooks. In some countries, a few large scale printers may exist, and
though they may be expert at printing magazines, journals, reports and brochures, they may
not be good at printing books with the number of pages and binding required for textbooks.
When selecting a printing house for a job, it is therefore important to ensure that you match
the desired job to the right printing house. If for instance you would like to print 50,000
textbooks, then you would select a printing house that specializes in printing textbooks and that
has the equipment to print this volume at a cost effective cost. In many instances, this means
printing outside the country.




                                                                                              45
Slide 18




Photo credits: Maggie de Jongh/Blue-Tree Group


In many developing countries, local printing presses are small and often do not have access to
capital to acquire high technology equipment for textbook manufacturing. They may also not
have adequate jobs to keep the presses busy when textbook manufacturing is not taking place.
While they may not have capacity to print large job, they can print small textbook jobs such as
teacher guides, workbooks and supplementary readers.



Slide 19




This does not mean that local printing should not be encouraged. Methods to facilitate this
process include:

                                                                                            46
•   Forming joint-venture partnerships between local and international printers. This enables
    knowledge and technology transfer. It can also provide access to funding to allow
    participation in textbook bidding projects.
•   Splitting large print jobs between local and foreign partners for local job creation where, for
    example, the local partner prints teacher guides and other supplementary readers, and the
    international printer handles the textbooks.



Slide 20




Local vs. International Printing
Where to print books is often a financial negotiation. Publishers and MoE consider the following
trade-offs.

Local capacity: Can local capacity handle large volumes at competitive cost compared to
international sources? Remember to factor in shipping costs from outside the country.

Regional: For countries within regional economic communities (ECOWAS, EAC, SADC, etc.),
would using a regional hub for printing be cost-effective?

Economies of scale: For multiple titles with identical dimensions, keeping illustrations and
employing black plate changes results in significant cost savings. This works very well for multi-
language translations of a book.

Import/Export laws: One would also need to find out if any national laws do not allow book
imports (as in Argentina?) or mandate local printing (as in Egypt).




                                                                                                47
Slide 21

Summary
In this module we:

•   Described printing and highlighted the different stages involved in printing a book;
•   Discussed the various factors that influence the costs of printing;
•   Considered how to select the right printing house for a job, and the trade-offs that come
    into play, and
•   Suggested methods to strengthen the local printing industry.



Slide 22

Discussion Question
A Ministry of Education is considering building a state-of-the–art printing press in low-income
Country Y. The idea is to facilitate printing of textbooks as enrolment increases. Some officials
say this would enable the MoE to save money on and also have full control of procurement of
textbooks.

Imagine that you have been asked to prepare a briefing for the minister. If this were your
country, how would you advise the minister? In light of our discussion so far, consider the
following:

•   Availability and cost of paper and ink.
•   Skilled labor to operate the equipment.
•   Machine capacity utilization: How many books will be printed and how often will the
    equipment be fully in use?
•   Electricity supply.
•   Market and availability of other printing.
•   Relative costs of private vs. public printing.

Consider also the impact a government-run press would have on printers in the country.



                                                                                              48
Slide 23

Resources
For further study:

1. Bann, David. 2007. The All New Print Production Handbook. New York: Watson-Guptill.

2. DeJongh, Maggie: The printing contribution to the successful delivery of books:
   http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day1/The%20Printing%20Contribution
   %20to%20the%20Successful%20Delivery%20of%20Books%20-%20Maggie%20DeJongh.pdf

3. DFID Practice Paper Guidance Notes. Learning and Teaching Materials: Policy and Practice
   for Provisions.

4. Florence Agreement on Importation of Education, Scientific and Cultural Material – June
   17th, 1950: http://portal.unesco.org/culture/en/ev.php-
   URL_ID=35104&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html) and
   http://ia.ita.doc.gov/sips/sipsfap.html.

5. How paper is made videos: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jGH7kQ30SKo; and
   http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2MUGbe6vRpo

6. Video of a tour of a modern printing press (Goal of this video is to show the various printing
   process: pre-press, press, and post-press).




                                                                                               49
Understanding the Textbook Industry
Module 4: Textbook Costing and Financing

Slide 5

Learning Objectives
In this module, we will:
• Discuss factors that contribute to the unit cost of a book;
• Examine why the cost of textbooks vary widely from country to country;
• Enable participants to ascertain if prices quoted for books are appropriate;
• Examine suggestions for potential cost savings; and
• Consider options for financing textbook provision.



Slide 6




Breaking the Cycle of Chronic Textbook Scarcity
• One of the factors that contribute to chronic book scarcity, as discussed in Module 1, is the
   high cost of books. If the cost of books is too high, parents and schools cannot afford to
   purchase them, and students attend schools without textbooks and other reading material.


                                                                                            50
    Market prices for textbooks can be prohibitive at all levels, not only at the primary school
    level. Some countries also restrict imported goods (Textbooks and Quality Learning for All,
    p. 48). Similarly, reading books are sometimes just as scarce and expensive as textbooks.
    When textbooks costs are high, governments are unlikely to order or replace copies when
    existing books are damaged or exhausted.
•   Governments that could subsidize the costs of books in low-income countries are
    sometimes unable to do so due to competing national interests. For example, available
    funds are channeled toward more pressing needs such as health (Textbooks and Quality
    Learning for All; p. 47).

It is important to know how the unit cost of books are determined, so that governments,
program advisers, and administrators can tell whether they are getting value for money.



Slide 7
What factors affect the cost of books?

There are many factors that affect the cost of books: Some factors have a large impact on cost
of books; some modest. When designing a book provision plan, it is important to know which
factors are most responsible for influencing the costs of books, in order to determine whether
prices quoted are fair and valid.



Slide 8




                                                                                             51
The factors that have major impact on the cost of books include:
• Availability and cost of raw materials: For most countries paper, ink, and other inputs for
   printing are imported and dependent on international prices. They may not be readily
   available on the market since there are few specialized importers. In many cases, for
   example, sourcing paper internationally—direct from manufacturers—can be cheaper than
   buying locally, but few printers can afford this bulk purchase.

•   Print run/Economies of Scale: This often has the single biggest influence on costs. The
    higher the print run, the lower the cost of producing one textbook.
•   Capacity of local publishing and printing industries to produce books efficiently: Older
    equipment and reliance on manual labor for aspects of production, e.g. collating printed
    sheets, leads to errors, more wastage, and lower quality of books.

•   Corruption in the manuscript/book evaluation, contract award, and monitoring processes:
    Money that suppliers spend to influence officials is recovered through higher cost of books
    and distribution services.

•   Prices of imported finished books vs. locally produced: In many countries, imported books
    are free of taxes and customs charges, whereas inputs such as paper and ink for local
    production attract taxes and customs charges. In some countries, locally produced books
    are subject to tax.

•   Manuscript development costs: This depends on the complexity of material to be provided.
    Manuscripts originated from scratch cost more to develop than those created from
    adaptations of existing books. For example, if a curriculum in Country A is similar to that of
    Country B, a publisher could simply contextualize content (change names and places) in a
    book developed for Country A and reprint it for use in Country B.



Slide 9




                                                                                               52
Factors that have a modest effect on textbook cost include:
• Piracy: Infringement of intellectual property rights (copyright) contributes to significant loss
   of income for publishers.

•   Profit margin: This depends on affordability by buyers, and whether bulk purchases are
    made.

•   Distribution costs: They can significantly affect the unit cost if factored into it. Most low
    income countries, at least in Africa, have scattered schools in difficult terrain, usually to be
    distributed during the rainy season which precedes the beginning of the school year.
•   Payment schedule for completed deliveries: Publishers (or distributors and booksellers) are
    likely to adjust their prices upward if there is a history of payments being delayed after they
    have fulfilled orders for books by the Ministry, for example.

•   Purchasing power of parents/students: This is especially important, if books are sold on the
    open market.



Slide 10




Accurate budgeting/financing depends on ensuring that all possible expenses are covered,
especially if ministry staff perform various tasks. If this is not done, say the salary component is
not charged to manuscript development costs, it gives a false view of what it actually costs to
produce a book. It should also be noted that if one asks a printer for a quote the figures
submitted may only cover printing costs because publishing and distribution are different
businesses/costs.




                                                                                                 53
Slide 11




So, how do publishers determine the cost/price of a book? First, we need to understand the
breakdown of the costs that go into producing books. It should be noted that there are many
different price breakdowns; what is presented here is one practical way of doing so.
The cost of one book is referred to as the unit cost. For a particular book, the unit cost is
calculated by adding all the potential expenses that go into the process from acquisition to
getting the book in the hands of a reader, then dividing by the total of books printed:



Unit Cost of book (U)

Where
CP: cost of production
CD: cost of distribution (including discounts to distributor and bookseller)
R: royalty payable to author
O: overheads
PR: print run

It is important to understand how unit cost is calculated because it “determines the cost of
books to the end-consumer, such as students, parents, and schools.”17 It also helps in
identifying areas to cut costs. In some instances unit cost is used to refer to only the
manufacturing cost, or the cost of printing. This does not accurately reflect all expenses
incurred in producing the book such as the various publishing costs.

17
     (De Guzmán 2012)

                                                                                          54
Slide 12




When we examine the prices of books across regions we notice that the costs of books vary
greatly from country to country for the same size of book. These differences can be small or
large, as shown in Table 1. For example, the cost of an average textbook in Uganda is $15, while
the cost of an average book in Kenya is $3.80.18 The question then is, “why are books more
expensive in certain countries than in others?” The answer lies in how a book is priced for sale.




18
     (DFID Guidance Note: Learning and teaching materials: policy and practice for provision n.d., 20)

                                                                                                         55
Slide 13




We have seen the breakdown of the costs that determine the unit cost of a book. What then
leads to variations in costs from publisher to publisher? How, for instance, does a publisher in
Kenya decide that the catalogue list price of a textbook will be $3.80 while the counterpart in
Uganda decides that the price of a similar textbook will be $15?

These differences depend on the factor that a publisher uses to set the list price of a book. This
factor enables publishers to meet all their expenses and make a profit and is influenced by:

•   Profit margin expected: The publisher prices to enable recouping expenses involved in
    manuscript development (including royalties and any other fees) and production (printing
    and packaging). If books are purchased “off the shelf” and the publisher is contracted to
    deliver to a school, for example, the distribution expense will also be factored into pricing.

•   Market demand vs. availability: If sold through bookstores, shortages on the market can
    lead to higher prices.

•   Purchasing power of buyers: can they afford the selling price?

•   Value placed on the content: This is subjective and often influenced by market demand or
    feedback from teachers and students.

We will illustrate with some sample calculations.




                                                                                               56
Slide 14




Publisher A19
Publisher A’s Standard One English book has a production cost of $1 and sets a list price of $5
(using a multiplication factor of 5):

     •   From this list price, deduct 50% as discount given to the distributor/wholesaler and
         bookseller/retailer to move the book closer to the students.

                 5 X 50% = $2.50. Now you have a Net list price of $2.50.

     •   From the Net list price, deduct 10% for copyright fees

                 2.50 X 10% = $0.25. That leaves $2.25.

     •   Next deduct the unit production cost; in this example let us assume that cost is $1.

                 $2.25 – $1 = 1.25. This publisher will make a gross profit of $1.25 per book.

     •   From this gross profit the publisher will need to deduct the costs for overhead (salaries,
         administrative expenses, utilities, etc.), taxes, and promotion. If these costs amount to
         $0.75 per book,

19
  Credit: The sample calculations presented in Slides 14 and 15 are a dapted from handouts to “So you’re thinking
about a textbook component for your project! What a task team leader needs to know for project preparation and
implementation (but were afraid to ask)”; a presentation by Alfonso de Guzmán, at “Getting Books to the Kids,” a
community of practice workshop of the Global Partnership for Education, Washington, D.C., October 12, 2012.


                                                                                                               57
               $1.25 - $0.75 = $0.50. Therefore, the publisher’s net profit is $0.50 per book.



Slide 15




Publisher B
Imagine that for the same Standard One English book as before, this publisher gives it a list
price of $3 and production cost of $1 (multiplication factor of 3):

   •   From this list price, deduct 50% as discount given to the distributor/wholesaler and
       bookseller/retailer to move the book closer to the students.

               3 X 50% = $1.50. Now you have a Net list price of $1.50

   •   From the Net list price, deduct 10% for copyright fees

               1.50 X 10% = $0.15. Now you have price of $1.35.

   •   Next deduct the unit production cost; already stated as $1.

               $1.35 – $1 = $0.35. This publisher will make a gross profit of $0.35 per book.

From this gross profit the publisher will need to deduct the costs for overhead (salaries,
administrative expenses, utilities, etc.), taxes, and promotion. In order for Publisher B to make a
net profit, these costs must be less than $0.35 per book. If not, Publisher B would have to raise
the multiplication factor.

                                                                                                 58
The two examples we have shown illustrate why two publishers in the same country can quote
different prices for the same book. It is also understandable that, because production costs and
overheads vary from country to country, there will be significant differences in the comparative
cost of books.



Slide 16
Why should we lower the cost of books?

Often, publishers face pressure from students, parents, teachers, governments or donors to
make their books more affordable in order to support learning and education. As we have
already seen, there are many stakeholders involved in the book chain. Therefore, given all that
is required to produce one print run, publishers alone can only do so much to lower the unit
cost of books; it would take the concerted effort of many stakeholders. Governments can help
by putting in place policies or specific measures, but they also need the cooperation of the
stakeholders in the book chain. On their part, publishers can identify areas for potential cost-
cutting. We shall discuss these aspects in more detail.



Slide 17
How can we lower the cost of books?

Methods to explore to help lower costs include the following:
• Dimensions: Reduce number of pages per book and size/format of each page. Less paper
  means less cost.

•   Curriculum Revision and Design: Reduce number of revisions and the number of required
    subjects at any grade level. Fewer required subjects at any grade level results in fewer
    textbooks published, and lower overall book provision costs. A negative effect of this is that
    fewer subjects reduce the market for publishers, resulting in them increasing prices to
    remain sustainable.

•   Durability/Lifespan of Books: Create specifications to ensure that printed books are
    durable enough to withstand normal wear and tear. This will reduce frequency of reprints
    needed to replace damaged books. A three-year life is generally acceptable.




                                                                                               59
Slide 18




Slide 18 shows cost factors from two sources. You will note that they have some costs in
common as well as others that are unique. Once these cost drivers are identified, we can
consider where to make savings. For a project manager, this can be an excellent guide in
negotiating prices when dealing with publishers. For example, if the MoE will undertake
distribution, that could save about 9 percent of cost in the SSA textbook example on the slide.

Such a breakdown also provides ideas as to interventions that can bring down prices (See Slide
19).



Slide 19




                                                                                            60
How can we lower the cost of books?

Here are some pertinent areas to explore:
Raw Materials: A ministry or government agency can buy paper in bulk on behalf of printers. In
some cases, paper accounts for more than 40 percent of the production cost of a book.20 The
savings to be passed on to book buyers can therefore be significant.

Tax exemptions: Consider a policy decision to reduce or eliminate customs duty and taxes on
imported raw material (such as paper), and equipment (computers, printing equipment, etc.)
used for book production. The problem here is that these same inputs can also be used for
products which are not books. For example, computers and graphic design equipment can be
used for newspapers and advertising work. Also, once paper enters a printing house, it is
difficult for an outside agency to police how it is used.

Guaranteed purchase: Here, a Ministry of Education (MoE) guarantees to buy a fixed number
of copies of a title from publishers. In return for this buyback the MoE negotiates a favorable
discount from the publisher to lower the cost of books purchased as well as prices of those that
may be sold on the open market.

Strengthen delivery systems: Book provision projects should provide funding to cover delivery
of books. Unsecured warehouses and non-verification of deliveries lead to leakages. One can
also negotiate with distributors/booksellers to reduce cost of delivery to schools, particularly if
the MoE can assure them of continued business.

Pricing: Make this a significant factor in evaluating books for selection onto approved textbook
lists or for purchase. It has the potential of creating competition between publishers that would
lead to lower prices. However, care must be taken not to compromise the quality of books
supplied.




20
     (DeJongh 2012)

                                                                                                61
Slide 20
Who finances the books?

Book financing can be done in two main ways: Financing the supply side of book provision
(producer financing), and financing the demand side of book provision (consumer financing).
Producer financing supports the production of books, while consumer financing supports the
purchase of books.



Slide 21




Production of books (producer financing)

Commonly used methods of financing textbook production include:
• Government: In some countries, the government produces or directly finances production
   of textbooks. This is usually the case where books are authored by staff of government
   agencies, where there is no local publishing industry or the industry lacks the capacity to
   produce the required books.

•   Donors may provide funding in the form of loans or grants to governments specifically for
    the purpose of producing books.

•   Publishers: Where the publishing industry is vibrant, especially in middle income countries,
    private publishers finance production of textbooks using their own capital. The books may
    be then purchased by government for supply to schools or sold on the open market for
    purchase by parents/students.

•   Public-private partnership: In this scenario, Government teams up with publishers or
    printers to produce textbooks. For example, government may commission manuscripts,
    then turn them over to publishers to take through the production process (editing, design,

                                                                                             62
    illustrations, printing, and packaging). Government may then buy back all textbooks
    produced. In another scenario, often used in many countries, the government purchases a
    portion of the books produced and allows the publisher to sell the rest on the open market.
    When this happens this becomes a hybrid method, a case of Producer/Consumer funding.



Slide 22




Provision (supply) to Schools and Students

While producer financing refers to financing the production of textbooks, in consumer financing
we are talking about who pays for supplying the books to schools. A number of scenarios arise:
• Government: This type of financing is prevalent in most countries. Government, either
   central or district/provincial/local, allocates funding in education budgets to fully cover
   textbook provision. The government then buys books and distribute to schools. The
   government may choose to establish revolving funds in which money from rental schemes
   and government contributions is collected and used for textbook provision. For several
   years, this was successfully done in Lesotho.

•   Parents: Purchase books for their children.

•   Donors: Provide funds in the form of grants to governments to help purchase books. This
    method does not result in sustainable financing for long-term book provision as donor funds
    cannot be guaranteed forever.

•   A combination of all of the above: In this case, costs are shared. For example, parents may
    be required to fund 30% of cost; donor agency 30% and government 40% of the cost of
    supplying a book.



                                                                                            63
Slide 23

Scenarios for Financing Textbooks




The table shown here summarizes the different scenarios described for financing textbooks. It
is important to analyze what would work for a country, given its own context —funding
available to government, parental purchasing power, etc.



Slide 24

How can we ensure sustainable financing for books?

Different means of financing come into play depending on the country’s resources, affordability
of the books—parental purchasing power—and access to finance for publishers and printers.

Government
Its role is primarily to ensure that budgets include a line item for textbook provision annually.
Planning for sustainable funding for books is crucial in ensuring the provision of books to
students year after year and avoiding one-off book provision projects that cannot be replicated.
In some countries, such as Albania, for example, the government provides parents with
vouchers which are redeemed at bookstores that stock school textbooks. Although parents
collect books on behalf of their children, in effect it is the government that pays for the books.

                                                                                               64
Textbook rental scheme
Schools can loan books to students year after year for a fee. The books are collected at the end
of the year and then loaned again to the next group of students. For Textbook rental schemes
to be success this process has to work effectively. Rental fee subsidies may not be high enough
to support new book development cases but can often support reprints of current books. An
example of a successful rental scheme is Lesotho that was in place from the 1980-1990s.
(Source: DFID Guidance Note).

Improve access to finance for stakeholders
This is a policy issue. Government can encourage commercial banks to add book publishing to
their lending portfolios to provide better access to financing for publishers and printers.
Improved access to loans and interest rates will result in lower pricing compared to prices that
are dictated by the cost of financing through other means of raising capital. As noted in
Modules 2 and 3, lack of access to finance is one of the key problems faced by publishers and
printers in low income countries.

For more on sustainable funding of textbooks, see DFID Guidance Note in the Resources section
of this module.

Slide 25




                                                                                             65
This slide suggests how donors can support governments to provide sustainable funding for
book provision programs.21 Which of these are applicable in your own country? What else do
you think should be done in this regard?



Slide 26

Summary
In this module we:

•    Learned about methods by which publishers determine the unit production cost and the list
     (catalogue) price of a book;
•    Discussed factors that contribute to wide differences in costs of textbooks across regions
     such as Africa, and some methods to lower costs; and
•    Examined scenarios for sustainable financing of textbooks. We noted that the different
     scenarios require analysis per country context before they are applied.



Slide 27

Exercise Questions
1. Assuming a multiplication factor of 4 times a production cost of $1, a copyright fee at 10%
   of list price, and overheads, etc. amounting to $0.75, what net profit would Publisher Z
   arrive at, using the same method as outlined in this module? You may refer to Slides 14 and
   15 for guidance.

2. Country X is a low income country that has seen a dramatic increase in the number of
   students enrolled in school due to the introduction of fee-free primary school education.
   Unfortunately the budget for textbook and learning material has not increased to meet this
   increase in number of students. The MoE has requested your help for suggestions on how
   to finance the next cycle of textbooks. What short- and long term measures would you
   suggest to lower the cost of books in order to meet this need demand? Explain why you
   think they would work in Country X.


21
  Adapted from “Textbook Cost and Financing Issues in Sub-Saharan Africa,” a presentation by Birger Fredriksen at
'Getting Books to the Kids,' a community of practice workshop of the Global Partnership for Education,
Washington, D.C., October 12, 2012.


                                                                                                              66
Slide 28

Resources

For further study:

1. World Bank Support for Provision of Textbooks in Sub-Saharan Africa 1985-2000. Cost
   Recovery and Affordability, p. 55 (see table of cost structure of an average African
   textbook): http://www-
   wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2002/08/09/000094946
   _0207270405422/Rendered/PDF/multi0page.pdf

2. DeJongh, Maggie: Books costs across the book chain
   http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day1/Books%20Costs%20Across%20th
   e%20Book%20Chain%20-%20Maggie%20DeJongh.pdf

3. DFID - Learning and Teaching Materials: Policy and Practice for Provision, Financing LTMs
   and Textbook Costs. Retrieved from:
   https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/learning-and-teaching-materials-policy-and-
   practice-for-provision-guidance-note-a-dfid-practice-paper

4. Braslavsky , C. and Katya Halil (2006). Textbooks and Quality Learning for All: Some Lessons
   Learned from International Experiences. Paris: UNESCO Publishing.

5. Fredriksen, Birger. Textbook Cost and Financing Issues in Sub-Saharan Africa:
   http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day3/GPE_Textbook_Workshop_Fredr
   iksen_PresentationOctober_2012.pdf




                                                                                              67
Book Acquisition Strategies
Module 5: Preparing for a Textbook Acquisition Strategy—Deciding What To Pay
          For


Slide 5

Learning Objectives
In this module, we will:
• Discuss issues to consider prior to developing a textbook acquisition strategy, and
• Examine 8 factors critical to planning a successful acquisition strategy and the impact each
    of these has on the process.



Slide 6




Why is a book acquisition strategy needed?

The goal of a successful book acquisition strategy is to get the right books —content, relevance
to curriculum, publication and print quality—into the hands of students when and where they
are required, at the right cost. Strategy guides action. Therefore, the strategy will detail how
best to achieve this objective. The starting point is to think through what needs to be done
before planning a strategy. This would involve:

•   Finding out which titles are needed;
•   Determining how many books will be acquired by students and teachers, where they are
    needed, when they should arrive at their points of destination – not to the Ministry but to
    the end-users (schools, teachers, and students) or bookstores for students to buy before
    the beginning of the school year; and

                                                                                             68
•   Considering how the book acquisition project will be financed.



Slide 7




Eight Factors to consider in Textbook Acquisition Strategy Development

While acquisition strategies may vary from country to country, there are 8 basic factors that
each country should consider before planning a book acquisition strategy. These are:

1. Needs Assessment: This includes the assessment of the current book needs.
2. Market Capacity: If books will be purchased by parents, are prices affordable? What is the
   size of population that uses books on a regular basis?
3. Implementing Agency: Will the industry (private sector) be involved in book production and
   distribution or will the government do everything?
4. Student-to-Book ratio: How many students will share one book? What will promote learning
   vs. government’s ability to provide?
5. Choice: Will government acquire a single book per subject per grade or will it acquire
   multiple books per subject per grade?
6. Distribution: Getting the books to end users is critical. Does a distribution system exist –
   trucks or rail? What do the roads look like in rural areas? Is warehousing available
   throughout the country?
7. Lifespan: What is the expected lifespan of the books before reprint or revision? Will they be
   used in the classroom only or will students carry them to and from home? Carrying back
   and forth would require durable materials—paper and binding, for example.
8. Supplementary/local language books: Will these types of books be acquired to support
   learning?


                                                                                             69
We will now discuss each of these factors in detail.



Slide 8




1. Country Book Needs

Before commencing a new cycle of book provision, it is important to conduct a needs
assessment to determine what and where the book needs are. Some of the issues to address
and questions to ask during needs assessment are:

•   Current situation: What is the number and state of existing books (titles) used in schools?
    Are books available, and how many are available in each region of the country? Where and
    when are books needed? Assessment should indicate zones of scarcity. For example, where
    is scarcity prevalent—limited to rural areas or also noticeable in semi-rural areas? Is it a
    nationwide issue? The answers here will help to formulate the objective for the book
    provision project. Additionally, this is the time to determine whether any existing local
    publishing capacity can adequately meet the textbook demand identified during needs
    assessment. If not, then the strategy adopted should identify the steps the country intends
    to take in order to satisfy demand in the short term, while laying a foundation for the
    medium to long term. For instance, a fragile country such as South Sudan, faced with
    providing textbooks all across the newly independent country, might identify a short-term
    plan to address a lack of local procurement and book provision capacity, while at the same
    time develop/adopt measures to meet its medium needs such as reprints of books and
    long-term needs such as publishing of book using local capacity.

•   Types of books: What books are needed to fulfill curricular needs? Does every required
    subject have the right kind of book already available on the market, for example? If so, can

                                                                                             70
    these be purchased off the shelf? If not, what arrangements can be made for reprints? If no
    books exist for a subject, would the project then have to support writing and publishing,
    perhaps in partnership with the private sector? For mother-tongue and supplementary
    books, would these have to be translated or new ones written?

•   Student-to-book ratio: What is the optimal ratio (i) that government desires; (ii) that can
    realistically be financed? This has major financial implications as well as logistics
    arrangements.

•   Quantities: How many books should be acquired to meet the desired student-to-book ratio
    and effectively neutralize any black market in books? This will involve considering the
    requirements of both public and private schools when deciding the quantities to produce.



Slide 9




2. Market capacity
A major factor affecting textbook market capacity is affordability. This is one area where
consultancy advice might be needed. Questions to consider here are:

Can parents afford to purchase the books? If so, how many books per child, for example? If not,
what system can be established in place to ensure that books are made available to students
through alternative financing options such as donor funding, government free supply or a book
rental scheme? In low income countries, the choice is often between total free provision and
systems of partial cost recovery—free provision only of core textbooks, or to deprived/rural
areas, rental schemes, etc.




                                                                                            71
Slide 10




3. Implementation Agency. Who will best fulfill the project?
In addition to evaluating market capacity, a good book acquisition strategy will identify:

•   Whether the government alone should undertake acquisition, using the centralized
    method;
•   Whether the private sector be involved in book production and distribution under a
    decentralized approach; or
•   If a hybrid model incorporating elements from the two other methods will be the best
    option for the country.

Any choice has implications, as we will show.



Slide 11




Under centralized acquisition strategy, Government, usually through a Ministry or agency will,
for instance, approve book manuscripts, procure publishing and printing services, then acquire
and distribute the books to the schools without involving local districts or the private sector.


                                                                                             72
Before opting for this scenario, an assessment should be done to ensure that government/MoE
has the capacity to undertake all the different tasks required as well as cost-effectiveness
compared to involving the private sector.



Slide 12




In a decentralized system, Government and private sector have separate, defined roles to
ensure efficient book provision. Government can, for example, evaluate and approve
manuscripts and books to be used, procure publishing and printing, and then assign schools and
local government districts the job of acquiring the books for their students.

Before choosing this option, an assessment should be carried out to determine if the private
sector (publishing industry), local government and schools all have the required capacity to
implement this strategy in a cost-effective manner. Such an assessment should also indicate
whether and when to involve publishers and their agents, and/or whether joint ventures
between publishers (national-national, national-international) would meet the country’s needs.




                                                                                           73
Slide 13

How do Centralized and Decentralized Acquisition Strategies differ?




The table highlights some pros and cons about centralized and decentralized acquisition of
books. Are there any others that you can think of?



Slide 14




Hybrid model
Depending on circumstances, the MoE might choose a hybrid model that incorporates
elements of the two methods described. For example, the MoE may choose to centralize orders

                                                                                        74
from schools or districts, and then deal directly with publishers, printers or their agents.
Distribution and delivery would be made through the private sector: (i) by publishers to district
education offices and from there to schools; (ii) by distributors and/or booksellers direct to
schools; or (iii) from publishers through booksellers for purchase by parents or delivery to
schools. For example, one can have centralized production but decentralized printing and
acquisition, as in Sudan, which is totally State monopolistic. Or one can have private production
and centralized acquisition, as in Mongolia. As stated before, the country context as well as
costs are major deciding factors for the type of acquisition the MoE will use in book provision.



Slide 15




4. Student-to-Book Ratio
A successful book acquisition strategy should identify the book-to-student ratio that will ensure
equitable book distribution. Will every student be provided with a book or will they share
books?
The student-to-book ratio depends on:

•   The curriculum’s requirements for the subject: For example, a workbook in which students
    have to complete exercises cannot be shared and, it can be used for only one school year.
    On the contrary, a story book can be shared and reused for a number of years.
•   Book usage: Will books be taken home or used only in class?
•   Availability of Teacher’s Guide: Where books are in short supply, having teacher’s guides
    can help fill the vacuum and provide structured teaching. In fact, it is advisable to always
    make provision for teachers’ guides, regardless of availability of books for students.
•   Funding: Whether it is government or parents who finance book provision.



                                                                                              75
Several studies have shown that a 1:1 student-to-book ratio facilitates learning.22



Slide 16




This photo illustrates what happens when multiple children share one book. Here, apart from
the natural jostling for position to see what is on the pages, the child who is second from right
most probably gets the closest view while the others see everything from the peripheral view.
In addition to the discomfort evident in the photo, only one student will best be able to see the
material clearly. And obviously, students cannot take home the book, given the difficulty of
having to track whose turn it will be, further hindering learning.




22
     (Majgaard 2012)

                                                                                              76
Slide 17




5. The Question of Choice
In many countries, the Ministry of Education approves one book per subject per grade. As
discussed under Market Capacity, a country with low population and one language spoken
throughout will have need for fewer total textbooks, compared to a country with a large
population and multiple languages. This has implications for whether or not students should be
given a choice of books for every subject per grade. There is need also to consider if teachers
will have a choice of books for their subjects.

Books can be acquired based on the following options:

Single book option (SBO): As the name states, this strategy acquires only one textbook per
subject per grade for each student. For example, for Standard One English, only one textbook
will be selected, prescribed, and acquired for use throughout the country.

Multiple book option (MBO): this strategy allows for the acquisition of multiple books per
subject per grade. In this case, for Standard One English, multiple titles will be approved from
which teachers or schools can select which one they think is best suited for their students to
use.

The following table compares the two options.




                                                                                             77
Slide 18

Single Book vs. Multiple Book Option




What factors are in play when a decision has to be made about choice? This table details issues
to consider and shows that one option does not fit all countries. Each country’s context plays a
significant role in what option to use.



Slide 19




                                                                                             78
6. Distribution
Once books are produced, distribution is the next major challenge. Getting the books safely
and on time to the intended users is important to ensure that students have the necessary
learning material at the beginning of the school year. In middle income countries, distribution
takes place through booksellers. But in many low income countries, distribution/bookselling is
seen as the weakest link in the book chain, and not well-developed.23

Distribution is perceived this way because governments have a tendency to focus on publishing,
leaving distribution on the back burner, and usually tackling it the wrong way (i.e. with a final
destination at local education offices, and not the school itself). A practical solution consists in
linking distribution with publishing at bidding stage: publishers will offer slightly higher prices
(but way less expensive than what it would actually cost the government to do it itself), but
they will subcontract and take care of the whole chain, preferably up to the schools’ doorsteps.
It works very well in Uganda, Kenya, and Mongolia for example. Government distribution
systems are usually a disaster—as experienced in Timor Leste, Madagascar—but can be
surprisingly efficient in ex-socialist systems, such as Moldova or Mozambique. The question to
consider is: “What will work better for this context?”

There is need therefore, to identify and address any weakness in distribution systems before
distribution begins. Issues include proper packaging (against weather changes, rough handling),
storage, transportation, and security as well as tracking and delivery verification to ensure that
books do not leak into the illegal market.

Distribution strategies will be discussed in detail in Modules 7 and 8.




23
     (Brickhill 2006)

                                                                                                 79
Slide 20




7. Lifespan/Duration

To help determine the interval between reprints, consider the following questions:

•      What is the expected lifespan of books in the classroom? Generally, this averages three
       years for paperback books. A shorter lifespan (perhaps due to low quality materials) will
       mean that books are replaced often, resulting in increased overall costs for book provision.
       A long lifespan of about 6 years, for example, reduces frequency of reprints and costs.24
       However, this would mean producing expensive hardcover books.

•      Will books be carried back and forth between school and home? This will have an impact on
       the condition of the book. Frequent and potentially rough handling (rain or shine) means
       books will likely not last very long. If students will be allowed to take books home, the
       technical specifications should provide for sturdy books and covers.




24
     (DFID Guidance Note: Learning and teaching materials: policy and practice for provision n.d., 26)

                                                                                                         80
Slide 21




8. Acquiring Local Language Books.

In some countries this is an important issue. Mother tongue books are important for students,
particularly in the first three years of formal education 3 (DFID Guidance Note, p. 15). In many
cases, the local language is spoken by a small population that may be marginalized. But in order
to enhance learning by students using those languages as their mother tongue, provision
should be made to obtain books in their language. The following are points to deal with when
planning for a successful local language book acquisition strategy:
• Authors and translators: Will books be from new writing or translations of (i) existing books
    within the country or (ii) from external sources? Are there authors with necessary skill sets
    to write books in local languages? Note that a locally-born author who writes well in English
    or French, for example, may not necessarily do equally well in a local language.

•   Orthography: Is the content in a standard form of the language, that is, will the book travel
    well across borders where the language are used? For example, will a Swahili book
    published in Kenya be written in such a way that it can be used in Tanzania or Democratic
    Republic of Congo, where the language is also spoken? The same goes for a book in Ewe,
    spoken widely in Togo and Ghana.

•   Usage: What level of students is the book aimed at? Does the book aim to serve transition
    from local to national (foreign) languages? Will students be able to take books home or use
    them in classroom only?

•   Sustainability: What measures are available or need to be established to sustain local
    language book production—guaranteed purchase or other form of subsidy?


                                                                                              81
Slide 22




Acquiring Supplementary Readers

Supplementary readers complement the coverage of a curriculum by textbooks. The process for
acquiring them bears many similarities to that for textbook acquisition. For example, there
should be a needs assessment to find the type of books needed by teachers and students. This
is followed by market assessment to ensure books are affordable or financed to guarantee
availability.

The main differences between acquisition strategies for supplementary readers and textbooks
are:

Local content: For supplementary readers, there is greater emphasis on content that students
can identify with culturally, because the books are mainly general readers.

Local authors: Where supplementary readers are written in local languages, local authors most
likely to hold an advantage over their foreign counterparts. An acquisition strategy for
supplementary readers should therefore include the assessment of local authors with good skill
sets to write trade books (books published for distribution to the general public through
booksellers) for various grade levels. Sometimes, it may be easier to order reprints or
translations of relevant foreign books.

Financing: In income countries, this can be a major obstacle for parents and government. It is
important to resolve this right at the onset. There are a number of NGOs working on providing
supplementary readers to students. Some of these NGOs provide producer funding to local
publishing industries by guaranteeing purchase of a percentage of the books of books published


                                                                                           82
for distribution to students and libraries. For an example, see “Burt Award for African
Literature” sponsored by CODE in Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, and Tanzania
(http://www.codecan.org/get-involved/burt-award-africa).



Slide 23




Book usage

Procuring books without students being able to use them is counterproductive—a waste of
resources. We can optimize usage through:

•      Teacher training. If teachers don’t know how to use the books they will facilitate usage in
       their classroom instruction, neither will they encourage usage by students outside school,
       for example, in libraries and at home. Thus student learning will be severely restricted.

•      Recording system (in schools): A simple system of recording and issuing books will provide
       the head teacher with knowledge about what books (s)he has, where they are and who uses
       them.

•      Continuous exposure. When students are allowed to take their books home, it enables
       them to interact with books in a non-classroom environment. Research has shown that
       “having books in the home has a greater impact on children from the least-educated
       families. It is at the bottom, where books are rare, that each additional book matters
       most”25



25
     (Evans 2010)

                                                                                               83
The reality in many countries is that book use tends to be restricted to the classroom.
Sometimes this is because there are not enough books to ensure one book per student. In some
cases, it is because the books are locked up by the teacher or head teacher after school, to
avoid losses. That means learning may be confined to the classroom as well, and the benefits
stated in the research cited above can never be enjoyed by deprived students.

Some communities in low income countries address this issue by establishing reading rooms or
small libraries, where students can read outside the classrooms. Sometimes these are done in
partnership with NGOs, but in many cases students cannot take books out of the reading
rooms. To learn more about how to organize a community library, you may read about the Osu
Children’s Library Fund.26



Slide 24

Summary
In this module, we learned that an effective textbook acquisition strategy will:

•      Take into account the 8 factors discussed—country’s textbook needs, student-to-book ratio,
       distribution network, etc.;

•      Map book availability;

•      Facilitate data collection;

•      Supply books required; and

•      Provide ongoing information about other needs.


Slide 25

Exercise

Yambazo is a small country that desires to print books in local languages for grades 1-4. The
Ministry of Education (MoE) currently implements the single book option as part of its
decentralized book acquisition strategy. To support a new curriculum, the MoE is about to
commence a new nationwide book provision program and is considering revisions to its
acquisition strategy.
26
     The information can be accessed at http://www.osuchildrenslibraryfund.ca/

                                                                                              84
Assuming that you were asked to advise the Minister of Education in Yambazo about designing
a strategy to get textbooks to students in time for the next semester:
How would you go about developing an acquisition strategy for the country? What questions
would you ask and why?
Consider also how you would find out about the current acquisition strategy —what is working
and what is not.



Slide 26

Resources
For further study:

1. Libraries without Borders – increasing growth and access to libraries and reading materials.
   http://www.librarieswithoutborders.org/

2. Further reading: CODE (www.codecan.org) guarantees purchase of a number of books from
   publishers if they meet certain conditions. The publishers then are free to print trade books
   because they have a guaranteed income to pay the printer and meet other publishing
   expenses. See presentation at workshop on Getting the Right Books to the Kids:
   http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day2/Reading%20Material%20Present
   ation%20-%20Scott%20Walter.pdf

3. Clark Chiarelli, Nancy. “Rwanda Reads”:
   http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day3/GPE_Textbook_Workshop_Clark
   _Chiarelli_PresentationOctober-2012.pdf

4. Jacobs, Tom. “Home libraries provide huge educational advantage.” 2010.
   http://www.psmag.com/culture-society/home-libraries-provide-huge-educational-
   advantage-14212/

5. Evans, M. D. R., et al. Family scholarly culture and educational success: Books and schooling
   in 27 nations. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility (2010),
   doi:10.1016/j.rssm.2010.01.002

6. Sow, M. Aliou. Textbook Provision:
   http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day2/Textbooks%20Provision%20-
   %20Aliou%20Sow.pdf




                                                                                              85
Book Acquisition Strategies
Module 6: Preparing for Textbook Development—Essential Steps



Slide 5

Learning Objectives
In this module we will:

•   Discuss methods a country can use to develop textbooks;
•   Examine the role that governments play in textbook development; and
•   Consider how to harness public-private partnerships in this endeavor.



Slide 6




Textbooks support learning and the educational goals of a country that aims to develop a
literate society. Textbooks provide a structured means to cover a program of learning, as
mandated by a curriculum. Without textbooks, it would be difficult to have standards by which
learning would be graded and tested. Without textbooks, very little formal learning takes place.
In fact, learning may be limited to dictation by the teacher, and copying and memorization by
students.

If governments understand that books are crucial to their educational goals, they will take the
necessary measures to ensure that students have the books they need to learn. A study of 21
Sub-Saharan Africa countries by Michaelowa and Wechtler found that a change from a no-
reading material status to full coverage of one book per student yields improvements in

                                                                                             86
student achievement of between 5 percent and 20 percent of a standard deviation.27
Moreover, teachers are unlikely to integrate textbooks into their instructional approach unless
all students have a copy.28 The study concluded that textbooks are among the most cost-
effective inputs in student learning.29


Slide 7




A textbook development program therefore aims to prepare and package quality content that
effectively addresses curriculum and learning goals, and also to provide adequate and
affordable learning materials to students in a cost-effective and sustainable manner.



Slide 8




Rather than purchasing off-the-shelf, a government may decide to develop textbooks for use
within the country’s schools. How does a government start? The Ministry of Education, (MoE) in
its role as supervisor of formal education, is usually responsible for setting policy, engaging
stakeholders, and creating the conducive environment necessary for textbook writing,
27
   (Majgaard 2012, 132)
28
   Ibid. p. 133
29
   Ibid. p. 145

                                                                                            87
evaluation, publishing (production and printing), and distribution. Generally, textbook
development should be guided by:

•   National (text)book policy
•   Curricula
•   Book publishing capacity
•   Financing

We will discuss each of these in detail.



Slide 9




National (text)book policy

National book policies provide guidelines on how books are produced, manufactured and
distributed in a country. Educational book (textbook) policy can form part of an overall national
book policy or may be a completely separate policy document (See Resources for a sample from
Namibia). Many countries do not even have a textbook policy, which details modalities for
provision of educational books. Whether a government undertakes the role of publisher or not,
the many different stakeholders of the book production and supply chain need to be
coordinated to ensure adequate and timely supply of textbooks and teachers guides for
students.

When preparing for textbook development therefore, it is important to establish guidelines to
deal with the following questions:



                                                                                              88
•   What language(s) will be used for textbooks?
•   What is the targeted student- to-book ratio?
•   What framework exists to show how to engage the different stakeholders (public and
    private) in order to facilitate the availability of textbooks? For example, is there a provision
    for public-private partnership? Experience tells us that you get a better outcome if you
    engage with your stakeholders and understand their views. They may also have insights that
    could help design or improve an effective program.
•   What are the regulatory measures in regards to content, taxes and copyright? The answer
    to this question could provide key incentives to attract private sector involvement.
•   Will teachers have a choice of books to select from? What book option—multiple or
    single—will be used for each subject, and at what level? This should be specified because it
    if the private sector is to be involved, publishers will know upfront that they will face
    competition.
•   What are the guidelines for use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in
    education? For example, does the policy allow for use of Open Educational Resources or
    distribution of content via e-readers such as mobile phones and tablets?

Module 11 deals with national book policies.



Slide 10




Curriculum Development

In many countries, the MoE is the government agency responsible for developing curricula.
Curricula generally reflect national aspirations and are revised as a result of various factors such



                                                                                                 89
as changing political, educational, economic, and social needs. Questions to consider before
proceeding further include:
• Does a curriculum exist? If yes, evaluate its adequacy to meet educational goals.
• If a curriculum is inadequate or does not exist, here are some options:
    − Can textbook development be delayed for curriculum to be revised?
    − Acquire textbooks from other countries and write a new curriculum? This might apply to
       a country in the immediate aftermath of civil war, for example, where key documents
       may have been destroyed.

Afghanistan provides a useful example of how a curriculum evolves:
The curriculum in all Afghan refugee schools is a variant of the pre-war curriculum of
Afghanistan. In the 1980s there were several curriculum development initiatives, leading to
different sets of textbooks and supplementary materials. An inter-agency workshop in 1990 led
to the adoption of the “University of Nebraska” textbooks for use in UNHCR -funded schools,
but since then the emphasis has shifted towards workbooks prepared by GTZ’s Afghan
educators. Refugees in UNHCR-funded schools also study Urdu (the national language of
Pakistan) as a subject. As noted earlier, the curriculum thus supports repatriation but provides
language skills for students who stay in Pakistan.30



Slide 11




When designing curricula, officials should consider how the following would affect textbook
development and provision:

1. Core (required) subjects per grade level: The more core (required) subjects that are
   needed, the more books need to be produced and therefore, more funding required. For

30
     (Learning for a Future: Refugee Education in Developing Countries 2001, 63)

                                                                                             90
       example, a reduction from 7 to 5 core subjects covering a school population of 100,000
       results in 200,000 less books needed. At a cost of $5 each, a country will save $1 million for
       one print cycle.

2. Frequency of major revisions: Major curricula revisions mean new books have to be
   produced to support the updated requirements. New books means that the Ministry of
   Education or parents need to find funds to purchase the new books. Additionally, teachers
   need to be trained on any new curriculum and usage of the new books. For example, in
   Tanzania, the agency responsible for curriculum development changed the syllabus three
   times in 5 years: 2005, 2007 and 2009.31

3. Timing of revisions: To avoid wastage, revisions need to be aligned with the planned
   lifespan of current textbooks. As discussed in Module 3, the typical lifespan of well-designed
   book is about 3 years. By timing curricula revisions to this lifespan and to the school year
   calendar, the government is able to retire books currently in use, and introduce new books
   in line with the revised curriculum, in a cost effective manner.

4. Harmonizing curricula: In regions where language and educational needs are similar,
   harmonized curricula can result in production costs being shared by the countries, reducing
   costs for all parties. Though one hears of this occasionally, it is yet to be effected in a
   practical manner in recent times. In the 1970s, for example, when Anglophone West African
   countries used a similar curriculum, English language books produced in Nigeria were used
   in Nigerian as well as Ghanaian schools.



Slide 12




31
     (Kira 2013, 136)

                                                                                                  91
Manuscript preparation

Now the task of providing quality textbooks swings into full gear, as curriculum is made
available to interested authors and publishers.

1. Writing
Once the issue of curriculum is settled, manuscript preparation can proceed. Here there are a
number of options. If textbooks have to be written from scratch, this may be done by:

•   Independent authors;
•   Individuals/Teams tied to publishers (private sector); or
•   Teams assembled by MoE or a textbook development agency.

2. Testing content
Piloting of textbooks: This is a means of assessing whether the content meets the curriculum’s
requirements. An author or publisher involves teachers and students to evaluate issues such as
language level, ease of understanding concepts, clarity of presentations, and overall usefulness
as a teaching and learning resource. The feedback collected is accordingly used to revise the
content.

Generally, most countries now develop their own textbooks employing the services of the
private sector. In the past, governments prepared manuscripts and used printers as needed.
Regardless of the testing means used, it is important for authors/publishers to continue
receiving feedback from teachers, students, and evaluators.




                                                                                             92
Slide 13

Intellectual property/Copyright ownership scenarios in Textbook publishing




Copyright
Intellectual property refers to creations of the mind: inventions; literary and artistic works; and
symbols, names and images used in commerce. Intellectual property is divided into two
categories: industrial property and copyright. Copyright is a legal term used to describe the
rights that creators have over their literary and artistic works. Works covered by copyright
range from books, music, paintings, sculpture and films, to computer programs, databases,
advertisements, maps and technical drawings.32 Copyright is the exclusive legal right, given to
an originator or an assignee to print, publish and to authorize others to do the same. Copyright
protection exists from the moment a work is created in a fixed, tangible form of expression. The
copyright immediately becomes the property of the author who created the work. Only the
author, or those deriving their rights through the author, can rightfully claim copyright. In the
case of works made for hire, the employer—not the writer—is considered the author.33

As we noted in Module 2, it is important to establish ownership of content before publication
takes place, to forestall claims later on. In some cases, publishers who produced copies of
textbooks based on manuscripts supplied by a Ministry of Education (MoE) claimed copyright


32
     (What is Intellectual property? n.d.)
33
     (The Campus Guide to Copyright Compliance n.d.)

                                                                                                93
ownership and prevented the MoE from reprinting the books. This could have been avoided if
the agreement to publish had clearly stated who owned the copyright.
Common copyright scenarios in textbook publishing include the following, detailed in the above
table:

1. Books developed by Ministry of Education or government agency and printed/published by
   private sector.
2. Books developed and printed/published by private sector.
3. Books developed by private sector and printed by government.
4. Educational content repackaged from open source resources.

The key issue in these scenarios is: Who owns/holds the copyright? Usually, copyright is owned
by the originator of the text (content) and any assignee(s). If government develops content or
commissions it, then government is the copyright owner. Open source content is further
complicating traditional notions of copyright as content can be repackaged and distributed
numerous times by different people, making it difficult to figure out the original owner of the
content.

Contracts given for printing or publishing a textbook should state clearly who owns the
copyright and how many printings are authorized. This is a point for negotiation between MoE
and publishers, especially where the MoE develops textbooks and invites printers/publishers to
print/publish. It must be noted that when MoE commissions a private publisher to produce
textbooks, said publisher will not commit itself in the long run and may not feel strong incentive
produce quality work if it does not hold the copyright. Negotiation and agreement on this
issue—to provide longer term reprint rights (say 3-5 years)—will eliminate complaints by some
governments that printers and publishers sometimes hold them to ransom, insisting that they
(printers and publishers) hold the copyright to books developed by the MoE.




                                                                                               94
Slide 14

Review and Selection of Textbooks (1)
In addition to design and development of curricula, the Ministry of Education or a designated
agency also undertakes the role of reviewing and approving textbooks to be used by students in
a country. Books can be submitted by publishers to the ministry for review in the form of a
manuscript or book.

Evaluation committees are constituted for the task. This committee should ensure that it uses
a well-designed book review instrument to determine which books are the most appropriate
for use as textbooks among those submitted for review. Criteria that should be included in the
review instrument include:

1. Conformity to curriculum: Does the book fully cover the curriculum? If not, what are the
   gaps?
2. Content: Is the book pedagogically and academically sound, that is to say, does it
   adequately treat the subject matter at the right grade level?
3. Language: Is it appropriate and clear to understand?
4. Exercises: Are they rigorous enough and adequate test and enhance learning?
5. Illustration and design: Are these relevant to the subject? Can students at this grade level
   understand and identify with what they see?
6. Technical specifications: Do these conform to the agreed standards?
7. Costs – publishing, manufacturing, distribution, and other related costs and discounts. If
   books are to be purchased on the market (off-the-shelf), pricing should be included as a
   measure of affordability. It should be noted that expensive (higher pricing) does not always
   mean superior quality of content or production.

The criteria for review of manuscripts or finished books should be publicly available to all
textbook stakeholders. Secrecy or restricted access creates room for mistrust and corruption
among parties involved. See the Resources section for an example of Review Criteria for a
textbook project.




                                                                                            95
Slide 15




Human Resource: In order to ensure a timely and accurate review and selection process, the
MoE should ensure that it has the necessary trained staff and appropriately qualified evaluation
committee members to perform the task before the review period begins. If there is a shortage
of qualified reviewers, the MoE should make plans to identify and tr ain personnel. UNESCO’s
International Bureau of Education (UNESCO-IBE) can assist the MoE in this capacity-building
exercise. See http://www.ibe.unesco.org/en/about-the-ibe.html for more information.

Fewer personnel available to evaluate manuscripts could result in delays in approval and,
subsequently, delays in the production process. Pressure placed on the few reviewers to review
a large load of books may result in approval of inferior quality books. It also creates an avenue
for corruption, as interested authors and publishers may attempt to bribe reviewers to
circumvent competition and the need to produce quality work in order to get on the list of
approved books.

Delays in review can also result in publishers, printers and distributers being pressured to make
up for time lost in the review process. Again, this can result in inferior book production or
wastage as publishers rush to produce books in order to get them to schools at the beginning of
the school year.




                                                                                              96
Slide 16
Review and Selection of Textbooks (3)

Book/Manuscript Review Committees

In many countries Book/Manuscript Review Committees are formed to evaluate manuscripts or
books submitted. To be effective, these committees should be composed of subject specialists
with expertise in the subject matter under review, teachers who have practical teaching
experience (including those working in rural areas), and pedagogical experts. Reviewers should
not have a conflict of interest by, for example, submitting manuscripts or reviewing their own
(or their friend’s or spouse’s) manuscripts or those to which they themselves have contributed.

How does selection take place? Restricting access to committees and using blind copies of
manuscripts — without author/illustrator/publisher names—promotes objective assessment.



Slide 17

Review and Selection of Textbooks (4)

Promoting Objectivity
One needs to beware of these scenarios which may compromise reviewers or pressurize them
when making final decisions.

Caution:
• Publishers’ agents may want access to committees in order to influence decisions.
• Concerns may arise about corruption of government officials or committee members. It is
   very difficult (near impossible) for MoE staff members to disqualify or fail to recommend
   books submitted by senior Government officials or their spouses. Sometimes, these people
   front for publishers or printers and use their influence to gain contracts.

How to deal with conflict of interest
Probably the most pragmatic way is to exclude authors from serving on a committee that will
review their books. Sometimes a quid pro quo situation arises where one member of the
committee agrees to give approval to a title submitted by another member, in exchange for a
similar favor.




                                                                                            97
Here is an example of how to promote objectivity in selections. First, seclude the reviewers;
their location is kept secret to protect them from agents or publishers coming to “see them.”
Next, provide reviewers with manuscripts coded to prevent identification—that have been
stripped of the name of the author or publisher. Reviewers also receive the grading sheet with
the agreed criteria. Reviewers work independently, then come together and collate their results
without discussion. This way, a reviewer will more likely judge according to quality of content.
Comments and reasons for selection are also written and filed with the results.

To promote transparency, the criteria and decisions (selections) of the Review Committee
should be made public. Books deemed suitable for use as textbooks or supplementary readers
are placed on a “list of approved school books” after review and selection.



Slide 18




Format and presentation

Next to content, other factors to consider include:
• Font size: This is important particularly for students whose eyes are not habituated to
   looking at text. Students in developed countries become accustomed to looking text at very
   early ages, but in many low income countries this does not occur until they are in school.
   Font size for these students matters greatly, therefore, to assist with habituation. It is
   generally recommended that larger font is used for new readers. As children gain skill in
   reading a smaller font and spacing between lines can be used. Additionally, students need
   to become fluent readers before they are introduced to stylistic calligraphy.

•   Text: In terms of readability, how appropriate is this for the target grade level? Dense text
    makes reading difficult, especially for new learners.


                                                                                              98
•      Shapes: Simple shapes are learned faster than complicated shapes, especially by children.

•      Information chunking: Cognitive neuroscience research has shown that the brain learns by
       chunking small pieces of information learned into big pictures. Questions that evaluators
       can ask when considering this aspect include how is information organized to enable
       students to chunk small bits of information into bigger chunks as they continue to learn new
       material?34

Refer to the Resources section for additional information on significance of font size, text, shape
and chunking.



Slide 19
Review and Selection of Textbooks (6)

Content: This is probably the most important criterion. Yet often, officials focus on the quantity
of books to be produced to the neglect of the quality of the content.

•      Evaluators check content to assess if books are pedagogically and academically sound, that
       is to say, does the content treat the subject matter at the right grade level?
•      The content of books should also effectively address curricular goals and requirements. Is
       content tailored to the needs of the user as outlined in the curriculum?
•      For lower grade levels, since the children are learning to read, it is important to include
       more illustrations—photos, drawings—than text to hold their interest and because of their
       limited vocabulary. For higher levels, more text is not a problem.

We should note that content development is changing rapidly with the rise of open educational
resources where non-profits, authors and teachers collaborate to create peer reviewed
educational content material for free use in classrooms. Thus teachers need not limit
themselves only to textbooks for teaching material.

See Resources for more information on open source content.




34
     (Abadzi 2013)

                                                                                                   99
Slide 20




What makes a textbook “good”?

A quality textbook:35

•      Communicates clearly in the language and at the conceptual development level of the
       learner;
•      Engages the learner;
•      Supports established curriculum objectives and learning outcomes;
•      Reflects the lives of learners and their environment.



Slide 21

Publishing capacity

In addition to manuscript selection, another important factor for governments to consider
when beginning textbook development is the state of the publishing capacity in the country.
Does the country have the capacity (human resource, infrastructure, access to finance, etc.) to
produce its own textbooks?

•      Where local capacity exists, how many publishers or printers can effectively produce the
       desired quantities of books? This will inform about any gaps that need to be filled. The issue
       then is to tap existing capacity and to give it the right policy and financial framework to
       thrive.

35
     (Bernard 2012)

                                                                                                 100
•   Where local capacity for producing books is weak or non-existent, such as in a conflict-
    afflicted country, can the government realistically take on the role of publisher? If not, what
    arrangements need to be made to source publishing (or printing) internationally? For
    example, do neighboring countries in a regional economic community (e.g. ECOWAS,
    COMESA, SADC) have the capacity? For example, Kenyan and Ugandan publishers today
    produce textbooks for the newly-independent Republic of South Sudan.

If a government ascertains that the country does not have the necessary book production
capacity, what are some of the options it should consider in order to build this capacity?

•   Public-Private capacity building collaboration: In this case, for textbook development,
    capacity building is a shared responsibility between the MoE and the publishing industry,
    and takes place as needed. Where the publishing industry is well established and vibrant,
    the stakeholders usually conduct their own training to update their technical knowledge
    and skills. However, there are issues relating to curricula and evaluation criteria that the
    MoE is often better equipped to handle. UNESCO’s International Bureau of Education
    (http://www.ibe.unesco.org) can be a helpful partner in this regard.

•   Skilled workforce development: In countries where the publishing industry is weak or non-
    existent, for textbook development to take off successfully, there would have to be
    recruitment, training and professional certification of persons to undertake some of the
    various responsibilities outlined in this module. This is more longer term focused.
    Cameroon, Ghana, India, Kenya, and South Africa are examples of countries that have
    established publishing institutes at tertiary level to teach courses in various aspects of
    printing and publishing to prepare the human resource needed by the book publishing
    industry.

Slide 22




                                                                                               101
Engaging stakeholders

Much of what we have discussed highlights the government’s lead role in ensuring the
availability of affordable, quality books. Experience in several countries over the years has
shown that it is not advisable for government to monopolize the entire process for providing
books.

Increasingly, as markets are liberalized, the role that the government can effectively play is to
create a conducive environment for book development. This is particularly important in
situations where there is no publishing capacity: the government can encourage potential
stakeholders to participate in textbook development within the country. This can be achieved
by:

•   Demonstrated commitment to partner with the private sector;
•   Willingness to dialogue with stakeholders on issues relating to book provision; and
•   Transparency surrounding textbook development and procurement.

As part of technical assistance to the education sector, donors and development partners—for
example, the World Bank and the U.K.’s Department for International Development—can play a
convening role to bring stakeholders together to deliberate on how to develop a viable public-
private partnership for book provision. This is especially important in conflict-affected
countries, where businesses may have been destroyed.



Slide 23




                                                                                             102
This type of engagement enables the ministry officials, industry players, and development partners
(donors) to:

    •   Assess capacity for all aspects of book provision, from concept to market/user;
    •   Determine what human resource constraints exist; for example does the country have
        adequate trained personnel for curriculum development and manuscript/book
        evaluation;
    •   Estimate funding requirements;
    •   Clarify roles and responsibilities; and
    •   Share information relevant to achieving the desired objectives.



Slide 24

Financing

Without establishing viable, sustainable sources of financing, textbook development is bound
to fail or result in one-off projects. Planners should, therefore, ensure that they ask the correct
questions regarding financing early in the planning stages of textbook development. Questions
to answer include:

•   What funding mechanisms does the country have to finance textbook provision? How much
    will government provide? Will donor funding cover any potential shortfalls?
•   Are available books affordable for government and parents? What can be done to lower
    costs if available books are too expensive?
•   Who will finance acquisition of books; will it be donor, parents or government? Is this
    arrangement sustainable?
•   What arrangements will be in place for payment to suppliers on fulfillment of delivery?
    Delays can cripple capital-intensive businesses such as publishers, printers, and bookstores,
    because in many low income countries, these are small sized companies with low capital
    base.



Slide 25

Summary
In this module we discussed the lead role that government plays in the development of
textbooks:


                                                                                               103
•   Preparing curricula and reviewing and selecting books for use in schools;
•   Engaging stakeholders and potential private sector partners; and
•   Creating an operating environment conducive for private sector.



Slide 26

Exercise
1. Saheliana is a country in the Sahel that operates two systems of education side by side: the
   non-formal Koranic education system and the formal, traditional education system. A
   recent revision of the country’s curriculum has made it possible for students attending the
   non-formal schools to mainstream into the formal education system. The new curriculum
   also requires for development of new textbooks and reading material to support this effort.
   Keeping in mind that each country has its particular context that differs from others, please
   make suggestions to the Saheliana Ministry of Education regarding the issues to pay
   attention to in this unique textbook development process.

2. Considering the state of publishing in your country, which stakeholders can effectively
   partner the government in book provision? Where industry professionals are present, how
   can you bring them together to harness their input (i.e. who can do what) and expertise for
   textbook development?



Slide 27



Resources

1. Abadzi, Helen and Robert Prouty. (2012). “Discerning shapes, reading words like faces. The
   Current Science of Literacy and its Implications for Low-Income Countries.” Interdisciplinary
   Research Journal of the AIIAS Graduate School. Vol.15, No. 1.; pages 5-28.
   http://internationalforum.aiias.edu/images/vol15no01/infojournalvol15no1_abadzi_and_pr
   outy.pdf

2. Abadzi, Helen. 2006. Efficient Learning for the Poor. Insights from the Frontier of Cognitive
   Neuroscience. Washington, DC: World Bank.
   https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/7023/366190Efficien101O
   FFICIAL0USE0ONLY1.pdf?sequence=1


                                                                                             104
3. Abadzi, H. How to “Cure” Illiteracy? Lessons We Can Learn From Fighting HIV. Blog post ing:
   http://www.educationforallblog.org/issues/literacy-issues/how-to-cure-illiteracy

4. Bontoux, Vincent. Textbook Issues in Lower Income Countries:
   http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day3/GPE_Textbook_Workshop_Bont
   oux_PresentationOctober_2012.pdf

5. California Open Source Textbook Project: http://www.opensourcetext.org/

6. International Bureau of Education (www.ibe.unesco.org) offers technical assistance and
   training to develop curriculum specialists. To read more about possible themes for a
   stakeholder training program. See also “Development of textbooks and teaching-learning
   materials” by IBE:
   http://www.ibe.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/COPs/Pages_documents/Resource_Pac
   ks/TTCD/sitemap/Module_5/Module_5.html

7. Sow, Aliou. Textbook Provision. http://www.globalpartnership.org/our-work/areas-of-
   focus/learning-outcomes/community-of-practice-textbooks-and-educational-materials-
   workshop-2012/

8. Kira, E. and Godfry Bukagile. “Perceptions of Education Stakeholders on the Implications of
   Textbook Liberalization Policy in Tanzania.” Journal of Education and Practice. Vol.4, No.1,
   2013. p. 136.

9. UNESCO Open Educational Resources (OER)
   http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/access-to-
   knowledge/open-educational-resources/

10. Example of Review Criteria for a textbook project (sample copy).




                                                                                             105
Distribution Strategies
Module 7: Distribution Strategies: How to Get the Books to Students



Slide 5

Learning Objectives

In this module we will:

•      Equip participants to understand how book distribution is organized and the role of
       booksellers in it;
•      Highlight the factors to consider when planning a successful book delivery project; and
•      Learn how to determine appropriate costs in book distribution programs.


Slide 6




Distribution – an introduction

In marketing, distribution is the process of moving a product from its manufacturing source to
its customers. A distribution channel is the path through which goods and services travel from
the vendor to the consumer.36 In publishing, distribution is the stage in the book chain when



36
     www.businessdictionary.com

                                                                                          106
printed and published books are delivered to targeted teachers and students. If not well-
planned, this is one of the stages where a book project is most likely to fall apart.

The ultimate goal of a successful book and reading materials provision project is to get the
books into the hands of students. The success or effectiveness of a distribution strategy
depends on the channels it uses. As has happened in some countries, it is possible to produce
the needed books, only to have them sitting in the warehouses of distributors or district and
regional education offices that are unable to move books to schools within the required time.
As a result, a school year may begin without books in schools. Worse, books meant for free
distribution are sometimes leaked for sale in markets, while students attend classes without
books.

An effective distribution strategy therefore, aims to avoid distribution pitfalls and ensure that
all books arrive in a timely manner at their scheduled locations.


Slide 7




Distribution Methods

Generally, two methods are used in textbook distribution: centralized and decentralized.

In centralized distribution, the Government perhaps through the Ministry of Education
monopolizes book distribution. The MoE (Head office) determines the needs of schools, selects
books and places orders to publishers or distributors and booksellers (accredited suppliers).
Books are delivered to a central point, e.g. a warehouse. Payment is also made to publishers
and suppliers by the MoE head office. From the warehouse(s), books are repackaged to districts
or provinces, then on to schools. In many cases, the ministry cannot effectively deliver books
directly to students. Often, books arrive much later than when needed

                                                                                             107
Decentralized distribution usually involves the private sector and other intermediaries. Here,
selections and orders for books come from schools or districts to publishers or distributors and
booksellers (accredited suppliers). Books are delivered as ordered and payment is made by
recipient school or district to the supplier. We should note that governments can also have a
decentralized delivery. In some countries such as Albania, vouchers are issued to parents, who
then exchange the vouchers for school books from booksellers.

One of the features of textbook distribution in Africa over the past ten years has been the
attempt in some countries, by both governments and donors, to create conditions that would
actively support the redevelopment of national private sector bookseller coverage. Good
examples of this policy development can be found in the De-centralised Instructional Materials
Procurement Pilot Project (DIMPPP) in Uganda, decentralized textbook ordering and supply in
Zambia, the secondary textbook rental scheme and revolving fund in Malawi and decentralized
textbook supply in Tanzania.37


Slide 8




37
     (World Bank 2008)

                                                                                            108
Centralized distribution (as shown in Figure 1) is often the preferred choice of governments
that may either not understand the role of distributors/booksellers or simply think they create
an expensive layer (or middleman) in book provision. This practice has been shown to be
generally bureaucratic, inefficient and prone to delays, leakage and corruption. However, it can
work well in a small country.



Slide 9




Book distribution network model

Generally, distribution is often most effective when it is decentralized, as shown in Figure 2.
However, this works best where the necessary infrastructure—distributors, booksellers, sales
agents—exist and function well. This is the situation where the publishing industry is vibrant. In
practice, the decentralized system more often than not excludes booksellers, whose networks
have been decimated in developing countries. In countries like Ghana, Namibia or Rwanda
either distributors or publishers are responsible for distributing textbooks.




                                                                                              109
Slide 10

Centralized vs. Decentralized Distribution




When centralized distribution is compared to the decentralized method, the latter potentially
offers more benefits in terms of efficiency and effectiveness. Most developing countries now
employ some form of decentralized distribution. The World Bank study of 19 African countries
referenced earlier provided detailed information on how book distribution has fared since the
move to involve the private sector. (World Bank, 2008; see Resources.)



Slide 11

Distributing digital content

While many low income countries still focus book acquisition and distribution on printed books,
in recent times curricula content available digitally is changing the way books are distributed. As
an alternative to traditional distribution methods, published digital curricula content is made
available for download onto digital devices such as the Kindle or Nook, or via computers and
mobile phones. This method of distribution is still being piloted in many regions, and it has the
potential to reduce the costs of books and make a wide variety of educational material easily
accessible to students and teachers. In planning for book distribution, it is advisable to consider

                                                                                               110
the possibility of using this method. See Resources for Worldreader article on pilots in Ghana
and Kenya.



Slide 12




Planning for Successful Book Distribution

A book distribution strategy involves much more than trucking boxes of books. Within
countries, distribution problems are often institutional. The basic issue is that one must
understand the country context. Where the infrastructure exists, the challenge might be a
matter of incentives and governance, not simply a matter of money to pay service providers.
The first steps for planning include:

•   Identification of all the players: Decide who will or should be involved. Then clearly define
    and establish all roles and responsibilities—who will do what? For example, will
    government exercise oversight or be the implementer? Will the Ministry deliver books to
    schools or will the private industry undertake the task?

•   Communication: Who will be project coordinator/contact person(s) at Ministry
    headquarters and in the districts (and schools)? Who will be the focal point for official
    communication on the project? How easy will it be to communicate with them? This is
    important for suppliers and other officials for questions, clarifications, and for verifying
    deliveries and payments.




                                                                                             111
Slide 13




After identifying those to be involved in book distribution and defining their roles, we will detail
nine (9) factors that guide planning for such a task:

1. School mapping: Is existing data accurate and up-to-date? Where is the information
   located? Is there a system to collect data on the number of schools, students and teachers
   per district? If no system exists or data is outdated, how would you proceed to estimate
   quantities needed? Consider increase in enrollment since last data available. See Nigeria
   school mapping using Google maps/satellite technology.

2. Geographical information: Where are target schools located—urban, rural or semi-rural
   areas? In a textbook project in Mozambique, distribution was difficult because of poor
   roads. Contractors subsequently abandoned delivery because schools were inaccessible.38

3. Weather conditions: Will delivery take place during rainy, hot, or humid season? In
   Rwanda, for example, books were transported in open trucks without covering. When it
   rained, the books were destroyed




38
     (World Bank 2008, 12)

                                                                                                112
Slide 14




4. Packaging: How will this be done to avoid damage or mis-delivery, and facilitate tracking?
   Packaging is more effective if it is pre-dispatched, that is, if the boxes are labeled as per
   their final destination, be it the school, or the local education office. Color coded boxes may
   be used in cases where handlers may not be literate? An example of color coding for this
   purpose may be red marking for science, blue for mathematics, green for biology, etc. How
   will packing (number of copies per box) be done for easy handling? In rural areas, for
   example, teachers often ask students to carry boxes into classrooms for distribution. This
   should factor into deciding on weight of individual boxes.

5. Warehousing: Are warehouses accessible by truck, secure, dry (no moisture or leaky roofs),
   and rodent-free? Is storage space adequate and configured for storing cartons of books?
   For soft-cover/paperback books, stacking boxes on each other more than 4 boxes-high will
   cause books to bend out of shape and ruin the soft covers used on textbooks.


Slide 15




6. Transportation: How is transportation infrastructure in areas where books will be
   delivered? How much will it cost? What are the road conditions at the time deliveries will
   be made? What are estimated travel times from publisher or warehouse to destination?



                                                                                              113
7. Freight forwarders: In practically every country, there are people or companies that run
   trucks. The following questions will help to determine whether they can handle the task of
   delivering books as required. What is their capacity? Do they have experience in moving
   books? What packing equipment do they use? Manual handling, for example, increases risk
   of damage to cardboard boxes containing books. Do their trucks have waterproof or other
   protective covering for books? This is important, depending on the state of roads and the
   weather during distribution time.



Slide16




8. Tracking system: How will delivery and payment be verified? Could innovative methods be
   used such as text messaging, which has worked in the health sector, be employed for this
   purpose? Rwanda and Namibia are in the first stages of a comprehensive e-ordering system
   based at local education offices, which seems to be working quite well.

9. Payment: How soon after delivery will final payment be effected? This should be part of the
   contract signed with distributors or those who will deliver books as required. Remember
   that delays in payment on one project could lead to higher pricing, corruption, and leakage
   in future.




                                                                                          114
Slide 17

“A book is of no value unless it gets into the hands of a child.” Roel de Haas

The Distributor

Once a book is printed, it needs to go to the targeted audience. The printer delivers the books
to the distributor or wholesaler and on to bookseller to make the books available to the end
user—readers, or in the case of textbooks, students. Distributors are generally wholesalers who
transport finished books from the printer or publishers to the market. It is important to factor
distribution costs into any book acquisition or provision strategy.



Slide 18
The role of booksellers

Distributors are generally wholesalers who transport finished books from the printer or
publishers to the market. Booksellers are intermediaries, often the direct or final link between
the distributor and the customer/reader, the target audience. They often rely on the advice and
promotional efforts of book distributors regarding which titles to buy. Distributors and
booksellers would know best which titles are selling well and which books will sell well in
various localities. Booksellers promote books from different publishers and thereby encourage
competition for better quality material.



Slide 19




Publishers or distributors sell printed books at a discount to booksellers, who then retail the
books to parents, students or schools. Booksellers are a critical link in the book chain who
support learning and development of a reading culture by:

                                                                                            115
•      Making books more accessible; they are often located close to the schools and students,
       and can carry books from several publishers at the same time.
•      Carrying supplementary readers and other useful learning material; and
•      Providing important market feedback for quality improvement. For example, user
       comments about missing book pages and factual errors are reported to the publisher via
       the bookseller. This can lead to publication of a revised edition of the book. Booksellers also
       provide valuable feedback on design/format and pricing.



Slide 20




A study of 19 African countries (World Bank, 2008) found only South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho,
Kenya, Cote d’Ivoire, and perhaps Nigeria as those that have bookselling capacity capable of
providing genuinely national coverage.39 In many low income countries, booksellers face
serious constraints:

•      They generally lack professional training. No one requires booksellers to have a professional
       qualification before they commence trading. The average education level for booksellers in
       Burkina Faso for instance is 4th grade.
•      Booksellers in these countries tend to have low business capital. Most are small businesses,
       vulnerable to payment delays.
•      They are also viewed as meddlesome middlemen who increase the cost of books.
       Booksellers typically enjoy discounts ranging between 20-30 percent of the retail price.
       Government and donor officials frequently refer to this as “extra costs” they could save by
       doing without booksellers. This is only partially true, because someone has to bear the cost
       of distribution, getting the books from publisher/printer to students.


39
     (World Bank 2008, xx)

                                                                                                  116
•    Low income country booksellers operate more as stationery stores/kiosks. This is especially
     so in areas where people focus on feeding their families and have less disposable income
     for books. “The viability of educational bookselling, particularly in rural areas, can
     sometimes be threatened by pavement booksellers, briefcase booksellers, and pirates.
     However, pavement booksellers concentrating on secondhand books (as opposed to illegal
     pirate editions) provide a valuable service in making low cost textbooks more widely
     available to students who would otherwise have to do without them.”40

As a result of these constraints, booksellers are often excluded from book provision programs.

All the same, a number of determined efforts in Uganda, Kenya, Malawi, Zambia, and Tanzania
have redeveloped primary and secondary textbook distribution strategies that consciously seek
to support private sector educational bookselling on a national basis. In most countries in
2006 this process of network redevelopment is still only partial and most countries suffer from
serious geographic gaps in private sector textbook distribution.41


Slide 21




But, should we continue to design book provision programs without booksellers?
Such a stance is understandable, if book acquisition and distribution is centralized. The World
Bank study referenced earlier confirmed this point: “The re -development of national
bookselling networks is hindered by continued state intervention in some countries and by
underﬁnancing with associated credit and stock-holding problems in others.”42




40
   Ibid.
41
   (World Bank 2008)
42
   Ibid.

                                                                                            117
Where a decentralized system operates, we needs to consider the role of booksellers in
providing other reading and learning material that the educational system may not provide. We
must also point out that any agency contracted to deliver books to schools will incur some
expense, even if they deliver “for free”; someone always pays for distribution. Where
booksellers exist, therefore, it makes sense to involve them in distribution, because of the
benefits they bring to the book chain. If strengthened, booksellers can:

•   Introduce efficiency in book distribution efforts. A solution could consist in having
    booksellers in the capital, for example, “tutor/link to” rural booksellers, as happened in
    Uganda.
•   Be effective service providers to support learning and to foster a reading culture.

Remember, booksellers can be strategic partners for literacy development, sustainability of a
national book industry, and to foster a reading culture.



Slide 22




In addition to the problems listed on the slide, many low income countries have poor road
infrastructure. With book distribution usually occurring during the rainy season—since school
reopening is linked with the advent of the dry season—it is not surprising that books do not
arrive in schools before the school year starts.




                                                                                          118
Slide 23

When books go astray: Dealing with leakage
Leakage occurs in all distribution networks—the degree of leakage varies widely from one
country to another, and between the regions of a country. It must be dealt with in order to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of a book distribution program. Leakage (loss) can also
result from negligence (poor packaging and documentation), short- or over-supply, and theft. In
the interface between printing and distribution, printers can collude with private distributors to
divert and sell books that are supposed to be for free. Leakage feeds on poor, unpredictable,
uneven distribution. Leakage is difficult to control as long as students do not have books and
demand exists.

Leakage control can be enhanced by:
• Technical expertise: There is no substitute for having a coordinator who understands the
   industry and distribution in particular. Investing in the right human capital can reap huge
   savings benefits and assure quality and efficiency during project implementation.

•    Institutional attitude and regulation: What sanctions do those responsible for short-supply
     face, for example? If people can go unpunished for fraudulent practices and theft, others
     will be encouraged to join in the practice.

•    Coded packaging: This could be as simple as using colors or numbers to indicate
     destinations of packages. In some areas, colors have been used instead of barcodes and
     numbers, because of the illiterate or semi-literate drivers/handlers involved in packing and
     delivery.

•    Community involvement: This has proved most effective in tracking along the distribution
     process and verification of delivery. In Pakistan, mobile phones have been used to do this
     for pharmaceutical drugs. In South Africa, this is being successfully used to track textbooks
     down to the classroom level through mobile technology. See the Philippines Check My
     School initiative (www.checkmyschool.org) for a full description of a community-led
     initiative that gained official (national) recognition. During its operating years, Textbook
     Count, a precursor of Check My School, tracked millions of textbooks. It managed to reduce
     the price of textbooks by 40 percent, to improve the accuracy of textbook deliveries, and to
     shorten the Department of Education’s procurement cycle from 24 to 12 months.43


43
   See Check My School (www.checkmyschool.org); and
siteresources.worldbank.org/INTFIDFOR/Resources/.../1cEAP-PR.pdf.

                                                                                              119
•      Flooding the market with books: It has been argued that the more books are available, the
       less likely leakage will occur. Crouch (2011) offers two recommendations: “First,
       governments need to make sure there is plenty of supply, which will greatly reduce the
       incentive to be a ‘book scalper.’ That is, make sure that there are as many books (or even a
       bit more) as would be desired at the free price; ‘flood the market’ so as to spoil the market
       for the scalpers, is how some government officials put it. Second, governments need to
       examine their own processes to make sure that no officials are diverting books towards
       merchants at the wholesale level (even regionally), so as to create artificial scarcities.”44

•      Working with local and international anti-corruption agencies: Sometimes, books,
       including those embossed with official markings for a particular country are stolen and
       diverted to pavement booksellers and markets or smuggled across borders to fetch higher
       prices in a neighboring country. Vigilance and cooperation between customs, border and
       other law enforcement officials can assist to curb the practice.

Slide 24




If the private sector undertakes distribution, they factor this expenditure into their overall
costs. If government is responsible, this is often not costed. To ensure successful book
distribution, it is necessary to estimate all potential costs, including warehousing, repackaging
(if centralized), and freight; and to factor all estimated costs into the overall project budget,
especially when seeking donor funds. If distribution is underfunded, the resulting service
provided will suffer.




44
     (Crouch 2011)

                                                                                                120
Slide 25

Summary
In this module, we:

•   Established that distribution is the stage where a book provision project is likely to fall
    apart.
•   Discussed various distribution methods;
•   Outlined steps to design a successful distribution strategy and nine factors integral to this
    process; and
•   Identified problems encountered in book distribution.

Module 8 will consider book distribution where a bookselling network is weak or non-existent.



Slide 26

Exercise
1. Read the civil engagement case study on Check My School (CMS), established 2011 in the
   Philippines: https://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/Data/wbi/wbicms/files/drupal-
   acquia/wbi/CaseStudy-CheckMySchool.pdf. The driving idea behind the initiative “assumes
   that community-driven data validation and easy access to data via the internet will enable
   government officials and citizens to highlight issues of concern in the education sector and
   identify potential solutions” (p.3). CMS builds on the work of predecessor initiatives such as
   G-Watch (Government Watch) and Textbook Count Project a component of G-Watch in the
   Philippines (p.6).

2. Country ABC has had difficulty delivering books to schools due to poorly designed road
   systems, lack of warehouses to store books and poor book freight and delivery systems. The
   country has recently learned about the CMS initiative in the Philippines and is seeking your
   advice on how to use the model to enable the country to build a better book distribution
   system.
   a. What would you recommend to the government of ABC as important factors to
       facilitate the success of this initiative?
   b. How would you go about organizing citizen engagement in this project? Who would you
       recruit and train for this effort and why? What kind of data would you have citizen
       engagement groups collect?



                                                                                              121
   c. Recommend problem–solving strategies for current delivery problems that ABC can use
      to ensure that books are delivered to schools?



Slide 27

Resources

1. allAfrica.com (March 2011). Mozambique: Illegal Sale of School Books Continues.
   http://allafrica.com/stories/201103150208.html

2. Books for All: Rwanda’s Innovative Textbook Distribution Program :
   http://www.globalpartnership.org/stories-2/rwanda-s-innovative-textbook-distribution-
   program/

3. Check My School: http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/stories/check-my-school-not-just-website

4. Crouch, Luis (2011). Disappearing books: Greed or Policy mistakes or both?
   http://www.educationforallblog.org/fr/issues/aid-effectiveness/disappearing-books-greed-
   or-policy-mistakes-or-both

5. Education Books Market Study (Uganda): http://nabotu.or.ug/wp-content/uploads/Book-
   Market-survey-report.pdf

6. Textbooks and School Library Provision in Secondary Education in Sub-Saharan Africa
   (2008). World Bank: http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/978-0-8213-7344-6

7. World Reader: http://www.worldreader.org/




                                                                                           122
Distribution Strategies
Module 8: Alternative Book Distribution Channels


Slide 5
Learning Objectives
In this module, we will:
    • Present 3 options to consider when planning a book delivery project where distributors
        or booksellers are not available;
    • Discuss methods for improving book distribution; and
    • Explore how to partner with CSOs to eliminate distribution problems such as late- or
        non-delivery and leakage of books.



Slide 6




Book distribution network models

Decentralized distribution

As discussed in Modules 1 and 7, distribution is often most effective when it is decentralized, as
shown in above illustration. However, this works where the necessary infrastructure—
distributors, booksellers, sales agents—exists and functions well. This is the situation where the
book chain is vibrant. What options can be used when a distribution network is weak or non-
existent?




                                                                                              123
Slide 7




Centralized distribution
Again, as we saw in Module 7, centralized distribution (as shown above) can work well in a very
small country. It is also often the preferred choice of governments that may either not
understand the role of distributors/booksellers or simply think they create an expensive layer
(or middleman) in book provision. Sometimes centralized distribution also takes place where
the book industry’s distribution network is weak or absent. Generally, this practice has bee n
shown to be generally bureaucratic, inefficient and prone to delays, leakage and corruption.
Where state facilities are used the basic infrastructure is often in poor condition. In Ghana,
Ministry of Education-owned regional and district stores are often in poor condition and are
often not weatherproof or secure. Book losses can be an issue and there are delays in the
supply chain caused by lack of funds to transport books to schools at district level. 45 This is how
one study summarized the state of affairs that existed in countries that used centralized
distribution:

“State control over textbook distribution frequently destroyed or seriously damaged the
existing private sector book wholesalers and retailers while not providing a reasonable
alternative textbook service to schools. This is perhaps the most tragic aspect of the state
domination of textbook distribution in Africa over the past 40 years.”46




45
     (World Bank 2008, 55)
46
     (Read 2001)

                                                                                                124
Slide 8




What if a country’s bookselling infrastructure is weak?

Instead of using a state-controlled, centralized system of distribution, here are three options.
Two these are short-term solutions, and one is better suited for the medium- to long-term.

For the short term, the project can be designed to:

Deliver books directly to schools: This may be done by the publisher, printer or sales agent
(usually acting on behalf of a publisher).

•   Explore using other distribution channels: This could involve:

    −     Private sector distributors specializing in other goods, such as soft drinks;
    −     Parent-Teacher Associations, which may designate some of their members to collect
          books on behalf of target schools;
    −     Civil society organizations that may already be working in the area. For example,
          organizations which provide boreholes and relief items often have vehicles that can
          carry books safely to the communities where they operate.

For the medium to long-term:

•   Initiate steps to create a nationwide distribution network: This will take perhaps years to
    mature, but the investment in planning with the private sector to achieve this is worth it in
    the long term.

We will now discuss each option in detail.




                                                                                             125
Slide 9




Delivering books directly to schools

Here, the plan is to have books delivered directly to schools or as close as possible (See Figure
above). This can be written into the contracts of suppliers—publishers, printers or
distributors/sales agents—when tenders are awarded. If this option is chosen, remember to
factor in appropriate costs and time needed when planning overall budget and schedule for the
book provision project. This system has worked very well in countries like Mongolia or Armenia.
In Malawi or in Namibia, it works through a two-tier bidding system: (i) Publishing; (ii)
Distribution. The fact that the final destination is the school itself is key to success. As noted
earlier, this is often the preferred system in most national and international competitive
tenders. Module 9 examines the issue of procurement and how it influences distribution.




                                                                                              126
Slide 10




Today, many countries use a hybrid system of semi-decentralized distribution (See Figure 4). In
this system, books are delivered to provincial or district warehouses, and from there to the
schools or libraries where books will be used. Arrangements are made with groups such as
PTAs, Community and Alumni Associations to collect books on behalf of their respective
schools.

We must caution that running a textbook warehouse needs a modicum of professionalism in
terms of stock keeping, physical storage, security, etc. None of this happens when the
warehouse is away from checks and balances. In low income countries—already short of
financing and skilled human resource—regional warehouses are costly and complicated to set
up. Also, while local schools from a regional capital might have fewer constraints to collecting
their books, those from remote areas often have more difficulty.




                                                                                            127
Slide 11




Another short-term option is to explore using other proven distribution channels. This allows
you to be creative, keeping your goal in mind—to get the books to students and teachers where
and when needed. Here are some ideas:

•   Contact and negotiate with private sector distributors specializing in other goods : For
    example, in some countries, companies with nationwide distribution networks such as
    Coca-Cola and Guinness that produce soft drinks targeting students have assisted when
    approached. In the Philippines, for example, to improve the delivery of textbooks to far-
    flung villages, Textbook Count collaborated Coca-Cola and used its distribution vehicles for
    transportation of books (See www.checkmyschool.org). Apart from such networks, are
    there companies in your country that have a provincial or regional distribution network that
    you can negotiate with? Caution: Ensure that books receive the attention they deserve —
    timely delivery, security, etc.—since they’re not the core business of such a company.

•   Involve Parent-Teacher Associations (PTAs). They can transport books as well as monitor
    deliveries. Due to distances that may be involved, tasking PTAs to do this might be more
    effective if deliveries are from say, district or provincial levels to schools.

•   Partner with CSOs working on literacy projects in mother-tongue and minority languages.
    Quite often, these organizations already work closely with the Ministry of Education, and
    they can be approached to help to deliver and/or track deliveries to schools, especially in
    the remote rural areas where they already work. In difficult humanitarian situations,
    organizations such as UNICEF (Madagascar, Afghanistan) or UN (Timor Leste) have
    undertaken part or all of the textbook distribution effort.


                                                                                            128
Slide 12




Creating a national distribution/bookselling network

For the medium- to long term, take steps to help to create a nationwide
distribution/bookselling network, involving the private sector.

•      Find out why the distribution network is weak or non-existent. If an existing one collapsed,
       what caused it? Can it be revived? What will it take?
•      What incentives can be offered to get people into book distribution? You may want to
       contract interested parties distribute to remote areas. Another incentive might be to
       include promoting bookselling as a key objective in a national book (or textbook) policy.
•      Identify and address constraints to developing a national distribution network.47 These
       could be:
       − Human resources: Recruiting, training, managing, and retaining qualified staff; and
       − Finance: This may include improving payment systems and speed of payments to
           suppliers.




47
     See (World Bank 2008, 54-57)

                                                                                               129
Slide 13




How can we improve textbook distribution?

There are situations where one does not have much opportunity to explore “new” options such
as those we have just considered. We will therefore discuss five ways to remedy weak
distribution. These are: plan effectively for book provision; strengthen existing distribution
channels; establish (or improve) tracking and payment system; engage Communities and CSOs
to transport books and monitor book distribution projects; and develop corporate partnerships.



Slide 14




1. Plan for effective and efficient book provision

The planning phase provides the foundation for a project’s success or failure .




                                                                                          130
•   First, create a realistic schedule for production and delivery of books to students. For
    example, you may use the beginning of the school year (or better, a week or two before) as
    the latest target date for books to be available in schools, then

•   Liaise with curriculum colleagues and consider the effect any curriculum changes would
    have on revisions to texts. This should really be done prior to publishing stage; once we
    have arrived at distribution stage, it’s already too late.

•   Decide point(s) of delivery in collaboration with stakeholders: teachers, community
    associations, PTAs.

•   Factor delivery time into schedule. For example, if books will be sourced internationally,
    does schedule include adequate time for shipping and clearing?

There are many cases where tenders are issued for books to be produced and delivered in 3
months (90 days), with inadequate attention given to the logistics of delivery to schools. The
result is a rushed book project prone to poor quality and other deficiencies, particularly in the
distribution phase.



Slide 15




2. Strengthen existing distribution channels

We can do this by:

•   Creating a role for distributors and/or booksellers. Since textbooks constitute the major
    portion of the book trade, this can provide business opportunities. To ensure that they
    effectively play their part, the project could include a capacity building component that will
    offer training to booksellers. Key aspects would be (i) to understand their role in book



                                                                                              131
    provision in the short and long term, and (ii) to develop proficiency in documentation
    procedures.

•   Ensuring timely payments. Distribution is a financially heavy exercise, and some
    governments are careless at disbursing money at the right time. Many booksellers are small
    businesses with little capital. Payment delays cripple them, and make it very difficult for
    them to stock other reading material.



Slide 16




3. Establish tracking and payment systems

Where these already exist, consider ways to effectively implement or improve. We have already
mentioned that delays in payment cripple the capacity of booksellers and distributors to fulfill
the book needs of schools and effectively service the entire book market. Think through the
following:

•   What needs to be in place to verify that all books have been delivered to respective
    schools? Persons to carry out the exercise? Reporting methods?
•   Link final payment to confirmation of delivery of books as contracted. Inform all concerned
    —especially officials responsible—about when payment should/would be effected.
•   Sanctions: What will be consequences for delays or non-delivery? This needs to be clearly
    stated and understood by all involved.

A good tracking system will ensure that books do not leak into the illegal market. An efficient
payment system is a deterrent to corruption.




                                                                                            132
Slide 17




4. Develop mutually beneficial corporate partnerships

Where transportation is lacking, explore and negotiate collaboration with companies that
operate a functioning nationwide distribution network. Coca-Cola and Guinness have been
mentioned as possibilities, but a country may have other networks that can effectively do the
job. Consider this a “think-outside-the box” opportunity. Creative and constructive engagement
can lead to a cooperative relationship with government. For example, the organization
identified may assist with distribution to areas that are usually difficult to reach.

Such a partnership is not a panacea to distribution problems, and should be regarded as an
interim measure, rather than a permanent solution. We should also point out that there are
strong pros and cons to this idea.

Advantages:
• Ready and tested nationwide network—albeit for another product;
• Piggy-back on infrastructure in place for documentation and tracking.

Disadvantages:
• Books could be treated with less urgency and priority—secondary to the company’s
    products;
• The arrangement with a large company may crowd out the involvement of smaller ones
    that are closer to the target schools.




                                                                                          133
Slide 18




5. Involve (train, equip) and empower CSOs to monitor book distribution projects 48

     •   Along the distribution channel—warehouse, truckers, point of delivery, school.
     •   To demand from district education heads and head teachers that promised books be
         made available in schools.


Slide 19




The Role of Libraries

In some instances, there just are not enough books to go round the school system. Book
provision projects may therefore consider procuring copies of textbooks for use in libraries,
particularly in cases where the book-sharing ratio is high. For study outside the classroom,
students can find the same books in libraries. In countries where textbooks are sold, students
who are unable to afford to buy books can find copies in libraries.

48
  See Philippines case study: Check My School (Boy Scouts tracking textbooks to schools) in Resources.
https://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/.../CaseStudy-CheckMySchool.pdf


                                                                                                         134
One problem, though, is that school libraries tend to operate only during school hours, and
students would still have limited access to textbooks. Community libraries try to fill this gap.
Together with school libraries they can also house e-books and information and communication
technology to access other learning material in addition to print books.


Slide 20




The Role of Civil Society Organizations/Parent-Teacher Associations

Communities and civil society organizations can assist with book distribution by:
Organizing transportation of books from Ministry offices or publishing houses and warehouses
to schools;
• Monitoring and verifying book distribution and payment;
• Helping to eliminate piracy. Here they ensure that only authorized books are purchased and
    distributed.
School management committees represent a successfully tested means to involve civil
participation in monitoring textbook distribution. See the “Check My School” case study in
Resources.

Slide 21

Summary
In this module, we:

•   Considered different options for planning a book delivery project in a country where
    distributors or booksellers are not available or the existing network is weak and, therefore,
    cannot deliver books efficiently as needed;
•   Explored ideas for improving weak book distribution; and
•   Discussed how to partner with CSOs to eliminate distribution problems.

                                                                                             135
Slide 22
Exercise
• Assume that you have been asked to prepare a textbook distribution plan for a large
    country VWY, with 100 bookstores of which 80 percent are located in the capital city. If the
    annual 4-month long rainy season causes countrywide flooding of roads, what issues would
    you need to tackle to ensure successful delivery of books to schools in rural areas? Which
    distribution method(s) would you recommend and why?

•   Is there an existing successful innovative program in your country for distributing drugs or
    other item nationwide? Study/Review it to see if there are any principles or lessons you can
    apply to improve book distribution.


Slide 23

Resources

1. Check My School project: http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/document/case-study-check-my-
   school and https://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/.../CaseStudy-CheckMySchool.pdf

2. Read, Tony, Carmelle Denning, and Vincent Bontoux (Eds.) 2001. Upgrading Book
   Distribution in Africa. Paris: ADEA Working Group on Books and Learning Materials.

3. Library on a Donkey: www.youtube.com/watch?v=eQMh8_TD2dI and
   http://www.ru.ac.za/corylibrary/latestnews/name,36947,en.html

4. The Book Bus: www.thebookbus.org




                                                                                            136
Policy and Practice
Module 9: Procurement Methods49



Slide 5

Learning Objectives
In this module, we will:

•    Learn how textbooks are procured using various procurement methods in Section 1; and
•    Discuss misprocurement and the factors that lead to it in Section 2.


Slide 6

Introduction

The goal of textbook procurement is to acquire quality books and quantities needed, at
affordable prices. To avoid misprocurement an understanding of procurement methods and
related requirements is necessary. The World Bank’s procurement guidelines are used
throughout this module. These are often adopted by other multilateral development agencies.


Slide 7

SECTION 1

Procurement Methods for Textbook Acquisition




49
  Credit: The content of this module draws heavily from “Procurement of Textbooks under World Bank Operations
(October 2012)” a presentation by Alaleh Motamedi, World Bank Senior Procurement Specialist, at “Getting Books
to the Kids,” a community of practice workshop of the Global Partnership for Education, Washington, D.C., October
12, 2012.


                                                                                                             137
Slide 8




Here’s a summary of the main lending instruments used by the World Bank. The Instrument
used to finance textbooks is Investment Lending. Borrowers must use the Bank’s Standard
Bidding Documents (SBD) and Procurement Guidelines (See Resources). Textbook-related
expenses are classified under procurement of goods and services, but also include consultants.


Slide 9




                                                                                          138
The World Bank Instrument used to finance textbooks is Investment Lending. Loans funded
using this and other lending instruments must follow the Bank’s Procurement and Consultant
Guidelines (See Resources). The two guidelines used cover:

1. Selection and Employment of Consultants for intellectual services, with outputs that are
difficult to quantify;

2. Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consultant Services to be used for projects with a
measureable physical output such as textbooks.
Early and regular collaboration between Procurement and Education specialists/Project
Coordinators is crucial to enable all parties to design a plan that focuses on solutions —
addresses potential problems solutions.



Slide 10




Procurement                                                                            Methods

When planning for procurement it is important to identify the type of services and goods that
will be procured and to match them to the appropriate procurement method.

For textbook projects, examples of services include manuscript development, publishing and
distribution services. An example of goods is books acquired “off-the shelf,’ that is, books that
are already available in the market. The major procurement methods for textbooks and reading
materials are:

•   International Competitive Bidding (ICB)
•   National Competitive Bidding (NCB)

                                                                                             139
•   Direct contracting
•   Shopping
•   Framework/Long-term Agreements


Slide 11




International Competitive Bidding (ICB)

This is the most popular method of procuring, used when the national industry does not have
the capacity to respond to the bidding process. As a result, ICB is usually won by large foreign
publishing houses or printers. ICB requires international competition, and its main features are:

•   Advertisement is internationally done.
•   Tender must be in an international language recognized by the Bank – French, English and
    Spanish.
•   Currency of payment is internationally agreed.
•   Must use the Standard Bidding documents prepared by the World Bank.

Not surprisingly then, most ICB tenders are won by large foreign publishing houses or printers.




                                                                                             140
Slide 12




National Competitive Bidding (NCB)

This applies the competitive bidding procedure of the Borrowing country as reviewed and
modified to assure compliance with basic principles of procurement.

It has proved useful when:

•   Overall contract value is small.
•   Low volume of books is to be procured; foreign bidders are not expected to be interested in
    a bid due to its size.
•   Books to be procured are available locally at prices that are lower than international market
    prices as, for example, with local language books.

NCB is sometimes used for political reasons—within the ceilings allowed by the Bank—when,
for example, a government does not want its textbooks to be published by any foreign entity.
For project managers, NCB is a good middle term between State publishing and some kind of
public-private partnership. Many countries are using NCB to provide books, and often involve
national tender boards (NTBs) and other related national procurement bodies in evaluation.
Ghana, Kenya, and Tanzania provide good examples of countries that have successfully used
NCB.

Main features are:

    •   Focus on local publishers and printing houses;
    •   Foreign bidders may be allowed on terms that apply to national bidders;
    •   National advertisement;
    •   Tender documents use the national language;


                                                                                             141
    •   Payment in national currency;
    •   Prices may be quoted for total cost at destination, incl. all taxes & duties;
    •   Effective and independent protest mechanism.


Slide 13




Direct Contracting

Direct contracting does not involve competition. It is therefore appropriate when there is no
advantage to competition or an extension of services or goods of similar nature. For example,
this can be used in ordering additional textbooks, provided that there is no advantage through
further competition, and the original contract was awarded through acceptable procedures. It
is also appropriate when availability of goods and services are proprietary in nature, limited to
one source. Other situations when it is appropriate to use Direct Contracting include:

•   Compatibility with existing equipment;
•   Exceptional circumstances; for example, natural disasters or emergency declared by the
    Borrower and recognized by the Bank.
•   Goods available from a particular source/supplier are essential to achieve the required
    performance/functional guarantee of an equipment or facility;
•   Procurement from a specific UN Agency.

The contract award information for direct contracting must be advertised for transparency
reasons.




                                                                                             142
Slide 14




Shopping

Shopping involves comparing price quotations from three or more suppliers, contractors or
service providers.
It is appropriate for procuring:

•   Limited quantities of readily available off-the-shelf goods such as readily available books;
•   Low volume purchases, for example, library books.

This method carries high risk for fraud and corruption, because suppliers can collude to fix
prices.



Slide 15




                                                                                                   143
Framework/Long-term Agreements

These are made with a contractor or supplier, which set terms and conditions under which
specific procurements can be made throughout the term of the agreement. It is an alternative
to shopping or NCB and open to both local and international competition. Prices can be:

   •   Pre-agreed, or determined at procurement stage through competition or revision. In
       this case a request for proposals is sent out to a small selected group.

Framework agreements are appropriate for:

   •   Goods procured off-the-shelf, and for simple non-consulting services such as editing or
       printing.

The circumstance, justification for usage and approach, model and procedures, and terms of
contracts must be acceptable to the Bank. Generally, such agreements last for a maximum of
three years.



Slide 16




Eligibility to Bid for Bank Projects

Firms and individuals from a Bank member country having the essential capabilities required to
fulfill a contract and not having any conflict of interest are eligible to bid for Bank-financed
projects. For textbooks, a supplier’s capacity is assessed during the bidding process.

The following scenarios constitute conflict of interest:




                                                                                            144
•      Conflicting assignments: For example, firm A is subsidiary of Firm AB. Firm A wrote the
       technical specifications for the bid, and firm AB subsequently decides to participate in the
       bid.

•      Multiple bids from same bidder or member of a joint venture: Firm B submits more than
       one bid for the same tender. For example, a local publisher submits a bid while at the same
       time in a joint venture with a multinational company bidding for the same tender.

•      Business and family relationship between persons working on bid: For example, when a
       firm bidding on a textbook project belongs to the wife of the Minister of Education.



Slide 17




Bid Evaluation50

Committees of experts are constituted to evaluate bids for textbook and learning material
projects. Evaluations are based on Quality and Cost.

•      Quality Evaluation Factors include:

           −   Conformity to curriculum;
           −   Content (pedagogy);
           −   Presentation, illustrations, and design.

•      Cost Evaluation Factors:




50
     See Module 12 for detailed discussion.

                                                                                               145
       −   Pricing—cost of books and distribution/delivery charges. Pricing is also influenced by
           the physical quality of the books.

Contracts are awarded to the lowest evaluated bid, not necessarily the bid with the lowest
prices. This usually involves a Quality/Price mix. The procurement documents state whether the
Bank will conduct a prior review of contract before it is awarded or a post review.


Slide 18




Develop a Procurement Plan

A procurement plan describes the products and services to be obtained and details the
necessary steps towards obtaining them. The plan also specifies the potential sources,
documentation required, selection criteria, and the time frame for the delivery of the items
procured. It also includes the appeal procedure, should any bidder have genuine concerns
about the fairness of the process and the award decision.

Outlining the needs of the project and how the supplies will be procured allow for adequate
budget and proper planning. A good procurement plan ensures optimum value for money
outcomes.


                                                                                             146
Slide 19

SECTION 2
Misprocurement and Related Issues




Slide 20




There are three situations in which the World Bank can declare misprocurement and cancel the
portion of the loan allocated to misprocured Goods/Works/Services. Include concrete cases of
mis-procurement as examples.

1. The contract award deviates from the Financing Agreement and Procurement Plan, which
   points to the importance of ensuring that the procurement plan is accurate.
2. The Borrower makes moves to delay or reject a qualified bid or in order to prevent award to
   the bidder otherwise determined as successful. For example, a borrower may delay
   awarding a contract in the hope that the most qualified company will become frustrated
   and withdraw their bid to enable a favored company will rise to the top and be awarded the
   contract.
3. A Borrower’s representative or recipient of a loan engages in fraud and corruption.

For the World Bank and the Caribbean Development Bank (CBD), misprocurement may still be
declared even after a contract is awarded if it found to have been modified after the Bank has
issued a “no objection” approval. The CBD procurement guidelines state, “Even once the
contract is awarded after obtaining a no objection from CDB, CDB may still declare
misprocurement and apply in full, its policies and remedies regardless of whether or not the
financing has been fully disbursed, if it concludes that the no-objection was issued on the basis
of incomplete, inaccurate, or misleading information furnished by the Recipient or that the

                                                                                             147
terms and conditions of the contract had been substantially modified without CDB’s no -
objection.”51


Common Examples of Misprocurement52

•    Procurement of goods, works or services from non-eligible countries;
•    Using the wrong funding sources to pay for goods, works or services;
•    Missteps in the process of advanced contracting for goods, works or services prior to
     approval of retroactive financing;
•    Award of a contract, the terms and conditions of which have been substantially modified
     without having first received CDB’s no-objection to the modifications.

To avoid misprocurement in textbook procurement projects, it is important to have early and
regular collaboration between procurement specialists, education specialists, and project
coordinators during the design and implementation phases.



Slide 21




Procurement Process Red Flags

The red flags described below do not necessarily mean that something is definitely going
wrong. But these signs might actually indicate the possibility of fraud and corruption, requiring
closer attention. Examples of red flags include:

51
  (Misprocurement on CBD-Financed Projects n.d.)
52
  Credit: Caribbean Development Bank. See http://www.caribank.org/projects/procurement/misprocurement,
accessed December 18, 2013.

                                                                                                     148
•   Procurement strategy inconsistent with market situations: For example, procuring
    publishing services using National Competitive Bidding when it is known that the local
    publishing market lacks capacity to respond to the call for bids.

•   Bid launching during a period when most people are on vacation , say over the Christmas
    and New Year holidays.

•   Bid packaging that favors certain suppliers: For example, providing inadequate technical
    specifications such as vague indication of quality of paper or requiring paper quality with a
    high GSM, or rejecting a bid based on requirements that do not affect the functionality.

•   Inadequate technical specifications: For example, vague indication of quality of paper or of
    printing, allowing for low quality paper or requiring too high quality cover.

•   No quality control or inspection of goods: Here, there is a lack of inspection procedures,
    minimum acceptable quality or inspection documentation. This could be a method to
    facilitate substandard books or to channel them to the illegal market.

•   Multiple change orders or amendments: In this case, low value change orders occur under
    the radar screen to pay kickbacks; there may be undue modification of contractual terms
    such as a $100,000 purchase order going up to $1.4 million; or substantial extension of
    contract scope and time.



Slide 22




•   Unusual Bid patterns: These are collusive schemes. For example, prices aligned or same
    bidders bidding in an irrational way in similar processes or bidders omitting obvious
    documents which will lead to their disqualification, paving the way for another to win.

                                                                                             149
•   Suspicious bidders: For example, suspicious phone numbers or address—incomplete, only
    PO Box, in residential areas, etc.

•   Inadequate copyright arrangements: For example, copyright to non-authors who facilitated
    award decision to certain Bidder or modification of copyright arrangements after bid
    submission/contract signature.

•   Inadequate transportation/distribution requirements: For example, requiring availability
    of storage facilities across the country as a condition to bid; lack of clarity about roles and
    responsibilities for transportation/distribution; or absence of requirements for adequate
    storage/transportation.

•   Loose or too stringent qualification criteria: To allow certain bidders to win or to reject
    otherwise qualified bidders.

•   Poor quality textbooks: May be an indication of wrongdoing.



Slide 23




Other types of red flags are:

•   Bidders lacking qualifications and offering a wide variety of goods that they come across
    as brokers.
•   Inflated agent fees: For example, middlemen or broker imposed to bidders or recruited by
    bidders to facilitate bribery and kickbacks.
•   Subcontracting almost 100 percent of the awarded contract to another firm: For example
    an international publisher subcontracts all of the tender won to a local publisher who did


                                                                                               150
    not qualify to participate or win, and the international publisher in effect charges high
    prices for low quality or delayed delivery.
•   Complaints: These may come from other bidders, the media or whistleblowers. Complaints
    are the best source of information on fraud and corruption.

We will discuss Fraud, Corruption, and other sanctionable practices in Module 10.



Slide 24

Summary
In this module, we:

•   Described different procurement methods and when it is appropriate to use them; and

•   Detailed potential issues including red flags which undermine the integrity of the process
    and could lead to misprocurement.



Slide 25

Exercises
1. You have been commissioned to recommend solutions to textbook procurement in Country
   Z, a fragile state that was formed after a 10-year civil war with Country Y. The new republic
   Z has just revised its education sector plans. The country faces many challenges particularly
   in procurement of textbooks to support the implementation of the newly-developed
   curriculum for core subjects in primary and secondary school. In order to reduce the costs
   of book production, the country has decided to adapt secondary books from those found in
   neighboring countries. The country also intends to procure mother tongue books for its
   early grade readers and teacher guides as well.

    •   Detail the types of learning material that you think need to be procured and
        recommend a procurement method for each, with supporting reasons. Note that the
        country does not have book production capacity due to the many years of civil war.

2. Zee Books, a publisher in Zamunda, received 20% advance payment for publishing 400,000
   textbooks for Zamunda’s secondary school system. The $2 million contract was funded by a
   World Bank education loan to Zamunda. More than 8 months later, Zee Books has not
   received the final payment from Zamunda, despite having completed publishing, printing
   and distribution of books in the 120-day timeframe as stipulated by the contract signed with
                                                                                            151
   Zamunda’s Education Ministry. As a small local business with limited capital, Zee Books now
   faces imminent collapse. Since repeated payment requests have not yielded results, Zee
   Books has therefore decided to contact the World Bank to claim the overdue payment.

   •   What response is the World Bank likely to provide to Zee Books? Consider the
       relationship that the World Bank has with the Borrower and the nature of contractual
       agreements as stated in the Standard Bidding Document, when formulating your answer
       to this question.



Slide 27

Resources

1. Sample procurement plan:
   http://documents.worldbank.org/query?sortBy=date&pageSize=20&docType=739941

2. World Bank Standard Bidding Document:
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROCUREMENT/Resources/Textbooks-05-04-
   ev1.pdf

3. World Bank Finance Procurement Guidelines:
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/PROCUREMENT/Resources/pm7-3-01.pdf

4. World Bank Guidelines for Procurement under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits :
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROCUREMENT/Resources/ProcGuid-10-06-
   RevMay10-ev2.pdf

5. World Bank Procurement website:
   http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/PROJECTS/PROCUREMENT/0,,pagePK:84271
   ~theSitePK:84266,00.html


6. World Bank Listing of Ineligible Firms & Individuals:
   http://web.worldbank.org/external/default/main?contentMDK=64069844&menuPK=11673
   0&pagePK=64148989&piPK=64148984&querycontentMDK=64069700&theSitePK=84266




                                                                                          152
Policy and Practice
Module 10: Fraud and Corruption in Textbook Procurement



Slide 5

Learning Objectives
In this module, we will:
• Identify what constitutes fraud, corruption and other sanctionable practices in textbook
    procurement;
• Understand how the World Bank deals with fraudulent and corrupt practices; and
• Discuss ideas to mitigate such practices during the preparation and implementation phases
    of projects.



Slide 6




“Corruption is the abuse of entrusted power for private gain. It hurts everyone who depends on
the integrity of people in a position of authority.”53

Why the corruption in textbook provision programs?

Textbook provision programs are particularly vulnerable to fraud and corruption for several
reasons. First, there are huge sums of money involved. A typical project runs into millions of
dollars. In low income countries, the temptation to divert some of this funding into private
pockets is heightened. Second, the several stakeholders along the book chain all vie for

53
     Transparency International: www.transparency.org

                                                                                          153
attention and money, especially in centralized acquisitions. This opens up avenues for officials
administering the project to demand or be offered bribes and other favors. Third, textbook
sales constitute about 90 percent of the local book market in some low income countries; for
many publishers winning a textbook contract means survival.54
Fourth, multiple points for evaluation and monitoring present opportunities for fraud and
corruption. Examples are manuscript evaluation, book selection, bid evaluation, delivery
channels and verification. Where there are few officials involved in such a large scale project,
the pressure of work can lead to collusion with suppliers to allow falsification of documents and
fraudulent transactions.

Corruption can also be situational, usually in textbook procurement, where there are few
producers or sellers—two or three publishers can agree on pricing—and only one buyer, the
ministry, where the principal officials can be “approached.”

Rather than assume a textbook procurement project will be free of corruption, it is better to
plan to mitigate the occurrence. Failure to do so will undermine the integrity of the process,
and may lead to undesirable results.

In this module, we will base our discussion on the efforts of the World Bank—one of the largest
funders of education projects—in combating fraud, corruption and other sanctionable
practices.



Slide 7




54
     (Trucano 2012)

                                                                                             154
We now define the five sanctionable practices encountered in procurement.55

1. Corrupt Practice: This is offering, giving, receiving or soliciting, directly or indirectly, of
   anything of value to improperly influence the actions of another party. Examples of this
   practice include offering and receiving of bribes, kickbacks, excessive gifts, travel, “loans”,
   and soliciting or providing sexual favors. In 2010, the World Bank declared Macmillan Ltd., a
   U.K. publisher, ineligible to be awarded Bank-financed contracts for a period of six years in
   the wake of the company’s admission of bribery payments relating to a Trust Fund -
   supported education project in Southern Sudan.56

2. Fraudulent Practice: This is any act of omission, including a misrepresentation or attempts
   to mislead a party in order to obtain a financial benefit or to avoid an obligation. Examples
   of fraudulent practices include false invoice, forgery, product substitution, false statement
   in curriculum vitae, and failure to disclose debarment status. See an example from Russia at
     http://go.worldbank.org/ZOJO86H570 .


3. Collusive Practice: An arrangement between two or more parties designed to achieve an
   improper purpose, including to influence improperly the actions of another party. Examples
   of collusive practices are bid rotation, price alignment, agreement to pay bribes, and
   agreement to withdraw bids. For an example from Indonesia, see
   http://go.worldbank.org/V8DNONW9M0; and for an example from Timor-Leste, see
     http://go.worldbank.org/ZY28KSWAX0 .




55
   The African Development Bank Group, Asian Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, European Investment Bank Group, International Monetary Fund, Inter-American Development Bank
Group and World Bank Group signed the Uniform Framework for Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption
in September 2006. The Uniform Framework laid the foundation for a consistent and harmonized approach to fight
corruption in the activities and operations of the leading international financial institutions.
56
   See official press release: http://go.worldbank.org/8214RMIQ70 (accessed December 23, 2013). The company
was released from debarment in April 2013 following what Bank’s conclusion that Macmillan had satisfactorily
fulfilled its release conditions, including the adoption and implementation of a Corporate Compliance Program.
The Bank’s emphasis on corporate compliance programs aims to ensure that companies foster and maintain higher
integrity standards. See
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTDOII/Resources/Macmillan_Lotti_Released_From_Debarment_04_29_13.p
df.



                                                                                                          155
Slide 8




4. Coercive Practice: This is impairing or harming, or threatening to impair or harm, directly or
   indirectly, any party or the property of the party to influence improperly the actions of a
   party. Examples are rejecting renewal of employee contract who question authority or
   practices, and threatening a person or family members in order to change contract award
   decision.

5. Obstructive practice: This involves
   − Deliberately destroying, falsifying, altering or concealing of evidence material to the
      investigation or making false statements to investigators in order to materially impede a
      Bank investigation into allegations of a corrupt, fraudulent, coercive or collusive
      practice; and/or threatening, harassing or intimidating any party to prevent it from
      disclosing its knowledge of matters relevant to the investigation or from pursuing the
      investigation; or
   − Acts intended to materially impede the exercise of the Bank’s inspection and audit
      rights. Some examples of obstructive practices include destroying original bids, invoices,
      modifying evaluation reports, etc.




                                                                                             156
Slide 9




Dealing with Sanctionable Practices

How can we deal with fraud, corruption and other practices that bedevil book provision
projects? According to Transparency International (www.transparency.org), the global civil
society organization leading the fight against corruption, “ understanding corruption is the first
step in fighting corruption.”

Fraud and corruption apply to a wide range of parties, from the personnel of the borrower to
the beneficiaries of any loan, which could be a school, or even students. It also includes bidders,
contractors, their personal agents, and subcontractors. In some cases, the practices involve
very senior and powerful officials in government or the private sector. Dealing with fraud and
corruption is not the preserve of a development agency, the donor community or a
government; it is the responsibility of all who are interested in book provision—getting the
right books in the hands of students.



Slide 10




                                                                                               157
So, how does the World Bank Group deal with cases of improper procurement practices?
Everybody involved with the contract is subject to World Bank Group fraud and corruption
provisions. The Bank will:

•    Reject the proposal to award a contract;

•    Declare misprocurement and provide a notice of misprocurement to the government. (See
     Module 9 for further details);

•    Sanction the organization or individual responsible. This includes debarment. Public
     debarment, which carries with it both financial and reputational risks, is considered a major
     deterrent to wrongdoing. Entities debarred by one multilateral development bank may be
     sanctioned for the same misconduct by four other development banks. Participating banks
     are the African Development Bank Group, the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank
     for Reconstruction and Development, the Inter-American Development Bank Group, and
     the World Bank Group. In July 2012, for example, the World Bank debarred two wholly-
     owned subsidiaries of Oxford University Press (OUP), namely: Oxford University Press East
     Africa Limited (OUPEA) and Oxford University Press Tanzania Limited (OUPT) - for a period
     of three years following OUP’s acknowledgment of misconduct by its two subsidiaries in
     relation to two Bank-financed education projects in East Africa.57

•    Cancel portion of loan allocated to the contract. Bank policy empowers such cancellation if
     the borrowing country fails to take appropriate and timely action on any fraud and
     corruption by the Borrower’s representative or a beneficiary.


Slide 11




57
  See http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2012/07/03/world-bank-sanctions-oxford-university-
press-corrupt-practices-impacting-education-projects-east-africa. The Global Corruption Report: Education (pages
37-38) also tackles the issue of corruption in international procurement of textbooks:
http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/pub/global_corruption_report_education.


                                                                                                             158
Temporary Suspension and Cross-debarment:

The Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) of the World Bank Group investigates cases of fraud and
corruption. When an organization is found to be involved in fraud or corrupt practices they are
issued a sanction. The INT website has a comprehensive list of organizations that have been
sanctioned by the bank. (See Resources for the current list.).

Under such sanctions, the Bank may:

- Suspend (debar) offending organization or individual temporarily or permanently.

- Ensure cross-debarment of offending organization among multi-lateral development banks.

The five leading Multilateral Development Banks—African Development Bank, Asian
Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Inter-American
Development Bank, and the World Bank—have an agreement that if one bank debars a
company, cross-debarment by the other banks will follow.58



Slide 12




The main goal of textbook procurement is to ensure that the supplier offering the lowest bid,
which conforms to all bid requirements, is awarded the contract.59 But because of corruption
this is not always the case. We have also described the potential for fraud, corruption and other
sanctionable practices in textbook production and distribution. Therefore, to encourage clean
procurement, countries need to establish systems to discourage fraud and corruption. Here are
some proven methods for fighting corruption:

58
   See Agreement for Mutual Enforcement of Debarment Decisions:
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/NEWS/Resources/AgreementForMutualEnforcementofDebarmentDecisions.p
df (accessed December 19, 2013).
59
   (Standard Bidding Documents 2013)

                                                                                                  159
•      Political commitment: Ensure that there is political commitment to enact and enforce laws
       for clean procurement in order to gain confidence of the public, private sector, and donors.

•      Openness and transparency: Ensure that the entire procurement process is open and
       transparent. Publicize information surrounding projects—objectives, funding, beneficiaries,
       target completion dates. Keeping information secret leads to opportunities for corruption,
       but opening up to public scrutiny increases accountability and reduces corruption. The
       Bank’s approach to mitigating governance and corruption risks at the sector and project
       levels rests on the “TAP” principles: transparency, accountability, and participation.
       Transparency implies openness, and is the foundation upon which both accountability and
       participation are built. Accountability has both internal and external dimensions: internal
       accountability implies integrity, efficiency, and effectiveness in the use of public resources;
       external accountability reflects the extent to which a government is responsive to citizens’
       needs and aspirations.60 Also, establishing e-procurement allows tenders to be submitted
       electronically and tracking by both the bidder and purchaser.

•      Training: Ensure that procurement staff are trained at all levels to ensure and understand
       what is required and expected from them. Examine country’s procurement capacity and
       take appropriate measures to strengthen it if it is found lacking. The World Bank Institute
       has online courses on procurement.

•      Involve civil society: Participation (or inclusion) is important on principle and in practical
       terms: the involvement of civil society in every stage of development (including the design
       and implementation of Bank-financed projects) can improve development outcomes and
       reduce fraud and corruption. For openness to provide real results on the ground there
       needs to be a mechanism in place to engage citizens. In the Philippines, this has been used
       successfully to track textbook supply to schools. (See www.checkmyschool.org).

•      Law enforcement: It is necessary to have in place and to enforce laws governing conduct of
       business and of procurement, in particular. Political commitment is also important in
       investigating, prosecuting, and implementing punishment for corrupt companies and public
       officials.

•      Whistleblower protection: Establish a fraud and corruption reporting system for suspected
       fraud and corruption. It is equally important to provide protection for whistleblowers and
       their families, as powerful political and business personalities are sometimes involved in
       sanctionable practices.
60
     (World Bank 2012)

                                                                                                  160
Slide 13




Fighting Corruption in Fragile and Conflict-affected States

While an understanding of country context is important for working in any country, it is
absolutely critical in Fragile and Conflict-affected States (FCS). These countries are not the
norm those involved in tenders are used to: while their political structures vary, and while some
governments may be politically powerful, governance is notoriously weak and public sector
institutions are dysfunctional; corruption is often rampant, and development outcomes are
uniformly poor. Both civil society and the private sector are likely to be severely
underdeveloped, and, in conflict-affected states, the security situation may involve substantial
risk and uncertainty. Donor support needs to reflect those realities and be informed by the
political factors underpinning them.61
The key elements for dealing with governance and anticorruption in World Bank projects are:

•      Understand the country context—what works and what does not. In addition, check if a
       similar project has been carried out under the prevalent conditions and review results for
       pertinent lessons;
•      Improve the assessment of risks;
•      Expand the options for risk mitigation; and
•      Strengthen project supervision and implementation support.




61
     (World Bank 2012)

                                                                                             161
Slide 14




The prospects for success in dealing with governance and corruption in FCS are greatly
enhanced when the following actions take place. Using Smart Project Design is a good practice
approach to incorporating governance and corruption risks and mitigation measures in the
design of Bank-financed projects.62 It has six key elements, each of which is relevant for Task
Team Leaders or Project Coordinators working in FCS:

•      Pursue sector-level governance and corruption issues through both project and non-project
       activities;
•      In project design, focus on the binding constraints to achieving desired development
       outcomes, and mitigate governance and corruption risks through the principles of
       Transparency, Accountability, and Participation (TAP);
•      Strengthen internal accountability using supply-side tools and approaches;
•      Strengthen external accountability through constructive engagement with civil society;
•      Build effective project oversight mechanisms into the project at the design stage;
•      Develop a communications program to reinforce the project’s focus on governance and
       corruption risks.

The Donor Community must also speak with one voice and to take a hard line on corruption
issues. Consider also what trade-offs may be required. It is important at this stage to be realistic
and ask: What success can this project achieve in terms of reducing corruption, while having to
deliver on a project in a situation where systems and institutions may not function as expected?
Plan for both short- and long-term. Finally, build alliances. Seek out and develop relationships
with potential allies--individual as well as institutional.



62
     (World Bank 2012)

                                                                                                162
Slide 15




Civil Society Organizations

Latest research (shown above) indicates that people trust nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) more than media or government. It is therefore vital to involve civil society in anti-
corruption efforts.63 The following case study from the Philippines demonstrates how to do so
successfully.




63
  Source: 2013 Edelman Trust Barometer; http://www.scribd.com/doc/121501475/Executive-Summary-2013-
Edelman-Trust-Barometer (accessed March 18, 2013).

                                                                                                      163
Slide 16




To conclude this module, we will now detail a civil society initiative from the Philippines that
sought to ensure that schools received textbooks supplied by the Department of Education. You
can now watch a short video (3 minutes) of the Textbook Count Story at
http://gwatchdeped.wordpress.com/textbook-count/, after which you can read about the
factors that contributed to the success of the initiative.64



Slide 17




64
  Source: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTFIDFOR/Resources/4659186-1206285405516/1cEAP-PR.pdf
(accessed July 8, 2013).

                                                                                                      164
How the project was executed

Effective preparation is key to the successful take-off of any venture. Based on the premise
that community-based initiatives are the most effective ways of transmitting the measure of
transparency and social accountability, preparations centered around the following:

•   Organizing civil society partners—Boys Scouts, school management committees;

•   Briefing-orientations were given to division supply officers, suppliers, and CSO provincial
    coordinators.

•   Department of Education (DepEd) sent relevant documents to its divisions, high schools,
    and district offices as well as CSO provincial coordinators and volunteers.

•   CSO and DepEd sponsored joint media outreach—print and radio advertisements.




Slide 18




Accomplishments

So, what did this initiative achieve?

•   Prices of textbooks were reduced by 50% by using International Competitive Bidding
    procedure of the World Bank.

•   Quality of materials significantly improved.

•   Department of Education completed procurement process from bidding to delivery in 12
    months (previous performance was 24 months).

•   Delivery errors were reduced to as low as 5% on average; this means 95% efficiency!



                                                                                           165
Slide 19




Lessons learned included:

•      Simple monitoring tools work effectively and can influence government’s policies and
       programs.

•      Constructive engagement with agency facilitates positive actions on the findings and
       recommendations.

•      Citizens’ involvement in public management prevents corruption and improves people’s
       access to basic services.

Other developing countries such as Romania and Moldova65 are replicating the Philippines’
example for their own situation. Already in Indonesia the focus is more on SMSs (texting) and
mobile phones rather than a website due to the difference in internet penetration. 66


Slide 20

Summary
In this module, we:

•      Defined fraud and corruption in textbook procurement;
•      Described the methods that the World Bank uses to deal with sanctionable practices; and
•      We examined a case study from the Philippines that shows how government can effectively
       partner with civil society to check corruption in textbook production and delivery to schools.


65
     Moldova Check My School initiative: http://afla.md/institutions/all/
66
     (Check My School – Not Just a Website 2012)

                                                                                                 166
Slide 21

Exercise
Company Tanzama is under contract to publish and distribute textbooks for Country ABC under
an Asian Development Bank funded project. It is discovered that Tanzama has been debarred
because of collusive practices in another country.

•   What happens to the contract between Tanzama and Country ABC? Is the contract declared
    null and void due to the debarment of Tanzama in another country? What options does
    Country ABC have now that Tanzama has been debarred, in terms of future book supplies
    under contract?



Slides 22-23

Resources

1. The Challenge of Poor Governance and Corruption. Rose-Ackerman, S (2004).
   http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/Files/Filer/CC/Papers/Governance_and_Corruptio
   n_300404_%280.7MB_version%29.pdf

2. Soreide, T. (2002). Corruption in Public Procurement. Causes, Consequences and Cures.
   http://bora.cmi.no/dspace/bitstream/10202/185/1/R%202002-1.pdf

3. "Check My School" and the Power of Openness in Development. See full article at
   http://blogs.worldbank.org/publicsphere/check-my-school-and-power-openness-
   development). See also www.checkmyschool.org .

4. Textbook Count video: http://gwatchdeped.wordpress.com/textbook-count/

5. Standard Bidding Documents (Revised March 2013).
   http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPROCUREMENT/Resources/Goods-EN-02April13-
   v3.pdf and Standard Bidding Documents for Textbooks and Learning Materials (May 2004):
   http://go.worldbank.org/ZKA02BYXB0

6. Dealing with Governance and Anticorruption (GAC) Issues in Project Lending: The Special
   Case of Fragile and Conflict-Affected States (2012). World Bank.

7. Global Corruption Report: Education (pages 37-38).
   http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/pub/global_corruption_report_education


                                                                                             167
8. Sanctions relating to textbook projects:

   •   Macmillan Ltd: http://go.worldbank.org/8214RMIQ70
   •   Oxford University Press (OUP): http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-
       release/2012/07/03/world-bank-sanctions-oxford-university-press-corrupt-practices-
       impacting-education-projects-east-africa
   •   Indonesian publishers (26): http://go.worldbank.org/V8DNONW9M0

9. Cross-debarment: http://go.worldbank.org/B699B73Q00. See also
   www.worldbank.org/integrity.

10. World Bank – List of Debarred companies:
    http://web.worldbank.org/external/default/main?theSitePK=84266&contentMDK=6406984
    4&menuPK=116730&pagePK=64148989&piPK=64148984




                                                                                        168
Policy and Practice
Module 11: National Book Policy—the Why and the How



Slide 5

Learning Objectives
In this module we will:

•     Define book policy and discuss its relevance to textbooks and learning materials provision;
•     Identify components to include when formulating a national book policy, and
•     Explore how to bring stakeholders together and build support for a national book policy.



Slide 6




National Book Policy: Definition

A national book policy can be defined as “a legal instrument adopted by the national
government and binding upon all parties concerned that recognizes the strategic importance of
the publishing industry and provides a comprehensive framework—with stated objectives and
specific political, economic, fiscal, and legal measure—to govern all activities in the book sector
and to guide the actions of all players involved.”67




67
     (Newton 1998)

                                                                                               169
The backing of government, the highest national authority, is essential since it is not only a
question of the allocation of sufficient resources but of giving status to a book policy to ensure
that it will be implemented.68 Government backing, perhaps championed by a senior public
figure, ensures that a national book policy is recognized nationwide—as operative official
policy—and also accepted as such in practice by stakeholders. The absence of official backing
will hamper tackling issues such as combating piracy, improving access to finance, and
generating private sector support for community library development and literacy initiatives.



Slide 7




Why does a country need a book policy?

Policy guides practice. Book provision projects sometimes fail because of the lack of clear
policies. A national policy framework increases the probability of success of book
projects/programs. Without the establishment of a suitable policy, textbook projects will have
only limited impact and no real change will be made.69




68
     (Askerud 1997)
69
     Ibid.

                                                                                              170
Slide 8




Good Policy combined with Good Practice leads to Desired Sustainable Outcome. Governments
can receive useful technical advice on best practices for designing and funding book provision
projects. Governments can also negotiate the buy-in of good practices by politicians, teachers,
industry stakeholders, and civil society organizations. But, unless these good practices are
embodied in a national book policy framework, there is increased risk that textbook provision
will not be successful and sustainable.

The point here is that in order to obtain desired sustainable outcomes, good technical advice
and the social marketing around it that encourages stakeholder by-in must be embodied in
approved operational policy. Failure to do so results in successive officials (at senior and lower
levels) bringing their subjective ideas or sometimes parochial interests to bear on far-reaching
decisions affecting book provision.




                                                                                              171
Slide 9




A national book policy defines the role that the book industry plays in textbook development.
“A well-conceived, comprehensive and legally sound policy has proved to be the single most
efficient and effective way to stimulate and further national book development and
publishing.”70

Since books support literacy and learning, book development is tied to a country’s
developmental goals. Therefore, a country would need to define the role that the book
industry will play in accomplishing these development goals, and the methods that will enable
the industry to fulfill that role effectively. A book policy should therefore address issues such as
combating piracy, improving access to finance, and raising professional standards in the
industry. It may also include guidelines on imported books that insist on relevance and avert
dumping. Additionally, the policy can provide incentives to encourage book exports.




70
     (Garzón 1997)

                                                                                                172
Slide 10
Why does a country need a national book policy?

A national book policy clarifies the roles and responsibilities of different stakeholders and
agencies, and harmonizes their activities. As stated in Module 2 (Publishing), there are many
stakeholders involved in book production and dissemination. Ideally, all these stakeholders
should work together towards a common goal. For example, the goals of publishers might
conflict with those of booksellers. A book policy will help harmonize the stakeholders’ agendas
to enable all to work toward the goals set by the policy.

A national book policy also facilitates donor and NGO interventions by articulating the role
expected of them in support of book provision projects. With millions of dollars spent annually
on books as part of education projects—from bilateral donor funds to the imports of donated
books—it is important that a country should have a policy framework for dealing with these, as
these inputs have strong impact on educational outcomes.

The World Bank, for example, supports textbook provision policies that place priority on
“literacy and numeracy”, that reduce or “eliminate cost to students at the level of primary
education, provide a need-based, targeted subsidy at higher grades of general education.”71
A national book policy that includes goals similar to these, will enhance efforts to attract
funding from the Bank.



Slide 11




71
     (World Bank 2002)

                                                                                           173
A national book policy aids in promoting a reading culture in support of literacy and continuous
learning. Textbooks enhance teaching and learning in the classroom. Supplementary readers
are key to successful literacy programs. Together, they strengthen education outcomes and
lifelong learning. Without a policy, there will be no standards governing what is produced and
disseminated. Given that supplementary readers and mother-tongue books often have a small
market, a policy would detail the support and incentives available to those who venture into
this field.



Slide 12




Components of a National Book Policy

A national book policy:

•   Articulates the use of language(s) such as mother tongue in books and other reading
    material. Are teachers trained for this task? Which languages are too small and therefore
    not cost effective for producing books and other learning material?
•   Identifies the country’s book needs, for example, provision of specialized materials and
    materials for minority groups, and state intentions in this regard. It provides a statement on
    material available (e.g. newspapers, books, magazines) and in which languages. This
    information is usually derived from research;
•   Provides the framework for the creation, production, and distribution and promotion of
    books for all categories of society. This refers (i) to creation of an enabling economic
    environment: loan portfolio programs for the book sector (publishing, printing, distribution,
                                                                                              174
    bookselling); cost sharing; and cost recovery details; and (ii) legislation covering issues such
    as censorship, taxation of raw materials and industry inputs; finished books, copyright
    protection, and other rights of book stakeholders;
•   Ensures access to books by all segments of the population —books should be available and
    affordable;
•   Promotes the reading habit and the eradication of illiteracy—through the use of
    supplementary readers and libraries;
•   Addresses constraints such as lack of human resources or access to finance which impede
    the development of endogenous authorship and publishing, especially in national
    languages;
•   States the agreed roles for public and private institutions participating in book provision.
    For example, what role will publishers, printers, distributors and booksellers play in book
    development? What provision will be made for public and community libraries? Which
    ministry or government agency will lead or coordinate efforts?
•   Indicates how and who will monitor implementation and report on progress.




Slide 13




Who should be involved in creating book policies?
                                                                                                175
The book can     be viewed as an educational tool, a cultural item, and/or an economic product.
Therefore, in    order to have shared ownership of the policy, the process should involve
consultations    with as wide a community as possible. Since the stakeholders have varied
interests, the   process could be a prolonged one, calling for patience and perseverance. Key
partners are:

•   Ministries responsible for Education, Finance, Trade, Industry, Justice, Communications and
    Culture;

•   Book producers and users: Publishers, printers, distributors, users (teachers, parents and
    school children), professional associations;

•   Funding agencies: NGOs and potential donors/development partners, bankers, investors.
    Donors/development partners usually play a catalytic role, for example, funding
    consultant(s) to facilitate the process and/or to assist with drafting.



Slide 14




                                                                                           176
Creating a National Book Policy

The process of developing a policy framework consists of five phases:72
1. The first phase is Preparation. Though often overlooked, this phase is vital to ensure that
    the following phases run smoothly. During this phase, leaders and key stakeholders are
    identified and engaged. The process of creating a book policy begins with the identification
    of the objectives of the policy.
2. This leads to the second phase, an Assessment of the state of the book industry to find out
    areas that will result in the achievement of the goal and areas that might work against it.
3. Assessment leads to the third phase, Consultations. This would involve requesting input
    from book chain stakeholders; public officials in ministries such as education, culture,
    economics and justice (law); Civil Society; and the Donor Community on methods to achieve
    the objectives of the book policy. This could easily be the most protracted phase because of
    the varied interests represented by stakeholders. It calls for patience, persistence, and
    skillful negotiations to come to a agree on the issues the policy should cover.
4. The policy is then drafted (Phase 4), which calls for more consensus building as the clauses
    in the policy are finalized. Usually, a team constituted by the stakeholders prepares a draft
    for discussion. The draft may be shaped into a legal document such as a parliamentary bill,
    for which legal expertise would be required.
During drafting and in Phase 5, policy approval, are two stages where a draft policy can get
stuck. The process for final policy approval varies by country and is in the hands of government.
At this point, having champions in government is crucial in rallying support within government
(cabinet) and the legislature as well as from stakeholders to get the policy approved into law.




72
  This model is adapted from Vargas-Barón, E. 2005. “Planning Policies for Early Childhood Development:
Guidelines for Action.” Paris: UNESCO/ADEA/UNICEF (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization/Association for the Development of Education in Africa/United Nations Children’s Fund).


                                                                                                          177
Slide 15




Implementing a National Book Policy

What happens after a policy becomes law? It must be pointed out that having an excellent
policy does not guarantee success; it has to be implemented. In several countries, a national
book council, usually attached to a ministry such as education or culture, is created and tasked
to implement the policy. Members of the council represent public and private sectors as well as
civil society. Click on the link provided here to see the composition of the Philippines National
Book Development Board. A book council’s effectiveness in implementing the policy depends
on political and legal backing, cooperation among the different interest groups, and
enforcement of sanctions.

Regular review of the health of the book industry is necessary to ensure that structures put in
place are working as planned. Where necessary, changes are carried out as for example, if new
priorities emerge regarding use of mother-tongue literature. A national book policy should
therefore be implemented as a working document that evolves to meet a country’s changing
needs.
Implementation should include monitoring and reporting on progress. This should lead to
regular reviews to enable stakeholders to address pertinent issues and remedy problems that
arise.




                                                                                             178
Slide 16




Educational Book (Textbook) Policy

The current situation is that many low income countries do not have a national book policy, but
they may have one on textbooks or one covering educational books (textbooks and
supplementary readers). As noted in module 10, in many low income countries, more than 90%
of the book trade is made of educational books, so, usually, textbook policy operates as book
policy. The educational books or textbooks policy should therefore align with other policies
such as those dealing with education in general, and use of mother-tongue in teaching.
There is no standard format for articulating textbook policy—some are really comprehensive
like Namibia's; some are just a couple of clauses like Cambodia's; some remain "forever" (for
years) in draft form, like Tanzania’s. The key point is that all of them recognize the importance
of providing high quality books and educational/learning material for schools. See the
Resources section for copies of the documents mentioned here.

A textbook policy addresses issues such as:
• The respective roles of the government and the private sector in textbooks and reading
    material provision;
• Multiple Book vs. Single book choice;
• Student-to-book ratio for classrooms;73
• Financing arrangements; and
• Taxes and exemptions on inputs or finished books.74


73
   See Cambodia’s Education Strategic Plan 2009-2103 (pages 58-59): http://www.moeys.gov.kh/en/policies-and-
strategies/73-policies/89-2012-08-22-08-22-12.html (accessed December 20, 2013).
74
   In December 2013, Ghana’s Parliament passed a bill to exempt raw materials used for the printing of text and
exercise books from import duties: http://graphic.com.gh/news/politics/14294-parliament-passes-bill-to-support-
printing-of-text-books-others.html.

                                                                                                            179
Slide 17

Summary
In this module, we
• Defined national book policy and its importance to textbook and learning materials
    provision;
• Identified components that should be included when designing a national book policy, and
• Discussed how to engage stakeholders to draft a national book policy.



Slide 18

Exercise
1. The country called Amarula has revised its education sector plans to include a plan to
   increase literacy and learning at all levels of education. In order to do this, the country
   needs to ensure that there is plenty of reading material available in the country. A newly-
   elected government has decided to develop a national book policy to support this objective.
   You have been contracted to help Amarula begin the process of developing this book policy.
   How would you advise Amarula to proceed? Consider the role of stakeholder consultation
   and process of developing book policies in your discussion. Consider also issues that a book
   policy should address, for example, student-to-book ratios and single vs. multiple book
   options.

2. In the absence of a national book policy, what would you, as a Project Manager (or Task
   Team Leader), advise a Minister of Education about creating the enabling environment for
   sustainable book provision?



Slide 19

Resources

1. Askerud, Pernille. (1997). A guide to Sustainable Book Provision. Paris: UNESCO Publishing.

2. “Building a Learning Nation” (2008). Republic of Namibia Textbook Policy.
   http://www.mcanamibia.org/files/files/PDFs/namibia_national_textbook_policy.pdf

3. Cambodia Education Strategic Plan 2009-2103 (page 58-59).


                                                                                            180
4. Garzon, Alvaro. (2005). National Book Policy. A guide for users in the field. Paris: UNESCO
   Publishing.

5. Gyamerah, Emmanuel Adu. “Parliament passes bill to support printing of text books,
   others.” Daily Graphic, December 17, 2013: http://graphic.com.gh/news/politics/14294-
   parliament-passes-bill-to-support-printing-of-text-books-others.html

6. Sosale, Shobhana (Ed.). (1999). Educational Publishing in Global Perspective: Capacity
   Building and Trends. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
   http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/0-8213-4254-1

7. Tanzania National Book Development Policy (Draft, 2007).
   http://www.bamvita.or.tz/docs/BookPolicy.pdf

8. Textbooks and School Library Provision in Secondary Education in Sub-Saharan Africa
   (2008). World Bank. http://elibrary.worldbank.org/content/book/9780821373446

9. Trucano, Michael (2012). Textbook policies in an increasingly digital age.
   http://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/textbooks




                                                                                             181
Policy and Practice
Module 12: The Textbook Specialist in Action: What a Program manager/Task
Team Leader Needs to Know



Slide 5

Learning Objectives

In this module, we will:
• Introduce key documents that task team leaders (TTLs/project managers) should be familiar
    with in the preparation of textbook projects;
• Discuss key questions to consider at different stages of the life-cycle of a textbook project;
    and
• Detail requirements for preparation & evaluation of bids.



Slide 6




Basic Documents for Book Project Preparation

Imagine that you have been made the TTL/Project Manager on a project with a textbook
component. What is the first thing you need to do? First you need to get familiar with the
basic documents you need before leaving for the field. These documents contain policies and
guidelines that are important for anyone working on a textbook project:




                                                                                            182
•      World Bank Operational Guidelines for Textbook and Reading Materials: Currently under
       revision,75 this document is the basis of what the Bank understands when it finances a
       textbook project or component. It states the role that textbooks play —they support
       classroom instruction. It also states that the Bank supports open competition, equity in
       textbooks provision, and decision making at the lowest level.

•      Standard Bidding Document for Textbooks (SBD): Borrowers with textbook provision
       component have to use this document. Interested parties prepare bids according to
       guidelines in this document. Failure to do so invalidates the bid.

•      SBD User’s Guide: This includes the bidding documents and carries annotations of what
       should and should not be in bid documents.

•      Procurement Technical Note on Textbooks: This has all the background information of
       what the publisher and printer do.

Procurement Guidance Note (specific to textbooks): This is under preparation.



Slide 7




Life-Cycle of a Textbook Project

Textbook provision is often a component of a larger education sector project. The life cycle of a
textbook project consists of the following phases, which correspond to that of a typical bank
project:


75
     As of December 2013, this was being revised.

                                                                                             183
Phase 1: Identification, Preparation and Appraisal
Phase 2: Implementation
Phase3: Monitoring
Phase 4: Completion, Evaluation and Audit.

For our purpose, we will concentrate on Phase 1 of the project life-cycle, and detail processes
for its three stages: Identification, Preparation and Appraisal. The process for Phase 1 of a
textbook provision project has three stages.
Step 1 is project identification, and the output for is the Project Information Document (PID),
which contains proposed objectives of the project.

Step 2: The output of activities under preparation is a Project Implementation Plan which
details the activities to undertake in various components of the project. The implementation
phase begins after the Bank’s Board has approved the loan.

Step 3’s output is a Project Appraisal Document (PAD), which is a comprehensive summary of
benchmarks and results targeted for the project that form the basis for review by the World
Bank Board.



Slide 8




Preparing a Textbook Project: Project Identification.

At this stage, steps are taken to determine whether the proposed project is suitable for Bank
financing. As a Project Manager, what should do when you arrive in the country for the first
                                                                                           184
time? Your focus should be on understanding the issues in the country and the context in which
one would have to address them. One learns quickly by observing and asking questions relating
to the following pertinent aspects of book provision.

1. Get the lay of the land: Get a general understanding of the political, social and economic
   context in which the project will be carried out. What are the major languages in the
   country and the language of instruction? Understanding the country context is key to
   designing a project that will respond effectively to the country’s needs.

2. Manuscript development: Identify who will write the manuscripts – Will it be government
   (agency) or private industry? Sometimes the government will insist on writing textbooks for
   subjects such as civics and culture. They may, for example, want to ensure that students get
   content that teaches national aspirations and family values. In cases such as these, the
   government will likely be seeking funding for printing only. If government originates
   content, will there be a system to evaluate those books to ensure that content is of high
   quality? Is there a third way between State publishing and public-private partnership with
   publishing bids? Focus is on what will work best for the country’s situation.

3. Publishing capacity: Are there publishers in the country that can be used by the project?
   Are there printers? Can local capacity handle the requirements of the project? Why or why
   not? What are the reasons for any capacity constraints? Borrowers expect benefits for their
   local industries to come out of their loans. But we sometimes have to explain to our
   borrowers the reality that, in order for books to reach schools on time, they would need to
   contract externally, particularly if the local industry is not well developed or simply lacks
   capacity to undertake the scope of the project. Per the current World Bank Operational
   Guidelines, for example, projects can make provision for supporting or creating a national
   publishing industry.

4. Single or Multiple book choice: Does the country have a policy on how many textbooks will
   be approved per subject per grade level? Again, what is feasible?

5. Student-to-book ratio: How many students will share a book? Other than workbooks, some
   sharing may be considered if resources are tight.

6. Procurement Method: Will the project use centralized or decentralized procurement? The
   general trend is that more and more countries use decentralization.




                                                                                            185
7. Distribution and Delivery point(s): Where are the target schools? Where will books be
   delivered – to district education offices or school level? What method will ensure optimal
   results? Who will deliver books to the schools—government or private sector? Are there
   freight forwarders (truckers)? Are there bookstores? How many? How large or small?
   What’s the scope of their operations—do they cover the entire country or only urban
   areas? What distribution networks (including warehousing) exist for books and other
   goods? How will delivery be verified? If distribution and delivery issues are not carefully
   worked out, they will increase cost of books as well as possibly create shortages.

The underlying issue is, does the Project aim to merely patch up the existing system or does it
want to thoroughly review and improve or reform it? Answers here depend on many factors
including financial volume, reform-readiness of the government, timeframe, curriculum
situation, and textbook policy. Determining what to focus on usually relies on a survey—about
3-4 weeks—of the current textbook situation in the country, undertaken by
experts/consultants.

During the Identification stage, the Government and the Bank agree on a project concept to
guide preparation. Many of the decisions made during the Identification stage will profoundly
affect the design, and ultimately the likelihood for successful implementation of the proposed
project.



Slide 9




Preparing a Textbook Project: Formal Project Preparation

After identification comes formal project preparation, which calls for three points to be
considered:




                                                                                           186
The Project Manager must ensure that the textbook component links directly to the
achievement of the education project’s development objectives. The project document will be
internally reviewed, and if the textbook component is seen as an outlier that has nothing to do
with the overall project, then your project will have a difficult time getting approved. This is
also the time to check if plans for the textbook component conform to the country’s textbook
policy, if one exists. There does not need to be a formal book policy in place, but the World
Bank’s Operational Guidelines on Textbooks and Learning Materials require that the borrower
clearly articulates plans for future provision of textbooks. What measures are needed to create
the right environment for development or sustainable provision of textbooks?

The textbook component should also directly support the country’s education strategy,
particularly in relation to curriculum, teacher training, and student assessment. The project
preparation stage is the time to review the curriculum and identify issues that need attention.
Frequently countries will say they have a curriculum, and that all they need is money to print
the books. But this is not always the case. For example, upon review, a Project Manager might
identify that the curriculum for Mathematics is incomplete. This should open up a new dialogue
as to whether curriculum development should be part of project before discussion on
textbooks can take place. Other questions to ask regarding curriculum are: Is there sufficient
support for teacher training? What plans are needed to train teachers to use any new material
effectively? Similarly, will books provided adequately cover the curriculum?

To find answers to some of these questions, the Bank provides policy and project advice along
with financial assistance. The Client country conducts studies and prepares the final project
documentation.



Slide 10




                                                                                            187
Other tasks during project preparation include:

Setting physical targets
Here, detail what will be covered or produced by the textbook component. Textbooks only?
Will there be teacher’s guides? What subjects will be covered? For each book, establish
quantities that would be provided.
Should the need arise for trade-offs due to resource constraints, guiding questions include:
What is the priority of the government? Some governments have priority in core subjects like
languages, mathematics and science. Others might include social studies. This has to be
figured into the dialogue, because in the end you will have to calculate a financing package that
fits with the larger education project package that to be delivered. Also this is where the
borrower state’s own contribution and what books this contribution will cover such as civ ics
and culture?

Implementation arrangements
This involves identifying some specific roles and responsibilities: Who will do what when the
project gets underway? Will all personnel be found locally or will the project need to contract
external consultants? Which government agency will execute the project? Who will be overall
project manager in the country? Who will be responsible for reporting on agreed indicators to
the sector minister and the Bank every quarter?



Slide 11




Preparing a Textbook Project: Appraisal

Once formal project preparation is done, we move on to appraisal. During Appraisal, the Bank
assesses the economic, technical, financial, environmental, and social aspects of the project.
The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) that results indicates (i) technical, institutional,


                                                                                             188
economic, environmental and financial aspects and (ii) alternative methods for achieving
objectives. The PAD provides a comprehensive summary of envisaged activities, the estimated
implementation schedule, procurement plan, benchmarks and results targeted, and any
conditionality for review by the World Bank Board. This document also presents any potential
risks as well as necessary safeguards.



Slide 12




The Procurement Plan

We have already fully discussed procurement plans in Module 9. Each borrowing country is
required to present a procurement plan to the Bank prior to engaging in procurement activities.
A procurement plan defines what the project will procure, when, estimated cost and the
method of procurement.76 Procurement of goods such as textbooks is done in packages and in
sub-packages, called lots. Each lot lists items required to be procured.

Publishers have their specialties. So, as Project Manager, you might want to package the
textbooks to attract the type of publishers that can best deliver. For example, if the country
would like to acquire science books for higher grades, the procurement plan has to package the
science books together in order to attract bids from publishers specializing in science. Each
package should have estimated costs and proposed method of procurement such as
International Competitive Bidding (ICB), National Competitive Bidding (NCB) or Shopping. The
procurement plan should include a time schedule detailing all procurement activities from
beginning to end of the project.

At this stage, it is important to work with procurement experts to ensure compliance with
guidelines.

76
     Module 9 deals with Procurement methods and discusses the procurement plan in detail.

                                                                                             189
Slide 13




Know your Standard Bidding Documents: Schedule of Requirements
Once the procurement plan is approved, bidding can proceed. One of the most important
documents that a Project Manager should become very familiar with is the Standard Bidding
Documents (SBD) and, particularly, its Schedule of Requirements. The schedule of requirements
is meant to provide appropriate information regarding the goods and services to be supplied, in
order to enable bidders to prepare their bids efficiently.



Slide 14




What are key aspects of the schedule of requirements that a Project Manager should pay
attention to?

1. The list of books to be procured and the number of pages per book : We learned in Module
   2 that publishers count pages by factors of 16. This is done in order to reduce paper and
   machine time wastage as books printed using other factors require off-press collation.


                                                                                           190
2. Quantities of Print copies & Packaging: Large scale printers count the number of printed
   copies of books in thousands, which makes it easier to count totals. The dimensions of a
   book determine how many can be packed into one box. It is helpful to consider this and
   round up figures where necessary to facilitate packaging. For example, if the number of
   printed copies (print run) specified in the schedule of requirements for Grade One English
   book is 150,632 and one average sized box will hold 60 copies, this should raise a red flag
   since that means one box would hold only 32 copies of the books. It would be better to
   specify 151,000 copies as the total print run. This will result in 2,515 boxes holding 60
   copies each, leaving 10 copies as “inspection copies.”

3. Delivery locations and responsibility for receipt and reporting: modules 7 and 8 tackle
   issues involved in distribution, particularly how to ensure that books arrive where they are
   needed and in a timely manner. Documentary evidence that books have been received as
   allocated should be mandatory before payment to publishers or distributors.



Slide 15




A Project Manager also needs to pay attention to the following technical details listed in the
Schedule of Requirements:

1. Paper: Basis Weight: This is the density of printing paper, expressed in grams per square
   meter (gsm). Brightness: In many rural areas of developing countries, there is no electricity.
   When classrooms are dark, children have to bring book pages close to their eyes to read.
   Printing on bright paper is needed for such situations.




                                                                                             191
   Cover stock (Opacity): Opacity is the measure that will or not allow light to pass through.
   This is important for early grade readers to ensure they are not distracted by print on the
   other side of the page.



Slide 16




2. Packaging: The borrower (Client country) needs to specify the type of packaging needed in
   order to ensure that books arrive at their destinations in excellent condition. Materials used
   should withstand weather and transportation. Sturdy packaging ensures that books will not
   be damaged in transit. Textbooks should be wrapped and bundled well, because in some
   areas books have to be transported across rivers and lakes and paper cartons could get wet
   and damage the books.

   Color coding boxes facilitates efficient delivery. Quite often, people that are working on
   delivery of packages may not be literate. Color-coding boxes of books takes care of the
   problem. For example, Math books will be in boxes with red coloring, boxes with brown
   color could be science and green for social studies.

   Dimensions and weight should be appropriate for ease of manual handling during
   dissemination. In many rural areas boxes of books are carried by students, teachers or
   volunteers from warehouse or district education offices to schools.




                                                                                             192
Slide 17




3. Security is another important consideration. Schools in conflict afflicted countries have poor
   security for storing books, as illustrated in the photo from North Kordofan, Sudan. Many
   rural schools also lack doors or cabinets to secure books. At the end of the year or
   sometimes even daily, teachers take books home for safe-keeping.



Slide 18




Bid Evaluation: Criteria for Quality

The Sector Ministry has the choice of using the template provided in the Standard Bidding
Documents or creating their own instrument to evaluate bids. The following bid evaluation
instrument is found in the Standard Bidding Documents. For evaluating Quality, there are seven
categories relevant to books with ratings (scores) based on a point system of 1-40:


                                                                                             193
•   Conformity to the curriculum (5-10 points)
•   Content (10-40)
•   Level of language (5-10)
•   Pedagogical Method (10-40)
•   Teacher support (teacher guide) (5-10)
•   Presentation and design (5-10)
•   Illustration (5-10).



Slide 19




Bid Evaluation: Criteria for Cost

The evaluation criteria for Cost examine the build-up of the overall bid price. This should factor
in discounts and domestic preference, if applicable; Freight, insurance, tariffs, etc. This covers
all incidentals that will be paid to get the books to destinations specified in the project. For
information on two examples of bid evaluation, see the document titled XXXX in Resources.


Slide 20

Summary
In this module, we:
• Identified the documents a task team leader needs to consult in preparing a textbook
    project;
• Detailed questions that a task team leader needs to consider at various stages of project
    preparation; and
• Discussed the requirements for designing the textbook provision component of a project.




                                                                                              194
Slide 21
Exercise
In 2008, Siam revised its Education policy to shift the language of education from French to
English. The Ministry of Education (EduMin) announced a policy decision to change textbook
development from French to English for grades 4 to secondary school to support this initiative.
In the same year, a large textbook development tender was issued for core language books in
English for Grades 4 through secondary school, and local Kinyarwanda language for Grades 1-3.
The last time that Siam procured textbooks, there were long delays in bid review due to a
number of issues such as lack of experienced bid managers and reviewers, the evaluation
methodology and instrument used also did not meet international standards. Additionally,
there were delays in the awarding of contract and distribution of books.

You have been asked to help EduMin to put measures in place that will ensure successful bid
evaluation this time. What ideas would you provide to the Ministry on reforms that should be
put in place prior to beginning the review process?



Slide 22

Resources


1. Bontoux, Vincent. “Textbook Chain Issues In Lower Income Countries: Timor-Leste and
   Burundi – Case studies”:
   http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day3/GPE_Textbook_Workshop_Bont
   oux_PresentationOctober_2012.pdf

2. De Guzmán, Alfonso. “So you're thinking about a textbook component for your project!
   What a task team leader needs to know for project preparation and implementation (but
   were afraid to ask)”:
   http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day2/What%20a%20Task%20Team%2
   0Leader%20Needs%20to%20Know%20-%20Alfonso%20DeGuzman.pdf

3. World Bank Operational Guidelines for Textbook and Reading Materials:
   http://imagebank.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2002/09/06/000094
   946_02082804004785/Rendered/PDF/multi0page.pdf

4. For information on World Bank Guidelines for Procurement of Textbooks and Reading
   Materials see http://go.worldbank.org/DLRZ49RFP0
                                                                                           195
References


Abadzi, Helen. How to “Cure” Illiteracy? February 28, 2013.
        https://www.educationforallblog.org/issues/literacy-issues/how-to-cure-illiteracy (accessed
        December 13, 2013).

Askerud, Pernille. A Guide to Sustainable Book Provision. Paris: UNESCO, 1997.

Bernard, J. "Can Textbooks really promote peace and global citizenship? Some lessons, examples, and
       possible new directions." In Education Above All: Education for Global Citizenship, 74-87. Paris:
       UNESCO, 2012.

Bgoya, Walter. "Development Dialogue." Dag Hammarskjöld Foundation. 1997.
       http://www.dhf.uu.se/publications/development-dialogue/the-future-of-indigenous-publishing-
       in-africa/ (accessed December 10, 2013).

Blumberg, Rae L. Gender bias in textbooks: a hidden obstacle on the road to gender equality in education
      . Paris: UNESCO, 2007.

Bontoux, Vincent. "Textbook Chain Issues In Lower Income Countries: Timor-Leste and Burundi – Case
       studies ." Textbook and Educational Materials - Community of Practice Workshop 2012; Global
       Partnership for Education. October 17-19, 2012.
       http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day3/GPE_Textbook_Workshop_Bontoux_
       PresentationOctober_2012.pdf (accessed December 23, 2013).

Books for All: Rwanda’s Innovative Textbook Distribution Program. n.d.
        http://www.globalpartnership.org/stories-2/rwanda-s-innovative-textbook-distribution-
        program/ (accessed December 13, 2013).

Braslavsky, C. and Katya Halil. Textbooks and Quality Learning for All: Some Lessons Learned from
        International Experiences. Paris: UNESCO Publishing, 2006.

Brickhill, Paul, Christopher Chirwa and Bengt Lindahl. Changing Public Private Partnerships in the African
         Book Sector. London: ADEA/Department for International Development, 2006.

"Check My School – Not Just a Website." The World Bank Institute. May 15, 2012.
       http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/stories/check-my-school-not-just-website (accessed July 8, 2013).

Clark, G. and Angus Phillips. Inside Book Publishing. London: Routledge, 2008.

Crouch, L. "Disappearing books: Greed or policy mistakes or both?" Education for All Blog. April 12,
       2011. https://www.educationforallblog.org/issues/aid-effectiveness/disappearing-books-greed-
       or-policy-mistakes-or-both (accessed December 14, 2013).


                                                                                                      196
De Guzmán, Alfonso. "So you're thinking about a textbook component for your project! What a task
      team leader needs to know for project preparation and implementation (but were afraid to
      ask)." Textbook and Educational Materials - Community of Practice Workshop 2012 - Global
      partnership for Education. October 17-19, 2012.
      http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day2/What%20a%20Task%20Team%20Lea
      der%20Needs%20to%20Know%20-%20Alfonso%20DeGuzman.pdf (accessed December 23,
      2013).

DeJongh, Maggie. "Books costs across the book chain." Textbook and Educational Materials - Community
       of Practice Workshop 2012 Global Partnership for Education. October 17-19, 2012.
       http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day1/Books%20Costs%20Across%20the%2
       0Book%20Chain%20-%20Maggie%20DeJongh.pdf (accessed December 23, 2013).

Devas, N. "The Challenges of Decentralization." IVGlobal Forum on Fighting Corruption. June 7-10, 2005.
        http://www.cgu.gov.br/ivforumglobal/pdf/nickdevas-2.pdf (accessed December 10, 2013).

DFID Guidance Note: Learning and teaching materials: policy and practice for provision. London, n.d.

"Education Strategic Plan 2009-2013." Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport (Cambodia). September
       2010. http://www.moeys.gov.kh/en/policies-and-strategies/73-policies/89-2012-08-22-08-22-
       12.html (accessed December 20, 2013).

Evans, M. D. R., Jonathan Kelley, Joanna Sikora and Donald Treiman. "Family scholarly culture and
       educational success: Books and schooling in 27 nations." Research in Social Stratification and
       Mobility, 2010: doi:10.1016/j.rssm.2010.01.002.

Fredriksen, Birger. "Textbook Cost and Financing Issues in Sub-Saharan Africa." Textbook and
        Educational Materials - Community of Practice Workshop 2012; Global Partnership for
        Education. October 17-19, 2012.
        http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day3/GPE_Textbook_Workshop_Fredrikse
        n_PresentationOctober_2012.pdf (accessed December 23, 2013).

Garzón, Alvaro. National book policy: A guide to users in the field. Paris: UNESCO Publishing, 1997.

"Global Corruption Report: Education ." Transparency International. October 1, 2013.
        http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/pub/global_corruption_report_education (accessed
        December 19, 2013).

Gyamerah, Emmanuel Adu. "Parliament passes bill to support printing of text books, others." Daily
      Graphic, December 17, 2013.

"iRead Ghana Study: Final Evaluation Report." Worldreader. 2012.
        http://www.worldreader.org/uploads/Worldreader%20ILC%20USAID%20iREAD%20Final%20Re
        port%20Jan-2012.pdf (accessed December 11, 2013).



                                                                                                       197
Jacobs, Tom. "Home Libraries Provide Huge Educational Advantage." Pacific Standard. April 8, 2010.
        http://www.psmag.com/culture-society/home-libraries-provide-huge-educational-advantage-
        14212/ (accessed May 14, 2013).

Kira, E. and Godfry Bukagile. "Perceptions of Education Stakeholders on the Implications of Textbook
         Liberalization Policy in Tanzania." Journal of Education and Practice. Vol.4, No.1, 2013: 136.

Learning for a Future: Refugee Education in Developing Countries. Geneva: UNHCR, 2001.

Majgaard, K. and Alain Mingat. Education in Sub-Saharan Africa: a comparative analysis . Washington,
       DC: World Bank, 2012.

Misprocurement on CBD-Financed Projects. n.d.
       http://www.caribank.org/projects/procurement/misprocurement (accessed December 18,
       2013).

Motamedi, Alaleh. "Bank Procurement Policies and Principles Applicable to Textbooks (Part 1 and 2)."
      Textbook and Educational Materials - Community of Practice Workshop 2012; Global Partnership
      for Education. October 17-19, 2012.
      http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day2/Bank%20Procurement%20Policies%2
      0and%20Priciples%20Applicable%20to%20Textbooks.%20%20Part%201%20and%202-
      %20Alaleh%20Motamedia.pdf (accessed December 23, 2013).

Newton, Diana. "National Policies for the Book Sector." In Educational Publishing in Global Perspective:
      Capacity Building and Trends, by Shobhana Sosale (Ed), 13-18. Washington, DC: World Bank,
      1998.

Read, Tony, Carmelle Denning, and Vincent Bontoux (Eds.). Upgrading Book Distribution in Africa. Paris:
       ADEA, 2001.

Sow, Aliou. "Textbooks Provision." Textbook and Educational Materials - Community of Practice
        Workshop 2012; Global Partnership for Education. October 17-19, 2012.
        http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day2/Textbooks%20Provision%20-
        %20Aliou%20Sow.pdf (accessed December 23, 2013).

Standard Bidding Documents. Washington, DC, March 2013.

The Campus Guide to Copyright Compliance. n.d.
       http://www.copyright.com/Services/copyrightoncampus/basics/law.html (accessed December
       13, 2013).

Trucano, Michael. "Textbook policies in an increasingly digital age." EduTech. May 14, 2012.
       http://blogs.worldbank.org/edutech/edutech/textbooks (accessed December 11, 2013).

Walter, Scott. "Textbook and Educational Materials - Community of Practice Workshop 2012." Global
        Partnership for Education. October 18, 2012.

                                                                                                    198
        http://www.globalpartnership.org/media/textbooks/day2/Reading%20Material%20Presentatio
        n%20-%20Scott%20Walter.pdf (accessed December 11, 2013).

What is Intellectual property? n.d. http://www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/index.html (accessed December
       13, 2013).

World Bank. Dealing with Governance and Anticorruption (GAC) Issues in Project Lending: The Special
       Case of Fragile and Conflict-Affected States. Washington, DC: World Bank, 2012.

World Bank. Operational Guidelines for Textbooks and Reading Materials. Washington, DC, July 2002.

—. "Procurement." 2004 SBD Textbooks. December 1, 2004. http://go.worldbank.org/ZKA02BYXB0
       (accessed December 19, 2013).

World Bank. Project Performance Assessment Report: Mozambique. June 17, 2008.

—. Textbooks and School Library Provision in Secondary Education in Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington,
       DC: World Bank, 2008.

World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). Managing. Intellectual Property in the Book Publishing
        Industry. A business-oriented information booklet. Geneva:
        http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/freepublications/en/copyright/868/wipo_pub_868.pdf,
        n.d.

Zell, Hans M. Print vs. electronic, and the ‘digital revolution’ in Africa. January 28 , 2013 (last accessed
        December 23, 2013).




                                                                                                        199
