87763 v2
                                      Islamic Republic of Pakistan


                                           Diagnostic Review of
                                         Consumer Protection and
                                            Financial Literacy



                                           Volume II
                                  Comparison with Good Practices



                                                     March 2014




THE WORLD BANK
Financial Inclusion Practice, Micro and SME Finance
Financial and Private Sector Development Vice-Presidency
Washington, DC
 T his Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The
 World Bank. T he findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the
 Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / International Development Association or
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                       Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy i


Acknowledgments

A World Bank mission visited Pakistan from December 4 to 14, 2012, to prepare a Diagnostic Review of
Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (CPFL). This Diagnostic Review was prepared by a team
led by Ann Rennie (Advisor/Consultant) from the World Bank’s South Asia Finance and Private Sector
Group. The team comprised Sau Ngan Wong (Senior Counsel), Denise Dias (Microfinance Consultant),
Andrej Popovic (Financial Sector Specialist), Jules Gribble (Insurance Consultant), Sarwat Aftab (Senior
Private Sector Development Specialist), and Sarmad Ahmed Shaikh (Analyst). The team was supported
by Ehtesham-ul-Haq, Program Assistant.

The team expresses its deep appreciation to the Pakistani authorities for their cooperation during the
preparation of the review. Detailed comments on the draft report were provided by Alexander Pankov,
Uzma Khalil, and Johanna Jaeger. Doug Pearce (Acting Manager, Financial Inclusion and Consumer
Protection Service Line) provided overall guidance and comments. The project team would like to thank
all those who so generously contributed to the final report.

The review was co-financed by the USAID Trust Fund on “Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy.”
ii Abbreviations and Acronyms


                         Abbreviations and Acronyms

   ACMFD                        Agricultural Credit and Microfinance Department
   AMC                          Asset Management Companies
   AML/CFT                      Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing
                                of Terrorism
   BCO                          Banking Companies Ordinance
   BID                          Banking Inspection Department
   BPD                          Banking Policy Department
   BPRD                         Banking Policy and Regulation Department
   BSP                          Banking Surveillance Department
   CCP                          Competition Commission of Pakistan
   CDA                          Central Depository Act
   CDS                          Central Depository System
   CIB                          Credit Information Bureau
   CIS                          Collective Investment Schemes
   CIU                          Collective Investment Undertaking
   CP                           Consumer Protection
   CPD                          Consumer Protection Department
   CPFL                         Consumer Protection and Finance Literacy
   CRR                          Cash Reserve Requirements
   DFI                          Development Finance Institutions
   DFID                         Department for International Development
   DPS                          Deposit Protection Scheme
   eCIB                         Electronic Credit Information Bureau
   EFT                          Electronic Fund Transfer
   FATF                         Financial Action Task Force
   FIA                          Federal Investigation Agency
   FSA                          Financial Sector Assessment
   FSAP                         Financial Sector Assessment Program
   GOP                          Government of Pakistan
   IAP                          Insurance Association of Pakistan
   ICAP                         Institute of Chartered Accountants of Pakistan
   ICM                          Institute of Capital Markets
   ICMAP                        Institute of Cost and Management Accountants of
                                Pakistan
   IOSCO                        International Organization of Securities
                                Commissions
   IPO                          Initial Public Offerings
   KFS                          Key Facts Statement
   KPK                          Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
   KYC/CDD                      Know Your Customer/Customer Due Diligence
   LEA                          Law Enforcement Agencies
   MCGF                         Microfinance Credit Guarantee Facility
   MFB                          Microfinance Banks
   MFCG                         Microfinance Consultative Group
   MFI                          Microfinance Institutions
   MOU                          Memorandum of Understanding
   MSP                          Microfinance Service Provider
   MUFAP                        Mutual Fund Association of Pakistan
   NAB                          National Accountability Bureau
        Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy iii


NCC         National Clearing Company
NCCPL       National Clearing Corporation of Pakistan Limited
NFLP        Nationwide Financial Literacy Programme
NGO         Non-Government Organization
NICL        National Insurance Company Limited
OBM         Office of the Banking Mohtasib
OGCC        Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards
PBA         Pakistan Banks’ Association
PKR         Pakistani Rupee
PLI         Postal Life Insurance
PLS         Profit and Loss Sharing
PMN         Pakistan Microfinance Network
PPAF        Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund
PRCF        Prudential Regulations for Consumer Financing
PRISM       Program for Increasing Sustainable Microfinance
PRCL        Pakistan Reinsurance Company Limited
PRMFB       Prudential Regulations for Microfinance Banks
RSP         Rural Support Programs
SAOF        Standardized Account Opening Form
SBP         State Bank of Pakistan
SECP        Securities & Exchange Commission of Pakistan
SI          Securities Intermediaries
SLIC        State Life Insurance Corporation
SLR         Statutory Liquidity Requirements
SRO         Self-Regulatory Organizations
     iv Contents


                                                    Contents


1.   BANKING SECTOR: GOOD PRACTICES                                                                          1
     CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS....................................................................... 1
     DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES ............................................................................ 9
     CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE ..............................................19
     PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION ...............................................................................33
     DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS ...........................................................................37
     GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY...................................................................41
     CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT (SEE CHAPTER V)...........................................................44
     COMPETITION AND CONSUMER PROTECTION..............................................................44

2.   MICROFINANCE PROVIDERS: GOOD PRACTICES                                                                46
     CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS......................................................................46
     DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES ...........................................................................63
     CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE ..............................................77
     PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION ...............................................................................86
     DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISM .............................................................................90
     CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT ........................................................................................96

3.   INSURANCE SECTOR: COMPARISON WITH GOOD PRACTICES                                                      97
     CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS......................................................................97
     DISCLOSURE & SALES PRACTICES .............................................................................. 102
     CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE ............................................ 108
     PRIVACY & DATA PROTECTION .................................................................................. 110
     DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS ......................................................................... 112
     GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY................................................................. 115
     CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT ...................................................................................... 118

4.   SECURITI ES SECTOR: GOOD PRACTICES                                                                     122
     INVESTOR PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS...................................................................... 122
     DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES ......................................................................... 129
     CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE ............................................ 140
     PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION ............................................................................. 149
     DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS ......................................................................... 151
     GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY................................................................. 154
     CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT ...................................................................................... 156
                                               Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 1


    1. Banking Sector: Good Practices


SECTION A                    CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

Good Practice A.1.           Consumer Protection Regime
                             The law should provide clear consumer protection rules regarding banking
                             products and services, and all institutional arrangements should be in place
                             to ensure the thorough, objective, timely, and fair implementation and
                             enforcement of all such rules.
                                 a. Specific statutory provisions should create an effective regime for
                                     the protection of a consumer of any banking product or service.
                                 b. A general consumer agency, a financial supervisory agency, or a
                                     specialized financial consumer agency should be responsible for
                                     implementing, overseeing, and enforcing consumer protection
                                     regarding banking products and services, as well as for collecting
                                     and analyzing data (including inquiries, complaints, and disputes).
                                 c. The designated agency should be funded adequately to enable it to
                                     carry out its mandates efficiently and effectively.
                                 d. The work of the designated agency should be carried out with
                                     transparency, accountability, and integrity.
                                 e. There should be coordination and cooperation between the various
                                     institutions mandated to implement, oversee, and enforce consumer
                                     protection and financial system regulation and supervision.
                                 f. The law should also provide for, or at least not prohibit, a role for
                                     the private sector, including voluntary consumer organizations and
                                     self-regulatory organizations, in respect of consumer protection
                                     regarding banking products and services.
Description                  The laws and regulations of Pakistan do not yet provide clear consumer
                             protection rules regarding any financial products and services, including those of
                             banks. An effective regime for the protection of consumers seeking or acquiring
                             banking products or services remains to be created.

                             The Constitution of Pakistan refers to a Federal Legislative List. This list defines
                             the distribution of legislative powers between the federation and provinces. The
                             federation has the power to regulate the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) and
                             banking, that is, the conduct of banking business by corporations other than
                             corporations owned or controlled by a province and carrying on business only
                             within that province. However, general consumer protection is deemed to be a
                             provincial matter. There are provincial Consumer Protection Acts in place 1 in all
                             provinces except Sindh and the Federal Capital Territory. Although general in
                             their coverage, they do ostensibly cover “services,” which includes financial
                             services. However, with the exception of the province of Punjab, these laws have
                             not become fully operational or have lapsed.


1
See, for example, the Punjab Consumer Protection Act, 2005.
2 Banking Sector: Good Practices



                The provincial laws focus primarily on goods and manufactured materials, but
                also cover services. Under Pakistan’s legal system, specialized laws are deemed
                to have precedence over general laws, so most observers believe that the federal
                laws governing banking and other financial services that include provisions for
                protection of the public and investors would take precedence over the more
                general provincial consumer protection laws.

                SBP derives its powers principally from SBP Act, 1956, and the Banking
                Companies Ordinance (BCO), 1962. Neither law gives SBP an explicit
                consumer protection mandate, but they do provide broad powers to SBP to,
                among other things, give directions, where it is satisfied that it is “(a) in the
                public interest; or (b) to prevent the affairs of any banking company being
                conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of the depositors or in a
                manner prejudicial to the interests of the banking company; or (c) to secure the
                proper management of any banking company generally.” Banks are legally
                bound to comply with such directions. SBP’s powers and the binding nature of
                its directions on regulated entities have been demonstrated in practice and upheld
                by the Supreme Court. SBP has used these powers extensively to issue
                secondary legislation, rules, regulations, and other directives to banks on
                consumer protection matters in recent years.

                 Recent legislation prompted by the rapid expansion of electronic banking has
                 explicitly included clauses related to consumer protection, to avoid any
                 ambiguity with regard to new products, services, and terminologies.
                 Accordingly, different sections of the Payment Systems and Electronic Fund
                 Transfers Act, 2007, contain details about the Requirement of Notice (Section
                 29) for ATM Fees, Terms & Conditions of Transfers (Section 30), Availability
                 of Documentation & Proof (Section 32), Issuance of Periodic Statements
                 (Section 33), Consumer’s Liability in Case of Electronic Fund Transfers and
                 Burden of Proof (Section 41), etc. The law itself and the quoted Sections
                 provide further clarity and coverage to consumers .

                The following are the principal laws and regulations governing consumer
                protection in the banking sector:


                        1. State Bank of Pakistan Act, 1956 (SBP Act)
                        2. Banking Companies Ordinance (BCO), 1962, and associated
                           regulations
                        3. Provincial consumer protection laws; notably the Punjab Consumer
                           Protection Act, 2005
                        4. Competition Ordinance, 2007
                        5. Payments and Electronic Funds Transfers Act, 2007
                        6. Banks (Nationalization) Act, 1974
                        7. Various regulations, circulars, guidelines, and operational guidelines
                           issued by SBP, including but not limited to the following:
               Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 3


    •   Prudential regulations for consumer financing (PRCF) (updated June
        2011), which establishes rules for various types of consumer loans,
        including credit card debt, housing loans, and auto loans, and requires
        banks to limit customer exposure by income and ability to service the
        loan.
    •   Branchless Banking Guidelines, 2007
    •   Banking Policy Department (BPD) Guidelines 17, 2004, on Dealing
        with Customer Complaints
    •   BPRD Circular 01, 2012, on Minimum Return on Savings Deposits
    •   Consumer Protection Department (CPD) Circular 02, 2012, on Sale of
        Third Party Products by Banks
    •   Banking Policy and Regulations Department (BPRD) Circular No. 23,
        2003, on service charges on deposit accounts
    •   BPD Circular No. 30, 2005, on basic bank accounts
    •   BPRD Circular No. 7, 2011, on Service Charges on Profit and Loss
        Sharing (PLS) Deposit Accounts
    •   BPRD Circular No. 12, 2011, which prohibits charging for cash
        handling/deposit services at counters
    •   BPD Circular Letter No. 21, 2004, and BPD Circular No. 7, 2006, on
        unclaimed deposits
    •   BPD Circular No. 7, 2006, on statement of accounts to PLS/current
        account holders and basic bank account holders
    •   Operational Guidelines for Credit Card Business in Pakistan

The two main entities responsible for implementing, overseeing, and enforcing
consumer protection with respect to banking products and services are SBP
(notably but not exclusively the Consumer Protection Department) and the
Office of the Banking Mohtasib (OBM). These two entities also have
responsibility for collecting and analyzing data (including inquiries, complaints,
and disputes). Both institutions are adequately funded, and carry out their work
with transparency, accountability, and integrity.

SBP monitors consumer protection practices on an ongoing basis, and also
receives consumer complaints directly from the public, occasionally leading to
issuance of further clarifications of regulations in force and standards expected
of the financial sector. SBP has extensive powers to give directions and impose
monetary/restrictive penalties for violations.

Within SBP, various departments are engaged in different aspects pertaining to
consumer protection and financial literacy (CPFL). These include the Consumer
Protection Department; the Banking Policy and Regulations Department, which
develops and generates new rules and regulations, including in the CPFL; the
Agricultural and Microfinance Department (AMD) of SBP, which deals with
some policy issues pertaining to microfinance banks (MFBs), including in the
area of the CPFL; and the Banking Inspection Department (BID), which
conducts annual onsite inspections covering both prudential and market conduct
4 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                issues.

                The Office of the Banking Mohtasib (OBM), or banking ombudsman, is an
                independent statutory body established by law to resolve disputes between
                consumers and banks. It is the first authority where a consumer, if not satisfied
                with a bank’s decision, can lodge a complaint. It also collects, analyzes, and
                publishes data on consumer protection inquiries and disputes. The services
                performed by the ombudsman are free of charge. As is the case in some other
                countries, banks share the costs of the institution, with the cost to each bank
                determined by the central bank.

                The Competition Commission of Pakistan (CCP) is also involved in consumer
                protection. It is an independent quasi-regulatory, quasi-judicial body responsible
                for ensuring healthy competition among companies for the benefit of the
                economy. The CCP was established under the Competition Ordinance, 2007.
                The major aim of this ordinance was to provide a legal framework to create a
                business environment based on healthy competition for improving economic
                efficiency, developing competitiveness, and protecting consumers from anti-
                competitive practices. It has the legal power to, among other things, initiate
                proceedings, make orders, and impose penalties in cases of contravention of the
                Competition Ordinance. It has, from time to time, initiated investigations and
                issued directives involving anti-competitive practices by banks. There is regular,
                albeit informal, coordination and cooperation between SBP and OBM.

                There are no legal restrictions on the creation of voluntary consumer
                organizations; however, very few consumer protection nongovernmental
                organizations (NGOs) are active in the area of consumer financing.
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 5


Recommendation      The legal framework for financial consumer protection would benefit from
                    strengthening and clarification, along with consistent enforcement of existing
                    provisions. There are several ways to create an effective regime for the
                    protection of consumers of banking products or services. One way would be to
                    introduce a Consumer Financial Protection Act at the federal level in accordance
                    with international good practices, which would legislate on a range of issues,
                    including transparency, confidentiality, availability of statements, account
                    servicing, protection against unfair contracts and lending practices, and so forth.
                    This would have the advantage of consolidating the body of knowledge, case
                    law, and best practices into a single piece of law. Another way would be to
                    amend the BCO by introducing a new section specific to protection of
                    consumers of financial services. However, given the very long delays involved
                    in passing or amending financial legislation in Pakistan, SBP has opted in the
                    interim to use its broad banking sector regulatory powers to issue relevant
                    regulations, directives, and circulars in the area of consumer protection.
                    Although not optimal, SBP has used its powers in this area effectively.

                    Since the legal, regulatory, and institutional frameworks remain fragmented, a
                    high-level consensus should be sought among SBP, Ombudsman of Pakistan,
                    Competition Commission, Provincial Consumer Councils, and others, that SBP
                    plays the primary role in regulating matters of consumer protection for licensed
                    financial institutions under its jurisdiction. Procedural matters also need to be
                    clarified. For example, consumers often complain directly to SBP rather than to
                    the OBM because they are not fully aware of the complaints process. The
                    complaints process should be in the hands of the OBM, which should regularly
                    inform SBP on current issues in consumer financing and should have the right to
                    give its own recommendations regarding the regulations that concern consumer
                    financing.

                    There should be a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between SBP and the
                    ombudsman. The MOU should clearly define the rights and duties of the
                    institutions, manner of communication, sharing of information, and oversight
                    and enforcement of consumer protection provisions.

                    SBP should establish an ongoing dialog with relevant NGOs and volunteer
                    associations that are promoting consumer protection, and consult with these
                    organizations regarding draft regulations on consumer protection. Their role
                    should be recognized, in order to provide them with legitimacy and enable them
                    to obtain funding and gather resources.


Good Practice A.2   Code of Conduct for Banks
                        a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for banks that is
                            devised by all banks or the banking association in consultation with
                            the financial supervisory agency and consumer associations, if
                            possible. Monitored by a statutory agency or an effective self-
                            regulatory agency, this code should be formally adhered to by all
                            sector-specific institutions.
    6 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                        b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, it should be publicized
                           and disseminated to the general public.
                        c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary codes
                           of conduct for banks on such matters as facilitating the easy
                           switching of consumers’ current accounts and establishing a
                           common terminology in the banking industry for the description of
                           banks’ charges, services, and products.
                        d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and
                           disseminated.
Description
                    Currently there is no code of conduct for banks. Pakistan Banks’ Association
                    (PBA), which represents the Pakistan banking industry, was established in 1953,
                    with a view to coordinate the efforts of the banking industry and to share a
                    common vision of progress and development with its members. PBA
                    membership is institutionalized and is available only to banks operating in
                    Pakistan. The 46 current members are categorized into six groups (one of these
                    groups is under formation). SBP, in its 10-year strategy, has plans to encourage
                    the PBA to adopt a Banking Code of Ethics, which will be used as a basis for
                    committing all banks to fairness, disclosure, and proper ethical standards.
                    Moreover, individual banks do not appear to have developed their own codes of
                    conduct. While most banks interviewed indicated they had internal codes of
                    ethics, these appear to be limited to staff conduct, and are not disseminated to the
                    public. The mission was unable to obtain a copy of any of these codes of ethics.
Recommendation
                    Pakistan Banks’ Association (PBA) should adopt a code of conduct for banks.
                    The code should be a principles-based, statutory Code of Conduct for banks
                    devised in consultation with SBP. It should be widely publicized and
                    disseminated to the general public. The performance of the banks in accordance
                    with the requirements of the code would then need to be monitored by an
                    appropriate body, which could be SBP or OBM, for example.
                    Good examples of codes of banking practices that have been adopted and
                    enforced include those of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom,
                    Hong Kong, and South Africa. These codes are principles-based and their
                    compliance is monitored by the regulatory authority, as in the case of Hong
                    Kong, or subject to the jurisdiction of the ombudsman, as in the case of South
                    Africa and Australia.

                    The principles-based code should be complemented by voluntary codes of
                    conduct for banks on such matters as facilitating the easy switching of
                    consumers’ current accounts and establishing a common terminology in the
                    industry for the description of banks’ charges, services, and products.

                    All such voluntary codes should also be widely publicized and disseminated.
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 7


Good Practice A.3   Appropriate Allocation between Prudential Supervision and Consumer
                    Protection
                    Whether prudential supervision of banks and consumer protection
                    regarding banking products and services are the responsibility of one
                    organization or two institutions, the allocation of resources to these
                    functions should be adequate to enable their effective implementation.
Description
                    SBP has established a Consumer Protection Department that is entrusted with the
                    responsibility to redress the grievances of aggrieved financial consumers. The
                    CPD works independently, duly supported by other supervisory departments in
                    conducting consumer protection functions. The CPD director independently
                    manages the department and reports to the same executive director as the
                    Banking Policy and Regulation Department, which establishes rules and
                    regulations. SBP’s Inspection Department verifies compliance with both
                    prudential and consumer protection rules, regulations, and other directives
                    during annual onsite inspections at banks. The executive directors of Banking
                    Policy and Banking Supervision report to the Deputy Governor, Banking.

                    SBP allocates adequate resources to effectively oversee both prudential and
                    consumer protection matters.

Recommendation
                    The allocation of resources to these functions is adequate to enable their
                    effective implementation. However, the team is of the view that the CPFL
                    framework would benefit from clearer delineation of the internal roles and
                    responsibilities of various departments involved with the CPD. Moreover, the
                    channels through which the various departments exchange information on a
                    regular basis and establish priorities should be formalized.


Good Practice A.4   Other Institutional Arrangements
                       a. The judicial system should ensure that the ultimate resolution of any
                           dispute regarding a consumer protection matter regarding a
                           banking product or service is affordable, timely, and professionally
                           delivered.
                       b. The media and consumer associations should play an active role in
                           promoting banking consumer protection.
Description
                    The judicial system in Pakistan does not currently ensure affordable, timely, and
                    professional resolution of consumer protection disputes.

                    As noted earlier, general consumer protection laws in Pakistan are provincial.
                    Consumer protection laws were approved for the Islamabad Federal Capital
                    Territory in 1995, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK) Province in 1997, Baluchistan
                    Province in 2003, and Punjab Province in 2005, and they are pending for Sindh
                    Province. The provincial consumer protection laws call for the creation of
                    consumer councils and courts to deal with dispute resolution relating to
    8 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                    consumer protection cases, but these are fully operational only in Punjab. The
                    consumer courts must adjudicate cases within 60 days, which represents a major
                    improvement over the timelines in the general court system, where final
                    adjudication of cases can take several years. Punjab has established consumer
                    councils and courts under The Punjab Consumer Protection Act 2005, and
                    reports that it has dealt with some 700 cases involving financial services.

                    Further, in terms of Section 5 (1) of the Financial Institutions (Recovery of
                    Finances) Ordinance, 2001, the federal government has established Banking
                    Courts throughout Pakistan to ensure quick recovery of bank loans from
                    defaulters, but these cannot be used for consumer grievances.

                    Outside of the Punjab Consumer Courts, court proceedings are very slow, given
                    the huge backlog of pending cases within the judicial system. As a consequence,
                    financial consumers’ complaints and grievances are generally resolved or settled
                    out of court, by the banks themselves, by the banking ombudsman or by the CPD
                    at SBP.

                    Neither the media nor NGOs have traditionally played a significant role in
                    fostering consumer protection in banking, and SBP has not engaged actively
                    with either group in this area. That said, there are some indications of increased
                    media coverage of perceived unfair practices or unsatisfactory service levels.
                    Such issues, though generally localized, are covered as if they were pervasive.
                    Financial institutions are keenly aware of the reputational risk, which in turn has
                    encouraged banks to adopt a more proactive approach to consumer protection
                    and dispute resolution.
Recommendation
                    The judiciary (courts) should be an effective final arbiter of consumer disputes,
                    and should be recognized as capable of rendering a final and binding decision in
                    a professional, timely, and cost-effective manner. This is not currently the case
                    in Pakistan. Judicial reform is a lengthy process, and falls outside of the scope of
                    this exercise. However, the establishment of provincial consumer courts in
                    provinces other than Punjab would be a positive step, because they have
                    specialized knowledge and must observe strict timelines for adjudication of
                    disputes.

                    SBP or the Government of Pakistan (GoP) might also wish to consider
                    organizing seminars, workshops, and conferences for judges and the media,
                    covering current issues in consumer protection. The regulator can encourage
                    responsible media coverage and NGO focus by establishing an ongoing dialog
                    with both groups.


Good Practice A.5   Licensing
                    All banking institutions that provide financial services to consumers should
                    be subject to a licensing and regulatory regime to ensure their financial
                    safety and soundness and effective delivery of financial services.
                                    Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 9


Description
                    All banking companies must obtain a license from SBP before commencing
                    operations and are bound by all the directives, advice, guidelines, and
                    regulations of the regulator.

                    Under Section 27 of the BCO, before granting a banking license, SBP must be
                    satisfied that (i) the company is in or will be in a position to pay its depositors
                    and (ii) the affairs of the company are not being or are not likely to be conducted
                    in a manner detrimental to the interest of depositors. The consent of the home
                    country supervisor is obtained when considering the licensing of a foreign bank.
                    Minimum capital requirements are also stipulated. In the Basel Core Principles
                    Assessment conducted during the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP),
                    SBP was assessed as fully compliant with all principles related to licensing and
                    permissible activities.

                    The prudential regulation for consumer financing requires that, before
                    undertaking consumer financing activities, banks meet the following
                    requirements:
                        -   prepare a comprehensive consumer credit policy duly approved by the
                            board of directors of the banks and development finance institutions
                            (DFIs),
                        -   establish separate risk management institutional capacity staffed by
                            expert and experienced personnel,
                        -   develop and implement efficient computer-based management
                            information system capable of generating periodic reports,
                        -   develop comprehensive recovery procedures for delinquent consumer
                            loans,
                        -   prepare a standardized set of borrowing and recourse documents, and
                        -   become a member of at least one credit information bureau
Recommendation      No recommendation.



SECTION B           DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES

Good Practice B.1   Information on Customers
                        a. When making a recommendation to a consumer, a bank should
                            gather, file, and record sufficient information from the consumer to
                            enable the bank to render an appropriate product or service to that
                            consumer.
                        b. The extent of information the bank gathers regarding a consumer
                            should
                              (i)    be commensurate with the nature and complexity of the
                                     product or service being proposed to or sought by the
                                     consumer, and
  10 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                              (ii) enable the bank to provide a professional service to the
                                    consumer in accordance with that consumer’s capacity.
Description
                    According to the PRCF, the bank must, while carrying out consumer financing
                    activities, include risk management processes, such as identification of
                    repayment source and assessment of customers’ ability to repay, records of
                    customers dealing with banks/DFIs, and the latest information obtained from the
                    Credit Information Bureau (CIB) about the creditworthiness of the customer.
                    The regulation also requires banks to obtain a written declaration from the
                    customer with details of all consumer financing facilities they use at other banks.

                    These aspects are covered in “PART-B: Minimum Requirements for Consumer
                    Financing” (pre-operations and operations sections) under the Prudential
                    Regulations for Consumer Financing. Before extending any financial facilities to
                    existing or prospective customers, the regulations require that:
                        - Banks/DFIs shall prepare a standardized set of borrowing and recourse
                             documents (duly cleared by their legal counsel) for each type of
                             consumer financing.
                        - For every type of consumer finance activity, the bank/DFI shall develop
                             a specific program. The program shall include the objective/quantitative
                             parameters for the eligibility of the borrower and determining the
                             maximum permissible limit per borrower.
                        - The banks/DFIs must clearly disclose all the important terms,
                             conditions, fees, charges, and penalties, which include annualized
                             percentage rate, prepayment penalties, and the conditions under which
                             they apply. Their customers’ reference, banks/DFIs are encouraged to
                             publish brochures with frequently asked questions.

                    Anti-money-laundering/combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT)
                    regulations issued in BPRD Circular No. 2 of September 13, 2012, require that
                    banks should formulate and put in place risk-based customer due diligence
                    policies duly approved by their board. Regulation-1, among other things,
                    specifies minimum documents to be obtained, verified, and recorded on a know
                    your customer/customer due diligence (KYC/CDD) form.


Recommendation      No recommendations.


Good Practice B.2   Affordability
                        a. When a bank makes a recommendation regarding a product or
                           service to a consumer, the product or service it offers to that
                           consumer should be in line with the need of the consumer.
                        b. The consumer should be given a range of options to choose from to
                           meet his or her requirements.
                        c. Sufficient information on the product or service should be provided
                           to the consumer to enable him or her to select the most suitable and
                           affordable product or service.
                        d. When offering a new credit product or service that will significantly
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 11


                            increase the amount of debt assumed by the consumer, the
                            consumer’s creditworthiness should be properly assessed.
Description
                    While extending financing facilities to their customers, banks/DFIs should
                    ensure that the total installment of the loans extended by the financial institution
                    is commensurate with the borrower’s monthly income and repayment capacity.
                    The banks/DFIs shall ensure that the total monthly amortization payments of
                    consumer loans should not exceed 50 percent of the net disposable income of the
                    prospective borrower.

                    Policies of banks in all major areas of their activities are required to be provided
                    to SBP with updates as and when incorporated. Though SBP does not “approve”
                    such policies, they are thoroughly examined for adherence to laws, regulations,
                    and prudent practices. SBP makes suggestions for changes if needed. As stated
                    above (B.1), banks are required under Prudential Regulations for Consumer
                    Financing to develop specific programs for each consumer finance activity,
                    along with objective/quantitative parameters for the eligibility of the borrower
                    and determining the maximum permissible limit per borrower. In addition, it is
                    mandatory for banks to obtain a credit report and assess repayment capacity of
                    the borrower before extending any consumer financial facilities.
Recommendation      Although regulation requires that banks develop specific programs for each
                    consumer finance activity, and bank policies must be provided to SBP, there is
                    nothing in the regulation that specifically requires that products or services be in
                    line with consumer requirements or that various options be presented to the
                    consumer. It is recommended that this be rectified.
                    The regulation should also require banks to give the consumer a range of options
                    to choose from to meet his or her requirements. In addition, sufficient
                    information on the product or service should be provided to the consumer to
                    enable him or her to select the most suitable and affordable product or service.


Good Practice B.3   Cooling-off Period
                        a. For financial products or services with a long-term savings
                            component, a bank should provide the consumer a reasonable
                            cooling-off period (at least three to five business days) immediately
                            following the signing of any agreement between the bank and the
                            consumer.
                       b. On his or her written notice to the bank during the cooling-off
                            period, the consumer should be permitted to cancel or treat the
                            agreement as null and void without penalty to the consumer of any
                            kind.
Description         There is no regulation that provides the consumer a cooling-off period.

                    The Consumer Protection Department through Circular No. 2 dated June 29,
                    2012, on the subject of “sale of third party products by banks” stipulates that the
                    banks shall provide, among other things, a free look period for bancassurance
                    products. However, there is no specific requirement for other banking products
                    or services.
  12 Banking Sector: Good Practices



Recommendation      For all financial products or services with a long-term savings component, or
                    those subject to high-pressure sales tactics, banks should be required to provide
                    the consumer a reasonable cooling-off period (at least three to five days)
                    immediately following the signing of any agreement. This is especially
                    important in countries such as Pakistan where the terms of services and products
                    are not readily available or cannot easily be compared.


Good Practice B.4   Bundling and Tying Clauses
                        a. As much as possible, banks should avoid bundling services and
                           products and the use of tying clauses in contracts that restrict the
                           choice of consumers.
                        b. In particular, whenever a borrower is obliged by a bank to purchase
                           any product, including an insurance policy, as a precondition for
                           receiving a loan from the bank, the borrower should be free to
                           choose the provider of the product and this information should be
                           made known to the borrower.
Description
                    Banking Policy and Regulations Department Circular No. 11 dated August 1,
                    2006, requires banks to obtain prior consent from the existing or prospective
                    customers for availing any insurance or other product or service. This consent
                    may be obtained using any mode, for example, IVR (integrated voice recording),
                    ATM screen pop-up, in writing, and by telephone (after due verification).

                    In addition to BPRD Circular No. 11 quoted above; CPD Circular No. 2 dated
                    June 29, 2012, directs the banks to provide a “disclaimer stating that it is only
                    working in the capacity of a distributor.”

                    Furthermore, the Competition Act 2007, Section 3, prohibits tie-ins when they
                    prevent, restrict, reduce, or distort competition.


Recommendation      The prudential regulation or other directive should require banks to avoid as
                    much as possible bundling services and products and using tying clauses in
                    contracts that restrict the choice of the consumer. The regulation should also
                    define tying and bundling. For example, tying occurs when two or more products
                    are sold together in a package and at least one of these products is not sold
                    separately. Bundling occurs when two or more products are sold together in a
                    package, although each of the products can also be purchased separately on the
                    market.

                    Where insurance is required, consumers should, insofar as possible, be allowed
                    to select the provider.

                    Further, SBP should consider establishing, in coordination with the PBA, a
                    standardized disclosure format that includes all fees, including bundled
                                    Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 13


                    insurance.
Good Practice B.5   Preservation of Rights
                    Except where permitted by applicable legislation, in any communication or
                    agreement with a consumer, a bank should not exclude or restrict, or seek
                    to exclude or restrict
                        (i) any duty to act with skill, care, and diligence toward the consumer
                             in connection with the provision by the bank of any financial service
                             or product; or
                        (ii) any liability arising from the bank’s failure to exercise its duty to
                             act with skill, care, and diligence in the provision of any financial
                             service or product to the consumer.
Description         There does not appear to be a law, regulation, or directive that regulates this
                    issue.


Recommendation      The prudential regulation or other directive should prohibit banks, except where
                    permitted by law, in any communication or agreement with a consumer, to
                    exclude or restrict, or seek to exclude or restrict any duty to act with skill, care,
                    and diligence toward the consumer or any liability arising from the bank’s
                    failure to exercise its duty to act with skill, care, and diligence in the provision of
                    any financial service or product to the consumer.


Good Practice B.6   Regulatory Status Disclosure
                    In all of its advertising, whether by print, television, radio, or otherwise, a
                    bank should disclose the fact that it is a regulated entity and the name and
                    contact details of the regulator.
Description
                    There is no regulation requiring banks to disclose their regulatory status, or the
                    name and contact details of the regulator. SBP is of the view that this is not
                    required, because it is the sole regulator of all banks in Pakistan. However, this
                    fact (and SBP’s contact details) may not be known to the general public.


Recommendation      The prudential regulation should require banks, in all advertising, whether by
                    print, television, radio, or otherwise, to disclose the fact that it is a regulated
                    entity and the name and contact details of the regulator.
  14 Banking Sector: Good Practices


Good Practice B.7   Terms and Conditions
                        a. Before a consumer opens a deposit, current (checking), or loan
                            account at a bank, the bank should make available to the consumer
                            a written copy of its general terms and conditions, as well as all
                            terms and conditions that apply to the account to be opened.
                            Collectively, these terms and conditions should include:
                            (i)      disclosure of details of the bank’s general charges;
                            (ii)     a summary of the bank’s complaints procedures;
                            (iii)    a statement regarding the existence of the office of banking
                                     ombudsman or equivalent institution and basic information
                                     relating to its process and procedures;
                        (iv) information about any compensation scheme that the bank is a
                             member of;
                        (v) an outline of the action and remedies the bank may take in the event
                             of a default by the consumer;
                        (vi) the principles-based code of conduct, if any, referred to in A.2;
                        (vii) information on the methods of computing interest rates paid by
                             or charged to the consumer, and any relevant noninterest charges
                             or fees related to the product offered to the consumer;
                        (viii) any service charges to be paid by the consumer; restrictions, if
                             any, on account transfers by the consumer; and the procedures for
                             closing an account; and
                        (ix) clear rules on the reporting procedures that the consumer should
                             follow in the case of unauthorized transactions in general, and
                             stolen cards in particular, as well as the bank’s liability in such
                             cases
                        b. The terms and conditions should be written in plain language and in
                            a font size and spacing that facilitates easy reading.

Description
                    BPRD Circular No. 07 dated May 27, 2011, stipulates that all terms and
                    conditions of operation of an account shall be made known to the opener of the
                    account at the time the account is opened. The terms and conditions shall be
                    clearly, explicitly, and fully documented in the account opening form or
                    application and must be signed by the prospective depositor or account holder to
                    signify having been read and understood.

                    Banks are required to provide a copy of signed contracts to clients.

                    Banks are also required to clearly disclose all the important terms, conditions,
                    fees, charges, and penalties, which include annualized percentage rate,
                    prepayment penalties, and the conditions under which they apply (minimum
                    disclosure required under the PRCF).

                    BPD Circular No. 6 dated July 14, 2006, requires disclosure of all lending and
                    deposit rates on bank websites and branch locations. To facilitate comparisons,
                    rates must be disclosed on an annualized percentage rate basis (method of
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 15


                    calculation is prescribed), and whether the loans are priced on a fixed or floating
                    rate basis must also be disclosed. BRPD Circular No. 12 of 2007 further
                    elaborates these requirements. Banks are obliged to stipulate whether a loan is
                    fixed or floating, the benchmark and margin, all fees payable, a complete
                    amortization schedule, a yearly statement of principal, and interest.

                    Under BPD Circular No. 33 of 2003, banks are required to fix charges on a half-
                    yearly basis in advance, and to notify customers of the charges at least seven
                    days before the commencement of the half year.

                    Under BPRD Circular No. 7 of 2011, permissible service charges and fees on
                    deposit accounts are outlined. Banks are required to inform customers of all
                    relevant terms and conditions on such deposit accounts.

                    BPD Circular No. 17 of 2004 provides minimum instructions to banks for
                    dealing with customer complaints, which include the requirement to provide
                    leaflets on complaint procedures and resolution, in both Urdu and English, to
                    customers on request, and to post that information in bank branches and online.
                    Banks are further required to inform customers of the existence and contact
                    information of the ombudsman (OBM) in all bank statements.


Recommendation
                    Most of the information requirements outlined in B.7 are met. However, the
                    information is fragmented, and SBP may wish to consider requiring banks to
                    place some this information in the terms and conditions it provides to its
                    customers when an account is opened.

                    There is also a need to publish clear rules on reporting procedures for consumers
                    to follow in cases of unauthorized transactions, and the liability of banks in such
                    cases.


Good Practice B.8   Key Facts Statement
                        a. A bank should have a summary statement, such as a Key Facts
                           Statement (KFS), for each of its accounts, types of loans, or other
                           products or services and provide these to its customers and potential
                           customers.
                        b. The summary statement should be written in plain language and
                           summarize in a page or two the key terms and conditions of the
                           specific banking product or service.
                        c. Prior to a consumer opening any account at, or signing any loan
                           agreement with, the bank, the consumer should have delivered a
                           signed statement to the bank to the effect that he or she has duly
                           received, read, and understood the relevant summary statement
                           from the bank.
                        d. Summary statements throughout the banking sector should be
  16 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                            written in such a way as to allow consumers the possibility of easily
                            comparing products that are being offered by a range of banks.
Description
                    In the PRCF, banks are required to communicate the terms and conditions of
                    each product or service to the customers under “PART-B: Minimum
                    Requirements for Consumer Financing.” Banks must disclose all the important
                    terms, conditions, fees, charges, and penalties, including annualized percentage
                    rates, prepayment penalties, and the conditions under which they apply.
                    However, no standardized Key Facts Statement is required.

                    Requirements with respect to account opening are defined under BPRD Circular
                    No. 07 of 2011, while requirements for bancassurance-related information are
                    stipulated under CPD Circular No. 02 dated June 29, 2012. Again, while
                    minimum contents are outlined, no standardized KFS is required.

                    BPRD Circular No. 7 of 2011 requires banks to provide key features of the
                    account opening form in Urdu.


Recommendation      A KFS should provide consumers with simple and standard disclosure of key
                    contractual information of a banking product or service, contributing to the
                    consumers’ better understanding of the product or service. KFSs should also
                    allow consumers to compare offers provided by different banks before they
                    purchase a banking product or service and provide a useful summary for later
                    reference during the life of the banking product or service. For credit products,
                    KFSs would constitute an efficient way to inform consumers about their basic
                    rights, the credit reporting systems, and the existing possibilities for disputing
                    information. Examples of KFSs include the U.K. FSA’s initial disclosure
                    documents applicable to housing credit products, the European Union’s Standard
                    European Consumer Credit Information form, the U.S. Truth in Lending Act’s
                    “Schumer Box” for credit cards, Peru’s “Hoja Resumen” (Summary Sheet),
                    South Africa’s Pre-Agreement Statement & Quotation for Small Credit
                    Agreements, and Ghana’s Pre-Agreement Truth in Lending Disclosure
                    Statement.

                    Of special concern is the need to provide basic information to consumers in a
                    language widely understood by them. In Pakistan, although Urdu is spoken by a
                    majority of the population, much written banking information appears to be
                    available only in English. While SBP requires banks to translate key features of
                    the account opening form in Urdu, it would be preferable to have a standardized
                    KFS provided in Urdu as well as English.


Good Practice B.9   Advertising and Sales Materials
                        a. Banks should ensure that their advertising and sales materials and
                            procedures do not mislead customers.
                        b. All advertising and sales materials of banks should be easily
                            readable and understandable by the general public.
                                    Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 17


                         c. Banks should be legally responsible for all statements made in their
                             advertising and sales materials (i.e., be subject to the penalties under
                             the law for making any false or misleading statements).
Description
                     The Prudential Regulations for Consumer Financing clearly indicate under
                     Disclosure/Ethics that banks/DFIs must clearly disclose all the important terms
                     and conditions, fees, and charges and penalties, which include annualized
                     percentage rate, prepayment penalties, and the conditions under which they
                     apply. For their customers’ reference, banks/DFIs are encouraged to publish
                     brochures of frequently asked questions. Further, BPD Circular Letter No. 33
                     dated September 1, 2005, and BPD Circular No. 6 dated July 14, 2006, explicitly
                     require banks not to declare misleading information about lending and deposit
                     rates.
                     Banks, and for that matter any advertiser, would be legally bound by the
                     statements made unless a suitable clause or disclaimer is added giving the bank
                     the right to modify terms. Such responsibilities are derived from general law. In
                     addition, instructions issued by SBP, like the one stated above, are binding on
                     banks, and have the backing of the relevant provisions of the BCO. In case of
                     any instance of violation of regulatory instructions, enforcement action is taken
                     under the provisions of the BCO. This aspect is clearly highlighted in most of the
                     circulars and regulations issued by SBP.

                     Further, the Competition Ordinance 2007, Section 10, prohibits deceptive
                     marketing, which includes providing false or misleading information to
                     consumers.


Recommendation
                     Although the advertising is covered by general law, SBP may wish to consider
                     issuing specific regulations or directives dealing with advertising and sales
                     materials, to prohibit misleading statements and require disclosure of key
                     product characteristics. There are useful provisions of this type in the
                     Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards. These requirements should then be
                     subject to monitoring.


Good Practice B.10   Third-Party Guarantees
                     A bank should not advertise either an actual or future deposit or interest
                     rate payable on a deposit as being guaranteed or partially guaranteed unless
                     there is a legally enforceable agreement between the bank and a third party
                     that has provided such a guarantee. In the event such an agreement exists,
                     the advertisement should state
                           (i) the extent of the guarantee;
                           (ii) the name and contact details of the party providing the guarantee;
                                and
                           (iii) in the event the party providing the guarantee is in any way
                                connected to the bank, the precise nature of that relationship.
Description
                     Because banks are all technically required to work on a profit and loss sharing
   18 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                      (PLS) basis, all rates are “expected rates of return” and banks may give details of
                      actual rates paid in the past. As such, there are no guaranteed rates offered and in
                      practice actual rates paid are slightly above or below the expected rates of return.
                      However, since 2008, SBP has introduced a minimum rate of return for all
                      categories of savings, PLS saving, or term deposits, which is presently 6 percent.
                      However, banks are free to pay a profit rate on daily products or on average
                      balance basis.


Recommendation        No recommendation in light of above constraint.


Good Practice B.11.   Professional Competence
                          a. In order to avoid any misrepresentation of fact to a consumer, any
                             bank staff member who deals directly with consumers, or who
                             prepares bank advertisements (or other materials of the bank for
                             external distribution), or who markets any service or product of the
                             bank should be familiar with the legislative, regulatory, and code of
                             conduct guidance requirements relevant to his or her work, as well
                             as with the details of any product or service of the bank that he or
                             she sells or promotes.
                          b. Regulators and associations of banks should collaborate to establish
                             and administer minimum competency requirements for any bank
                             staff member who (i) deals directly with consumers, (ii) prepares
                             any Key Facts Statement or any advertisement for the bank, or (iii)
                             markets the bank’s services and products.
Description
                      CPD Circular No. 02 of June 29, 2012, requires that the personnel involved in
                      sales have adequate understanding of the product and are familiar with the
                      bank’s policy in this regard. For this purpose, banks must train their existing
                      staff to improve their understanding and knowledge of the product. Qualification
                      requirements for bank staff are not specified. Most of the regulatory instructions
                      issued by SBP require that banks should ensure compliance with relevant laws,
                      rules, and regulations while offering various products and services. Failure to do
                      so attracts action under the provisions of the BCO.

                      It is customary for banks to have specialized marketing personnel who, in
                      conjunction with established advertising agencies, develop marketing themes
                      and advertisements. As a matter of practice (but not regulation), all external
                      communications including advertisements are vetted by banks’ legal
                      departments to safeguard against any legal, regulatory, or reputational risk.


Recommendation
                      SBP and PBA should collaborate to establish and administer minimum
                      competency requirements for any bank staff member who (i) deals directly with
                      consumers, (ii) prepares any advertisement or KFS for the bank, or (iii) markets
                      any of the bank’s services and products to consumers.
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 19



SECTION C           CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE


Good Practice C.1   Statements
                        a. Unless a bank receives a customer’s prior signed authorization to
                             the contrary, the bank should issue, and provide the customer free
                             of charge, a monthly statement of every account the bank operates
                             for the customer.
                        b.   Each such statement should (i) set out all transactions concerning
                             the account during the period covered by the statement and (ii)
                             provide details of the interest rate(s) applied to the account during
                             the period covered by the statement.
                        c.   Each credit card statement should set out the minimum payment
                             required and the total interest cost that will accrue, if the
                             cardholder makes only the required minimum payment.
                        d.   Each mortgage or other loan account statement should clearly
                             indicate the amount paid during the period covered by the
                             statement, the total outstanding amount still owed, the allocation of
                             payment to the principal and interest, and, if applicable, the up-to-
                             date accrual of taxes paid.
                        e.   A bank should notify a customer of long periods of inactivity for any
                             of their accounts and provide a reasonable final notice in writing to
                             the customer if the funds are to be treated as unclaimed money.
                        f.   When a customer signs up for paperless statements, such statements
                             should be in an easy-to-read and readily understandable format.
Description
                    Section 33 of Payment Systems and Electronic Fund Transfers Act, 2007, states
                    that a financial institution shall provide each consumer with a periodic statement
                    for each account of such consumer that may be accessed electronically, at a
                    period as the state bank may determine from time to time. Under the Operational
                    Guidelines for Credit Card Business in Pakistan issued by the Payment Systems
                    Department in PSD Circular No. 01 of January 2009, all banks/DFIs are required
                    to dispatch a monthly statement of account to credit card holders at least 15 days
                    before the due date. Toward this end, banks/DFIs may offer online, e-mail, or
                    IVR billing facilities, with appropriate security measures. The minimum content
                    of such statements is specified in the Operational Guidelines, and is
                    comprehensive. In terms of BPRD Circular No. 02 of January 5, 2010, banks
                    are required to dispatch, free of charge, statements of accounts to their account
                    holders having a closing balance equal to or exceeding PRs 10,000 at least twice
                    a year on a six-month basis within one month from the close of the half year
                    (i.e., June 30 and December 31). However, banks also provide statements of
                    account to their accountholders on their own (monthly, quarterly, biannual, or
                    annual). There is no specific regulation on the content of statements of account,
                    which at minimum are understood to contain all individual debits and credits in
                    the account with brief details.

                    AML/CFT regulations define an inactive account as a “Dormant or in-operative
                    account,” meaning an account in which no transaction has taken place for the
  20 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                    past year. In addition, most banks observe an internal policy of designating an
                    account as inactive if no transaction takes place in the account for an extended
                    period of time. Such accounts are reactivated after appropriate verifications as
                    and when approached by the account holders. For accounts that have remained
                    inactive for an extended period, SBP has issued a Master Circular on unclaimed
                    deposits (BPD Circular No. 07 dated July 21, 2006, under Section 31 of the
                    BCO) whereby banks must notify the account holder about the inactive status of
                    the account.

                    In Pakistan, it is difficult to send monthly statements by post, because the postal
                    service is slow and unreliable. As a result, sending account statements is costly
                    because it requires costly courier services. This explains the biannual frequency.
                    Although banks deliver statements every six months as required, most indicate
                    they also use electronic means (e-mail, text) to advise customers of debits,
                    credits, and balances.


Recommendation
                    Given the lack of reliability of the postal services, SBP may wish to require that
                    banks offer monthly statements by electronic means, or if the customer does not
                    have access to such means, that the bank make statements available at the
                    nearest branch at the request of the customer.

                    SBP should also set minimum standards for the language, content, and format of
                    account statements.


Good Practice C.2   Notification of Changes in Interest Rates and Noninterest Charges
                       a. A customer of a bank should be notified in writing by the bank of
                            any change in
                             (i) the interest rate to be paid or charged on any account of the
                                  customer as soon as possible; and
                             (ii) a noninterest charge on any account of the customer a
                                  reasonable period in advance of the effective date of the
                                  change.
                       b. If the revised terms are not acceptable to the customer, he or she
                            should have the right to exit the contract without penalty, provided
                            such right is exercised within a reasonable period.
                       c. The bank should inform the customer of the foregoing right
                            whenever a notice of change under paragraph a. is made by the
                            bank.
Description
                    Banks are required to notify any change in loan or lending product provisions as
                    per BPRD Circular 12 dated August 01, 2007, and BPRD Circular Letter No. 33
                    dated November 13, 2008, pertaining to “pricing of lending products and loan
                    documentation.” Under the Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards (OGCC)
                    mentioned above, the statement of account to credit card holders must contain
                    annualized rate of interest and interest amount, along with the method of
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 21


                    calculating rates for purchases of goods and services, cash advances, and other
                    benefits of the credit card whenever these rates change. The customer must be
                    notified of changes in terms at least 30 days before they become effective. Banks
                    cannot change the interest rate payable on fixed-rate loans during the duration of
                    the loan. For variable-rate loans, the margin cannot change, and the base rate
                    can change only with periodic changes in the agreed benchmark.

                    The Payment and Electronic Funds Act provides that customers must be notified
                    of relevant charges at least 21 days prior to the effective date of any material
                    change in any terms or conditions.

                    There does not appear to be a specific provision allowing customers to exit
                    agreements without penalty in the event of changes in terms and conditions.
Recommendation      SBP should clarify by directive that customers can exit contracts without penalty
                    if they are dissatisfied with changes in terms and conditions, and specify that
                    banks should inform customers of this right.


Good Practice C.3   Customer Records
                     a. A bank should maintain up-to-date records on each customer of the
                         bank, which contain the following:
                               (i) a copy of all documents required to identify the customer
                                    and provide the customer’s profile;
                               (ii) the customer’s address, telephone number, and all other
                                    contact details;
                               (iii) any information or document in connection with the
                                    customer that has been prepared in compliance with any
                                    statute, regulation, or code of conduct;
                               (iv) details of all products and services provided by the bank to
                                    the customer;
                               (v) a copy of correspondence from the customer to the bank and
                                    vice-versa, and details of any other information provided to
                                    the customer, in relation to any product or service offered or
                                    provided to the customer;
                               (vi)all documents and applications of the bank completed,
                                    signed, and submitted to the bank by the customer;
                               (vii)        a copy of all original documents submitted by the
                                    customer in support of an application by the customer for a
                                    product or service by the bank; and
                             (viii) any other relevant information concerning the customer.

                     b. A law or regulation should provide the minimum permissible period
                         for retaining all such records and, throughout this period, the
                         customer should be provided ready access to all such records free of
                         charge or for a reasonable fee.
  22 Banking Sector: Good Practices


Description
                    AML/CFT Regulation-1, requires banks/DFIs to periodically review the
                    adequacy of information obtained in respect of customers and beneficial owners
                    and ensure that the information is kept up to date, particularly for higher-risk
                    categories of customers. The review period and procedures thereof should be
                    defined by banks/DFIs in their AML/CFT policies, on a risk-based approach.

                    AML/CFT Regulation-5 states, “Banks/DFIs shall maintain all necessary records
                    on transactions, both domestic and international, including the results of any
                    analysis undertaken (e.g., inquiries to establish the background and purpose of
                    complex, unusual large transactions) for a minimum period of ten years from
                    completion of the transaction.” There are no restrictions imposed by banks on
                    their customers to have access to records, except the unadvised and confidential
                    STR-related information.

                    The Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2002, Section 6, and the Payments and
                    Electronic Transfers Act, 2007, Section 7, require financial institutions providing
                    funds transfers to maintain complete records for periods determined by SBP.
                    Branchless banking guidelines also require agents to ensure safekeeping of all
                    relevant data and files for a period of five years.
Recommendation      No recommendation.


Good Practice C.4   Paper and Electronic Checks
                        a. The law and code of conduct should provide for clear rules on the
                           issuance and clearing of paper checks that include rules on
                               (i) checks drawn on an account that has insufficient funds;
                               (ii) the consequences of issuing a check without sufficient funds;
                               (iii)the duration within which funds of a cleared check should be
                                    credited into the customer’s account;
                               (iv)the procedures on countermanding or stopping payment on
                                    a check by a customer;
                               (v) charges by a bank on the issuance and clearance of checks;
                               (vi)liability of the parties in the case of check fraud; and
                              (vii) error resolution.
                        b. A customer should be told of the consequences of issuing a paper
                           check without sufficient funds at the time the customer opens a
                           checking account.
                        c. A bank should provide the customer with clear, easily accessible,
                           and understandable information regarding electronic checks, as well
                           the cost of using them.
                        d. In respect of electronic or credit card checks, a bank should inform
                           each customer in particular
                               (i) how the use of a credit card check differs from the use of a
                                    credit card;
                               (ii) of the interest rate that applies and whether this differs from
                                    the rate charged for credit card purchases;
                               (iii)when interest is charged, whether there is an interest-free
                                Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 23


                                 period, and if so, for how long;
                             (iv)whether additional fees or charges apply and, if so, on what
                                 basis and to what extent; and
                             (v) whether the protection afforded to the customer making a
                               purchase using a credit card check differs from that
                               afforded when using a credit card and, if so, the specific
                               differences.
                     e. Credit card checks should not be sent to a consumer without the
                        consumer’s prior written consent.
                     f. There should be clear rules on procedures for dealing with
                        authentication, error resolution, and cases of fraud.
Description
                 The Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881, and Payment Systems and Electronic
                 Fund Transfers Act, 2007, provide some relevant rules regarding the above
                 matters.
                 BPD Circular Letter No. 22 dated June 14, 2005, and BPRD Circular Letter No.
                 31 dated October 12, 2009, direct the banks to mention specific and clear reason
                 for dishonoring checks issued by their customers. The Criminal Law
                 (Amendment) Ordinance, 2002, made drawing a check with insufficient funds a
                 criminal offense and liable to prosecution under the provision of the Code of
                 Criminal Procedure, 1898.

                 Electronic checks are yet to be introduced in Pakistan. In Pakistan, commercial
                 banks do not currently send credit card checks to consumers.

                 For electronic fund transfers, the Payment Systems and Electronic Fund Transfer
                 Act, 2007, contains details about “Notification of Errors,” “Correcting Errors,”
                 “Violations Affecting Electronic Commerce,” and “Cheating by Use of
                 Electronic Device”; however, these do not appear to cover paper checks.


Recommendation   The rules and regulations regarding checks are very dated and appear
                 incomplete. Additional instructions should be issued:
                      (i) Given the very severe criminal penalties that may be imposed for
                            issuing checks with insufficient funds, banks should be required to
                            inform customers of these consequences when they open a checking
                            account. Charges for check issuance and clearing should also be
                            disclosed.
                      (ii) Liabilities of parties for fraud should be specified.
                      (iii) The delay within which funds for cleared checks should be credited to
                            accounts should be disclosed.


                 Even though electronic checks and credit card checks are not currently used in
                 Pakistan, given their usage elsewhere, SBP may wish to be proactive in
                 considering the rules that should apply to these products.
  24 Banking Sector: Good Practices


Good Practice C.5   Credit Cards
                        a. There should be laws on the issuance of credit cards and related
                             customer disclosure requirements.
                        b.   Banks, as credit card issuers, should ensure that personalized
                             disclosure requirements are made in all credit card offers, including
                             fees and charges (including finance charges), credit limit, penalty
                             interest rates, and method of calculating the minimum monthly
                             payment.
                        c.   Banks should not be permitted to impose charges or fees on
                             preapproved credit cards that have not been accepted by the
                             customer.
                        d.   Consumers should be given personalized minimum payment
                             warnings on each monthly statement and the total interest costs that
                             will accrue if the cardholder makes only the requested minimum
                             payment.
                        e.   Among other things, the legal rules should also
                                 (i) restrict or impose conditions on the issuance and marketing
                                      of credit cards to young adults who have no independent
                                      means of income;
                                 (ii) require reasonable notice of changes if fees and interest rates
                                      increase;
                                 (iii)prevent the application of new higher-penalty interest rates
                                      to the entire existing balance, including past purchases made
                                      at a lower interest rate;
                                 (iv)limit fees that can be imposed, such as those charged when
                                      consumers exceed their credit limits;
                                 (v) prohibit a practice called double-cycle billing, by which card
                                      issuers charge interest over two billing cycles rather than
                                      one;
                                 (vi)prevent credit card issuers from allocating monthly
                                      payments in ways that maximize interest charges to
                                      consumers; and
                                (vii) limit upfront fees charged on subprime credit cards issued to
                                      individuals with bad credit.
                        f.   There should be clear rules on error resolution and reporting
                             unauthorized transactions and stolen cards, with the ensuing
                             liability of the customer being made clear to them prior to their
                             acceptance of the credit card.
                        g.   Banks and issuers should conduct consumer awareness programs on
                             the misuse of credit cards, credit card over-indebtedness, and
                             prevention of fraud.
Description
                    The Operational Guidelines for Credit Card Business in Pakistan (issued in
                    2009) contain reasonably comprehensive and detailed consumer protection rules,
                    including instructions on marketing of credit cards, the credit card application
                    process, information on interest rates and other charges, billing processes, the
                    collection/recovery process, the complaint resolution process, and the merchant
                    relationship.
                                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 25



                               Interest rates must be stipulated on an annual basis, and sent to customers
                               through advertisements or mail. All fees and charges must be explicitly notified
                               in the user guide or application form, or the schedule of charges must be given to
                               the customer at the time of sale. The customer must be notified of any changes to
                               terms or conditions 30 days before they take effect. There is a clear framework
                               for error resolution and liability in the OGCC, complemented by rules imposed
                               by issuers such as Visa and MasterCard, and banks must monitor card usage and
                               maintain data on fraudulent usage. Curtailment of customer rights is expressly
                               prohibited by the OGCC.

                               There are further guidelines issued under the heading “Disclosure/Ethics” in
                               “PART-B: Minimum Requirements for Consumer Financing” (pre-operations
                               and operations sections) of the Prudential Regulations for Consumer financing.
                               These require, among other things, monthly statements, due dates, penalty rates,
                               and the prohibition of charging insurance premia without written consent. SBP
                               has established a code of conduct that prohibits aggressive selling of credit cards.

                               Although monthly statements do invariably indicate the minimum amount
                               payable, total interest costs are not quantified, as they are understood to be
                               charged at the contracted or agreed rate with the customer when the credit card is
                               issued.
                               Banks/DFIs should take reasonable steps to satisfy themselves that cardholders
                               have received the cards, in person or by mail. Banks/DFIs should advise the
                               cardholders of the need to take reasonable steps to keep the card safe and the
                               identification number secret to avoid fraud.

                               There are no restrictions on upfront fees chargeable on subprime (or any other)
                               cards, though subprime credit card issuance is not currently practiced in
                               Pakistan. The PRCF restricts unsecured credit card limits, and requires
                               mandatory credit checks.

                               Some banks have conducted consumer awareness programs on the misuse of
                               credit cards and consumer over-indebtedness, but more needs to be done in this
                               area.


Recommendation                 The rules and regulations regarding credit cards are broadly appropriate, but SBP
                               might wish to review them to address areas in C.5 not currently covered, such as
                               most of those detailed in point e. above.

                               SBP should also include awareness on credit card usage and indebtedness in its
                               planned financial education programs.
Good Practice C.6              Internet Banking and Mobile Phone Banking 2

2
 “Internet bank ing” is defined as bank ing serv ices that customers may access v ia the Internet. This access could be through a
computer, mobile phone, or other dev ice. Pay ment serv ices that are initiated only v ia the Internet using a mobile phone (e.g., by a
mobile bank ing application using an app on a smartphone) are not considered to be mobile pay ments; instead, they are categorized
    26 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                                    a. The provision of Internet banking and mobile phone banking (m-
                                       banking) should be supported by a sound legal and regulatory
                                       framework.
                                    b. Regulators should ensure that banks or financial service providers
                                       providing Internet and m-banking have in place a security program
                                       that ensures
                                           (i) data privacy, confidentiality, and data integrity;
                                           (ii) authentication, identification of counterparties, and access
                                                control;
                                           (iii)non-repudiation of transactions;
                                           (iv)a business continuity plan; and
                                           (v) the provision of sufficient notice when services are not
                                                available.
                                    c. Banks should also implement an oversight program to monitor
                                       third-party control conditions and performance, especially when
                                       agents are used for carrying out m-banking.
                                    d. A customer should be informed by the bank whether fees or charges
                                       apply for Internet or m-banking and, if so, on what basis and how
                                       much.
                                    e. There should be clear rules on the procedures for error resolution
                                       and fraud.
                                    f. Authorities should encourage banks and service providers to
                                       undertake measures to increase consumer awareness regarding
                                       Internet and m-banking transactions.
Description                    The provision of Internet banking and mobile phone banking are covered in the
                               following laws and regulations:
                               1. Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2002
                               2. Payment Systems and Electronic Fund Transfer Act, 2007
                               3. Branchless Banking Regulation (originally issued in 2008 and revised in
                               2011)
                               4. Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962
                               The Payment Systems and Electronic Fund Transfer Act, 2007, requires, among
                               other things, that “Financial Institutions and other institutions providing
                               Electronic Funds Transfer facilities shall ensure that secure means are used for
                               transfer, compliant with current international standards and as may be prescribed
                               by the State Bank from time to time.”

                               SBP has also issued Guidelines on Information Technology Security (BSD
                               Circular No. 15) and Guidelines on Branchless Banking, which address
                               technology-related risks and their implications. However, there is no separate
                               guidance on Internet banking and mobile phone banking per se. Internet banking
                               and m-banking payments are not considered as new payment instruments but
                               rather as other access methods to activate existing means of payment for

as Internet pay ments. This interpretation is consistent with the v iew of the Committee on Pay ment and Settlement Sy stems of the
Bank for International Settlements, the relev ant standard-setting body on pay ment and settlement sy stems. Howev er, for practical
reasons and due to the importance of mobile money in the country , Good Practice C.6 is intended here as also cov ering mobile
pay ments and, to some extent, e-money .
               Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 27


financial transactions processed by banks between bank customers.

Banks follow their own internally developed, screened, and legally vetted
processes, which can be scrutinized during onsite inspections of banks conducted
by SBP.

Under BPD Circular No 3 of 2003 banks are required to publish and make
available at their places of business and on their website schedules of all charges,
including those related to Internet and m-banking. Banks are free to determine
the rates of charges for various services they may provide to their customers.
The regulatory instructions also require that the banks will levy service charges,
which are commensurate with the scope of service they render to the customers.

The Guidelines on Outsourcing Arrangements issued in BPRD Circular No. 9
dated July 13, 2007, outlines a number of relevant provisions, including on
customer confidentiality, grievance redressal, and contingency planning.

The Guidelines for Branchless Banking (draft dated November, 24, 2007)
outline a number of consumer protection principles for m-banking and other
types of branchless banking (“banks need to ensure that adequate measures for
customer protection, awareness and dispute resolution are in place”). But it
appears that these have been issued as a draft only, and many of the principles
outlined are recommendations only, and would not appear to be binding on
banks.

In other instances, the guidelines are prescriptive and detailed, such as on
complaint redressal and consumer awareness programs:

“Financial Institutions must put in place a proper complaint redressal setup
capable of efficiently and quickly redress complaints from customers. Complaint
Redressal (CR), at minimum should be capable of:
• Receiving and processing customers’ complaints 24 hours through, text, IVR
and e-mail,
• Generate acknowledgement of complaint giving it a unique complaint number.
• Communicate acknowledgement to customer giving either the redressal or the
complaint number and estimated time to redressal.
• Redirecting the complaint to appropriate function for redressal.
• Keep track/log of all complaints and give status of every complaint.”

In any event, for all banking transactions and services there are guidelines for
error resolution and fraudulent activities, mentioned in the relevant instructions
or generally covered under Guidelines in dealing with Customers Complaints
given in BPD Circular No. 17 dated June 7, 2004.

SBP regularly engages in consumer awareness campaigns in collaboration with
foreign and local partners. Banks also undertake such activities according to
their own business plans and programs. In the case of branchless banking, the
draft guidelines outline minimum requirements for consumer awareness to be
  28 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                    conducted by banks.
Recommendation      The draft Guidelines for Branchless Banking should be finalized as soon as
                    practicable in order to provide a sound framework for branchless banking, which
                    is growing rapidly in Pakistan.

                    SBP should review existing policies and guidelines to determine if they need to
                    be strengthened to ensure compliance with C.6 b. and c. above.


Good Practice C.7   Electronic Fund Transfers and Remittances
                        a. There should be clear rules on the rights, liabilities, and
                             responsibilities of the parties involved in any electronic fund
                             transfer.
                        b.   Banks should provide information to consumers on prices and
                             service features of electronic fund transfers and remittances in
                             easily accessible and understandable forms. As far as possible, this
                             information should include
                                 (i) the total price (e.g., fees for the sender and the receiver,
                                      foreign exchange rates, and other costs);
                                 (ii) the time it will take the funds to reach the receiver;
                                 (iii)the locations of the access points for sender and receiver;
                                      and
                                 (iv)the terms and conditions of electronic fund transfer services
                                      that apply to the customer.
                        c.   To ensure transparency, it should be made clear to the sender if the
                             price or other aspects of the service vary according to different
                             circumstances, and the bank should disclose this information
                             without imposing any requirements on the consumer.
                        d.   A bank that sends or receives an electronic fund transfer or
                             remittance should document all essential information regarding the
                             transfer and make this available to the customer who sends or
                             receives the transfer or remittance without charge and on demand.
                        e.   There should be clear, publicly available, and easily applicable
                             procedures in cases of error and fraud in respect of electronic fund
                             transfers and remittances.
                        f.   A customer should be informed of the terms and condition of the use
                             of credit/debit cards outside the country, including foreign
                             transaction fees and foreign exchange rates that may be applicable.
Description
                    The Payment Systems and Electronic Fund Transfer Act, 2007, provides
                    standards to protect consumers and to determine respective rights and liabilities
                    of the financial institutions and other service providers, their consumers, and
                    participants. It provides clear rules on the rights, liabilities, and responsibilities
                    of the parties involved in any electronic fund transfer.

                    Section 29 of the act provides requirement of notice to consumers before levying
                    any fee, though there is no requirement of providing the level of detail outlined
                    above, nor is there a requirement regarding notification of the time it will take
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 29


                    for funds to reach the receiver. Section 30 requires that the terms and conditions
                    of EFTs shall be disclosed in English and in a manner clearly understood by the
                    consumer, at the time the consumer contracts for an electronic fund transfer
                    service. It further elaborates on the nature of the terms and conditions to be
                    disclosed.

                    As noted in C.6, banks are generally required to disclose their schedule of
                    charges to their customers.

                    A bank is required to document all essential information regarding the transfer
                    and to make this information available to the customer (Section 32).

                    There are clear procedures outlined for handling errors and frauds (e.g., Sections
                    36–39).

                    The mission found no specific rules related to terms and conditions of the use of
                    credit cards outside of Pakistan, but all provisions of the Payment Systems and
                    Electronic Fund Transfer Act, 2007, that deal directly or indirectly with
                    payments within Pakistan apply.


Recommendation      SBP may wish to consider greater specificity on pricing, notably of foreign
                    transactions, and requiring banks to notify clients of the time it will take for an
                    ETF to reach the receiver.


Good Practice C.8   Debt Recovery
                       a. A bank, agent of a bank, and any third party should be prohibited
                           from employing any abusive debt collection practice against any
                           customer of the bank, including the use of any false statement, any
                           unfair practice, or the giving of false credit information to others.
                       b. The type of debt that can be collected on behalf of a bank, the
                           person who can collect any such debt, and the manner in which that
                           debt can be collected should be indicated to the customer of the
                           bank when the credit agreement giving rise to the debt is entered
                           into between the bank and the customer.
                       c. A debt collector should not contact any third party about a bank
                           customer’s debt without informing the customer of the debt
                           collector’s right to do so; and the type of information that the debt
                           collector is seeking.
                       d. Where sale or transfer of debt without borrower consent is allowed
                           by law, the borrower should be
                           (i) notified of the sale or transfer within a reasonable number of
                                 days;
                           (ii) informed that the borrower remains obligated on the debt; and
                           (iii) provided with information as to where to make payment, as well
                                 as the purchaser’s or transferee’s contact information.
Description
30 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                 Banks are exposed to the risk of nonrecovery or late recovery of nonperforming
                 loans because of a huge backlog of cases pending with the courts that intensifies
                 this risk. The volume of the backlog of pending cases is much greater than the
                 processing capacity of the concerned courts. According to the available records,
                 more than 56,000 recovery suits were pending with courts and banking tribunals
                 during the first quarter of 2011. More than 14,000 of these have been pending
                 for more than 10 years. The relatively limited size and operational capacity of
                 the judiciary compared with the huge backlog of pending cases slows down the
                 litigation process and not only delays the recovery of the defaulted amount but
                 also provides incentives to borrowers to default on their commitments.

                 SBP, through BPRD Circular No. 13 dated November 3, 2008, has issued fair
                 debt collection guidelines that set minimum standards to be observed by
                 banks/DFIs in collection and recovery of debt from customers and borrowers.
                 These guidelines are applicable to various types of consumer financing facilities,
                 including credit cards and housing, auto, and personal loans. They include the
                 following minimum guidelines:

                 (i) Before proceeding for debt collection from a customer, the bank shall provide
                 the customer all information relating to payments fallen due. A minimum of 14
                 days’ notice will be served to the customer through letter or text advising him or
                 her to make the overdue payment, before a visit to his or her residence or
                 business is undertaken in a lawful manner to negotiate recovery of the
                 outstanding amounts. Advance notice will be required to the customer when
                 bank staff picks up the payment, and if done at the customer’s request then it
                 should be properly recorded.

                 (ii) Banks/DFIs in their collection/recovery efforts shall ensure that (a) the
                 customers/borrowers are not contacted at an inconvenient time; (b) proper
                 disclosure of identity, name of the bank, and the purpose of call is provided; and
                 (c) only lawful and acceptable business language and professional attitude are
                 employed in such contact.

                 (iii) Banks/DFIs shall also ensure that (a) collection calls are properly recorded;
                 (b) customers/borrowers are contacted at the given address/phone numbers and if
                 they cannot be contacted, at alternate address/phone number obtained through
                 collection efforts; (c) “visit reports” shall be kept on record for at least six
                 months; and (d) collection staff shall not harass customers’ family members.
                 However, necessary information could be obtained from family, friends, or a
                 third party of the borrower if he or she is not in contact for 30 days after the first
                 missed payment.

                 (iv) Banks/DFIs shall give 14 days’ written notice before repossessing a leased
                 vehicle on breach of an agreement or default on repayment by the
                 customers/borrowers; banks/DFIs and recovery agencies they employ are
                 advised to allow the customer/borrower to take their possessions out of the
                 vehicle.
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 31



                    (v) Banks/DFIs are advised to ensure that (a) their collection/recovery staff do
                    not transfer or misuse any personal data of customers/borrowers without their
                    prior approval and (b) any information about the customer/borrower provided to
                    the collections staff are properly documented.

                    (vi) Banks/DFIs shall ensure that the collection/recovery agencies they employ
                    must be enrolled with the Pakistan Banks’ Association, in accordance with the
                    Guidelines on Outsourcing Arrangements issued by State Bank of Pakistan.

                    (vii) In order to effectively control the functions of collection and recovery and
                    the human resources engaged in this process, banks/DFIs would ensure the
                    following:
                        (a) Frame a code of lawful conduct for recovery staff.
                        (b) Introduce a well-defined mechanism for addressing complaints against
                        the collection/recovery staff.
                        (c) Undertake a periodic review of their recovery procedures.
                        (d) Engage suitably qualified staff in collection/recovery and provide them
                        necessary training.
                        (e) Regularly monitor the activities of collection and recovery staff.

                    There is no requirement the bank provide information on debt collection
                    procedures at the time the credit agreement is entered into.

                    The sale or transfer of debt without borrower consent is not practiced in
                    Pakistan.

Recommendation      The written directives on debt recovery are comprehensive and in line with the
                    Good Practice.

                    However, the mission was informed that the guidelines are not always followed
                    in practice. It is therefore recommended that customers be made more aware of
                    these guidelines, and informed of their rights.
Good Practice C.9   Foreclosure of mortgaged or charged property
                        a. In the event that a bank exercises its right to foreclose on a property
                           that serves as collateral for a loan, the bank should inform the
                           consumer in writing in advance of the procedures involved, and the
                           process to be employed by the bank to foreclose on the property it
                           holds as collateral, and the consequences thereof to the consumer.
                        b. At the same time, the bank should inform the consumer of the legal
                           remedies and options available to him or her regarding the
                           foreclosure process.
                        c. If applicable, the bank should draw the consumer’s attention to the
                           fact that the bank has a legal right to recover the balance of the debt
                           due in the event the proceeds from the sale of the foreclosed
                           property are not sufficient to fully discharge the outstanding
                           amount.
  32 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                         d. In the event the mortgage contract or charge agreement permits the
                             bank to enforce the contract without court assistance, the bank
                             should ensure that it employs professional and legal means to
                             enforce the contract, including regarding the sale of the property.
Description          Section 15 of the Financial Institutions (Recovery of Finances) Ordinance, 2001,
                     elaborates on the information to be given to a customer regarding the foreclosure
                     of his or her property along with the explicit notice periods. (Three written
                     notices are required.)

                     Under Section 15(4) of the ordinance, financial institutions may sell the
                     mortgaged property without intervention of courts in the manner prescribed in
                     the said law. Property under charge can be sold only with the court’s assistance.

                     There is nothing in the ordinance that stipulates explicitly that the bank must
                     inform the customer of the procedure involved, of the legal remedies available,
                     or that the bank has a legal right to recover any balance due if the proceeds of
                     sale are insufficient to fully discharge the debt.

                     It should be noted that the ordinance was enacted at a time when Pakistan was
                     experiencing severe problems with debt recovery and willful defaults, and it was
                     intended primarily to address this problem.


Recommendation       SBP may wish to consider issuing a circular addressing the issues noted above
                     requiring banks/DFIs to inform the customer of the procedure involved, of the
                     legal remedies available, and that the bank has a legal right to recover any
                     balance due if the proceeds of sale are insufficient to fully discharge the debt.


Good Practice C.10   Bankruptcy of Individuals
                         a. A bank should inform its individual customers in a timely manner
                              and in writing on what basis the bank will seek to render a customer
                              bankrupt, the steps it will take in this respect, and the consequences
                              of any individual’s bankruptcy.
                         b.   Every individual customer should be given adequate notice and
                              information from his or her bank to enable the customer to avoid
                              bankruptcy.
                         c.   Either directly or through its bank association, every bank should
                              make counseling services available to customers who are bankrupt
                              or likely to become bankrupt.
                         d.   The law should enable an individual to
                                  (i) declare his or her intention to present a debtor’s petition for
                                       a declaration of bankruptcy;
                                  (ii) propose a debt agreement;
                                  (iii)propose a personal bankruptcy agreement; or
                                  (iv)enter into voluntary bankruptcy.
                         e.   Any institution acting as the bankruptcy office or trustee
                              responsible for the administration and regulation of the personal
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 33


                             bankruptcy system should provide adequate information to
                             consumers on their options to deal with their own debt and
                             rehabilitation process in the event of bankruptcy.
Description         Personal insolvency is covered by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920. This is a
                    very antiquated regime for personal bankruptcy, which is punitive rather than
                    rehabilitative, and does not allow individuals to make a proposal to creditors.

                    From discussions with banks and practitioners, it appears that personal
                    bankruptcy is almost never invoked in Pakistan. The practices outlined above are
                    therefore not respected.


Recommendation      There is first of all a need for a complete overhaul of both corporate and personal
                    bankruptcy laws in Pakistan. If and when this is done, it would be important to
                    apply the practices outlined above.



SECTION D           PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

Good Practice D.1   Confidentiality and Security of Customer Information
                      a. The banking transactions of any bank customer should be kept
                         confidential by his or her bank.
                      b. The law should require a bank to ensure that it protects the
                         confidentiality and security of the personal data of its customers
                         against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity
                         of such information, as well as against unauthorized access.
Description         Section 33A of the BCO and Section 70 of the Payment Systems and Electronic
                    Fund Transfer Act, 2007 deal with secrecy, fidelity, and privacy of customer
                    data and state that “Every bank and financial institution shall not, except as
                    otherwise required by law or according to customary practices in the banking
                    sector, divulge any information relating to the affairs of its customers.” The
                    Guidelines on Outsourcing Arrangements further require banks to ensure that
                    outsourcing arrangements that involve the transfer of customer information to
                    third parties comply with Section 33A of the BCO, as well as other relevant
                    laws, regulations, and directives.

                    The Payment Systems and Electronic Funds Transfer Act, 2007 Section 15,
                    requires that providers use secure means for transfer, compliant with
                    international standards or requirements that may be prescribed by SBP.

                    Under the OGCC Section 2, credit card issuers are similarly required to ensure
                    the confidentiality of customer information, and may not share it with or divulge
                    it to any party except SBP’s Credit Information Bureau or another approved
                    credit information bureau.

                    The Branchless Banking Guidelines, 2007, also require the protection of
                    customer confidentiality.
  34 Banking Sector: Good Practices



                    Finally, the Guideline on Information Technology Security (BSD Circular 15,
                    2004) makes specific reference to the need for banks to address risks such as
                    unauthorized access to critical financial data, impersonating clients, and theft or
                    alteration of information.

Recommendation      No recommendation.


Good Practice D.2   Sharing Customer Information
                        a. A bank should inform its customers in writing
                             (i) of any third-party dealing for which the bank is obliged to
                                   share information regarding any account of the customer,
                                   such as any legal inquiry by a credit bureau; and
                              (ii) as to how it will use and share the customer’s personal
                                   information.
                        b. Without the customer’s prior written consent, a bank should not sell
                           or share account or personal information regarding a bank
                           customer to or with any party not affiliated with the bank for the
                           purpose of telemarketing or direct mail marketing.
                        c. The law should allow a bank customer to stop or opt out of the
                           bank’s sharing of certain customer information and, prior to any
                           such sharing of information for the first time, every bank should be
                           required to inform each of its customers in writing of his or her
                           rights in this respect.
                        d. The law should prohibit the disclosure by a third party of any
                           banking-specific information regarding a bank customer.

Description         Sharing of personal information is not a customary banking practice in Pakistan
                    except in response to a credit report sought by a bank from another bank on a
                    particular customer. Bank secrecy laws and regulations as quoted above prevent
                    the sharing of personal information. However, credit-related information and
                    defaults are shared with SBP, which maintains a Credit Information Bureau
                    accessible to all banks. Accordingly, under Section 25(A) of the BCO, all banks
                    are required to furnish to the state bank credit information in such manner as the
                    state bank may specify, and the state bank may, either on its own or at the
                    request of any banking company, make such information available to any
                    banking company. Accordingly, the borrower’s consent is not required for
                    reporting of credit data to state bank. It is relevant to highlight that a draft Credit
                    Bureaus Act is in the process of promulgation, which covers this aspect.

                    Under Section 93C of the BCO, banks may share general information/data
                    among themselves, but the information cannot be used for marketing purposes.
                    Section 70 of the Payment Systems and Electronic Fund Transfer Act2007
                    restricts financial institutions from divulging any information relating to
                    electronic funds transfer, affairs, or accounts of its customers except where
                    required by law or customary among bankers or if the client has given his
                    consent.
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 35




Recommendation      No recommendation.


Good Practice D.3   Permitted Disclosures
                    The law should provide for
                        (i) the specific rules and procedures concerning the release to any
                              government authority of the records of any customer of a bank;
                        (ii) rules on what the government authority may and may not do with
                              any such records;
                        (iii) the exceptions, if any, that apply to these rules and procedures; and
                        (iv) the penalties for the bank and any government authority for any
                              breach of these rules and procedures.
Description         Under Section 46A of SBP Act, 1956 (Production of unpublished record of
                    Bank): (1) No court, tribunal, or other authority shall be entitled to compel the
                    bank (State Bank of Pakistan) or any person in the service of the bank to
                    produce, or as the case may be, give any evidence derived from, any unpublished
                    record of the bank. (2) No court, tribunal, or other authority shall permit anyone
                    to produce or give evidence derived from any unpublished record of the bank,
                    except with the prior permission in writing of the governor who may give or
                    withhold such permission as he thinks fit.

                    Law enforcement agencies (LEAs) may access individual customer information
                    to aid in their investigation under a court order, which generally entails stringent
                    criteria as determined by the courts in each case on merit. Authenticated copies
                    of such bank records may be used as evidence by LEAs. Banks are otherwise not
                    under compulsion as per Section 33A (fidelity and secrecy) of the BCO, bank
                    shall not divulge any information relating to the affairs of its customers except as
                    otherwise required by law. Under Section 33A (4) of the BCO, the State Bank of
                    Pakistan may, if satisfied that it is necessary so to do at the time of holding
                    general elections under any law relating thereto, publish a list of persons to
                    whom any loans, advances, or credits were extended by a bank or financial
                    institution, either in their own name or in the name of their spouses or
                    dependents or of their business concerns (if mainly owned and managed by
                    them) that were due and payable and had not been paid back for more than one
                    year from the due date, or whose loans were unjustifiably written off in violation
                    of banking practices, rules, or regulations on or after such date as may be
                    determined by the government: Provided that before publishing the name of any
                    person in any such list, the person shall be given prior notice and, if he or she so
                    requests, an opportunity of hearing.


Recommendation      Pakistan is generally in compliance with the good practices related to permitted
                    disclosures; however, there is no stipulation of the penalties that apply to banks
                    or other agencies for failure to comply with the law. The government may wish
                    to consider whether such penalties should be specified.


Good Practice D.4   Credit Reporting
  36 Banking Sector: Good Practices



                       a. Credit reporting should be subject to appropriate oversight, with
                          sufficient enforcement authority.
                       b. The credit reporting system should have accurate, timely, and
                          sufficient data. The system should also maintain rigorous standards
                          of security and reliability.
                       c. The overall legal and regulatory framework for the credit reporting
                             system should be
                             (i) clear, predictable, non-discriminatory, proportionate, and
                             supportive of consumer rights; and
                             (ii) supported by effective judicial or extrajudicial dispute-resolution
                             mechanisms.
                        d. In facilitating cross-border transfer of credit data, the credit
                             reporting system should provide appropriate levels of protection.
                        e. Proportionate and supportive consumer rights should include the
                             right of the consumer
                                  (i) to consent to information-sharing based on the knowledge
                                        of the institution’s information-sharing practices;
                                  (ii) to access his or her credit report free of charge (at least
                                        once a year), subject to proper identification;
                                  (iii) to know about adverse action in credit decisions or less-
                                        than-optimal conditions or prices due to credit report
                                        information;
                                  (iv) to be informed about all inquiries within a period of time,
                                        such as six months;
                                  (v) to correct factually incorrect information or to have it
                                        deleted and to mark (flag) information that is in dispute;
                                  (vi) to reasonable retention periods of credit history, for
                                        instance two years for positive information and five to
                                        seven years for negative information; and
                                  (vii) to have information kept confidential and with sufficient
                                        security measures in place to prevent unauthorized access,
                                        misuse of data, or loss or destruction of data.
                        f. The credit registries, regulators, and bank associations should
                             undertake campaigns to inform and educate the public on the rights
                             of consumers in the above respects, as well as the consequences of a
                             negative personal credit history.
Description        SBP currently operates and manages the Electronic Credit Information Bureau
                   (eCIB), further to Section 25 (a) of the BCO. The eCIB gathers and reports
                   credit information on all bank borrowers, irrespective of the size of the loan.
                   Banks are required to obtain a credit report on borrowers before extending credit
                   facilities.

                   No regulatory or supervisory regime is currently available for incorporation and
                   functioning of private credit bureaus in Pakistan. The proposed draft Credit
                                                Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 37


                              Bureaus Act will cover the licensing requirements for existing and newly
                              established credit bureaus. A few financial institutions are sharing consumer
                              credit information confidentially and voluntarily through a private company
                              owned by the participating banks, Datacheck.

                              SBP conducts consumer awareness campaigns regarding the importance of credit
                              databases and the implications of negative reporting for financial consumers.

                              All banks and member financial institutions are required to ensure the integrity
                              and reliability of credit data reporting as per CPD Circular Letter No. 1 dated
                              May 27, 2011. SBP takes severe punitive actions against defaulting banks and
                              financial institutions under the provisions of the BCO. SBP ensures that rights of
                              consumers are not jeopardized and consumers’ complaints are dealt with
                              effectively.

                              BSD Circular No. 16 of 2004 requires reporting institutions to send a letter to the
                              borrower about the implications of reporting to the eCIB, and to allow a
                              reasonable time period (at least 15 days) for reconciliation or settlement of
                              overdue liabilities. Under the OGCC, Section 6.8, the card issuer is responsible
                              for correcting erroneous information provided to the eCIB, or any other
                              approved credit bureau, within a reasonable time. SBP does not make corrections
                              to the system at the request of a borrower: Banks are solely responsible for data
                              accuracy, and only the reporting institution is able to alter information about a
                              borrower. Updates in the borrower’s record are made every 10 days, although
                              overdue amounts that have been settled are cleared the following month.

                              Neither corporations nor individuals are able to obtain their own credit reports.

                              A comprehensive law called the Credit Bureaus Act is in the process of
                              promulgation. The proposed law further elaborates all issues in the area of
                              consumers’ rights.


Recommendation                SBP should enable companies and individuals to obtain their own credit reports
                              and to dispute inaccurate information.

                              It will be important to ensure that the good practices outlined above are
                              incorporated into the new Credit Bureaus Act.



SECTION E                     DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS 3

Good Practice E.1             Internal Complaints Procedure

3
  This section is based on the state of affairs at the time of the mission. Subsequently , a new Federal Ombudsmen Institutional
Reforms A ct, 2013, was promulgated that may hav e repercussions on the Bank ing Ombudsman of Pak istan. See box 1 and v olume I
for further details.
  38 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                       a. Every bank should have in place a written complaints procedure
                            and a designated contact point for the proper handling of any
                            complaint from a customer, with a summary of this procedure
                            forming part of the bank’s terms and conditions referred to in B.7
                            above and an indication in the same terms and conditions of how a
                            consumer can easily obtain the complete statement of the procedure.
                       b. Within a short period of time following the date a bank receives a
                            complaint, it should
                               (i) acknowledge in writing to the customer/complainant the fact
                                     of its receipt of the complaint; and
                              (ii) provide the complainant with the name of one or more
                                     individuals appointed by the bank to deal with the
                                     complaint until the complaint either is resolved or cannot be
                                     processed further within the bank.
                       c. The bank should provide the complainant with a regular written
                            update on the progress of the investigation of the complaint at
                            reasonable intervals of time.
                       d. Within a few business days of completing the investigation of the
                            complaint, the bank should inform the customer/complainant in
                            writing of the outcome of the investigation and, where applicable,
                            explain the terms of any offer or settlement being made to the
                            customer/complainant.
                       e. The bank should also inform the customer/complainant of the
                            availability of a financial ombudsman services or other form of
                            alternative dispute resolution.
                       f. When a bank receives a verbal complaint, it should offer the
                            customer/complainant the opportunity to have the complaint treated
                            by the bank as a written complaint in accordance with the above. A
                            bank should not require, however, that a complaint be in writing.
                       g. A bank should maintain an up-to-date record of all complaints it has
                            received and the action it has taken in dealing with them.
                       h. The record should contain the details of the complainant, the nature
                            of the complaint, a copy of the bank’s response(s), a copy of all other
                            relevant correspondence or records, the action taken to resolve the
                            complaint, and whether resolution was achieved and, if so, on what
                            basis.
                       i. The bank should make these records available for review by the
                            banking supervisor or regulator when requested.
Description        Under BPD Circular No. 17 dated June 7, 2004, detailed “Guidelines in dealing
                   with Customers Complaints‟ were issued. Under the guidelines, banks are
                   required to put in place a comprehensive complaint redressal mechanism and are
                   required to designate an appropriate senior person to deal with complaints.
                   Banks must display in all branches and on their websites the complaints process,
                   and provide leaflets to customers on request. In addition to requiring the
                   appointment of a designated officer responsible for complaint handling, banks
                   are required to set up a complaint redressal system for identification and
                   classification of complaints, to ensure proper investigation and an expeditious
                   resolution within a specified timeline. Complaints must be responded to within
                   10 working days. Where a complaint requires further investigation, an interim
                   reply must be sent, indicating the reasons for the time to be taken and expected
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 39


                    date of action/response. In any case, the final reply may be sent within 45
                    working days, barring cases where reasonable grounds exist for not complying
                    with the 45-day limit.

                    Banks are required to maintain statistics on complaints, including volume, types,
                    and settlement, and should analyze the data and prepare periodic reports.
                    Complaint data as prescribed under the guidelines is reviewed by internal audit
                    and onsite inspection teams of SBP.

                    SBP inspection teams evaluate related mechanisms and efficient handling, but a
                    general reporting requirement is not in vogue, except that BPRD Circular Letter
                    No. 25 dated August 26, 2009, requires banks to report utility bill complaint data
                    on a monthly basis to the state bank. Banks must also report incidents of fraud
                    and forgeries to SBP. SBP maintains its own database of complaints received
                    from bank customers and scrutinizes the data from an operational risk
                    perspective for internal analysis and also to formulate policy initiatives for
                    consumer protection.

                    SBP policies are in conformity with all aspects of E.1 above, with the exception
                    of E.1 f. There appears to be no requirement that banks treat verbal complaints
                    on the same basis as written complaints. However, discussions with banks
                    during the mission indicated that they generally did so.


Recommendation      SBP may wish to consider clarifying that banks should treat verbal complaints
                    on the same basis that they treat written complaints.


Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                        a. A system should be in place that allows customers of a bank to seek
                             affordable and efficient recourse to a third-party banking
                             ombudsman or equivalent institution, in the event the complaint of
                             one or more of customers is not resolved in accordance with the
                             procedures outlined in E.1.
                        b.   The existence of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution
                             and basic information relating to the process and procedures should
                             be made known in every bank’s terms and conditions referred to in
                             B.7.
                        c.   At the request of any bank customer, the bank should make
                             available to the customer the details of the banking ombudsman or
                             equivalent institution, and its applicable processes and procedures,
                             including the binding nature of decisions and the mechanisms to
                             ensure the enforcement of decisions.
                        d.   The banking ombudsman or equivalent institution should be
                             appropriately resourced and discharge its function impartially.
                        e.   The decision of the banking ombudsman or equivalent institution
                             should be binding upon the bank against which the complaint has
                             been lodged.
   40 Banking Sector: Good Practices


Description         In addition to the Consumer Protection Department at SBP, the Office of the
                    Banking Mohtasib Pakistan (ombudsman) operates under Section 82 of the
                    BCO. The recently created Karachi Center for Dispute Resolution can also act as
                    a mediator in bank disputes. Section 71 of the Payment Systems and Electronic
                    Fund Transfer Act, 2007 provides that consumers may address complaints to
                    State Bank of Pakistan.

                    If a client does not obtain resolution of his or her grievance from his or her bank
                    within 45 days, he or she may refer the matter to the ombudsman (OBM).
                    Decisions of the OBM may be appealed by consumers to SBP governor (Section
                    82 of the BCO) or ultimately to the courts, but are binding on banks. Timelines
                    are specified for resolution. Most disputes that go to the ombudsman are settled
                    through an amicable resolution process, but roughly 20 percent are settled at a
                    hearing held by the OBM. The OBM handled 20,322 complaints between its
                    founding in 2005 and 2011. The position of the ombudsman, which is appointed
                    by the president on the recommendation of SBP governor, remained vacant for
                    approximately eight months - creating a serious backlog at OBM – before an
                    appointment was made in March, 2013.

                    Under BPRD Circular Letter 18 dated August 10, 2010, banks are directed to
                    inform customers about the OBM—in English and Urdu—on all bank
                    statements. In addition, public service messages have been published in widely
                    circulated newspapers across Pakistan to increase consumer awareness. In spite
                    of these efforts, awareness of the OMB and its procedures, although improving,
                    appears to be inadequate. Roughly two-thirds of those using the service do not
                    comply with the formal procedure and have to be guided through the process by
                    the OBM. Furthermore, a large number of complaints are directed to the CPD of
                    SBP, which then redirects the complaints to the concerned financial institution or
                    the OBM for follow-up. This indicates that consumers are not fully aware of the
                    process to be followed.

                    The OMB is funded by levies charged to banks, and is adequately staffed and
                    funded. Services are provided free of charge to consumers.
Recommendation      A new ombudsman needs to be appointed as soon as possible. If allowed by law,
                    the authorities should put in place a system to ensure that there will always be an
                    acting ombudsman in the event of a vacancy in the office, through either
                    delegated powers or the automatic appointment of an interim ombudsman.

                    Consideration should be given to proactively increasing awareness of the OBM,
                    and streamlining procedures to make them more user-friendly. SBP, the OBM,
                    and/or the PBA should consider conducting a more proactive campaign through
                    the media and other channels to increase awareness.

Good Practice E.3   Publication of Information on Consumer Complaints
                        a. Statistics and data of customer complaints, including those related
                            to a breach of any code of conduct of the banking industry, should
                            be periodically compiled and published by the ombudsman,
                            financial supervisory authority, or consumer protection agency.
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 41


                        b. Regulatory agencies should publish statistics and data and analyses
                           related to their activities in respect of consumer protection
                           regarding banking products and services so as to, among other
                           things, reduce the sources of systemic consumer complaints and
                           disputes.
                        c. Banking industry associations should also analyze the complaint
                           statistics and data and propose measures to avoid the recurrence of
                           systemic consumer complaints.

Description         The OBM publishes an annual review of complaints it handles. Further, under
                    Section 82 G of the BCO, the Office of Banking Mohtasib shall send a report to
                    the State Bank of Pakistan on or before March 31 in every succeeding year,
                    setting out a review of the activities of its office during the preceding year. The
                    Banking Mohtasib shall also submit a report or reports to the State Bank of
                    Pakistan containing the results of such inquiries as it may be directed to conduct
                    by the state bank from time to time. All reports submitted by the Banking
                    Mohtasib shall be published and released to the public unless it directs otherwise
                    (in such cases, the reasons are to be recorded).

                    The Consumer Protection Department of SBP annually reviews the data related
                    to complaints and proposes policy measures to enhance the level of consumer
                    protection. However, they do not publish any data or analysis.

                    Individual banks also maintain statistics, analyze the data, and produce reports
                    for bank senior management. However, the PBA does not do so.


Recommendation      There is a need to centralize, analyze, and publish data on consumer complaints.
                    There is a wealth of data available on consumer complaints, but the data are
                    dispersed among individual banks, SBP, the OBM, and provincial councils. The
                    OBM publishes statistics and analyzes complaints it receives to determine if
                    there are issues that require policy attention. The CPD also analyzes data on
                    consumer complaints it receives and prepares an annual review. Findings are
                    used for internal analysis, and the CPD has taken several policy initiatives on the
                    basis of conclusions drawn from the findings. This annual review is not made
                    public, however, and the data analyzed are not comprehensive. A comprehensive
                    and public analysis of all financial consumer complaints would allow regulators
                    and banks to better identify and address recurring problems and areas of
                    weakness in banking practices. This may be an appropriate role for the CPD of
                    SBP.




SECTION F           GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY

Good Practice F.1   Depositor Protection
                        a. The law should ensure that the regulator or supervisor can take
  42 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                          necessary measures to protect depositors when a bank is unable to
                          meet its obligations including the return of deposits.
                       b. If there is a law on deposit insurance, it should state clearly
                              (i) the insurer;
                              (ii) the classes of those depositors that are insured;
                               (iii) the extent of insurance coverage;
                               (iv)the holder of all funds for payout purposes;
                               (v) the contributor(s) to this fund;
                               (vi)each event that will trigger a payout from this fund to any
                                    class of those insured; and
                              (vii) the mechanisms to ensure timely payout to depositors who
                                 are insured.
                       c. On an ongoing basis, the deposit insurer should directly or through
                           insured banks or the association of insured commercial banks, if
                           any, promote public awareness of the deposit insurance system, as
                           well as how the system works, including its benefits and limitations.
                        d. Public awareness should educate the public on, among other things,
                           the financial instruments and institutions covered by deposit
                           insurance, the coverage and limits of deposit insurance, and the
                           reimbursement process.
                        e. The deposit insurer should work closely with member banks and
                           other safety-net participants to ensure consistency in the
                           information provided to consumers and to maximize public
                           awareness on an ongoing basis.
                        f. The deposit insurer should receive or conduct a regular evaluation
                           of the effectiveness of its public awareness program or activities.
Description        The State Bank of Pakistan Act provides SBP a wide range of corrective
                   measures in the event a bank conducts operations without due regard to safety
                   and soundness or fails to comply with the BCO and SBP’s Prudential
                   Regulations. Such measures include, depending on the circumstances: (i)
                   imposition of a directive; (ii) replacement of the board of directors and senior
                   managers; (iii) imposition of a moratorium on a bank’s operations pending its
                   restructuring; (iv) removal of a bank’s license to conduct banking business; and
                   (v) effecting the exit of bank from the industry through the seeking of a winding-
                   up order. In recent years, SBP has acted to resolve a number of smaller
                   distressed banks using a variety of the methods available. If offsite surveillance
                   or onsite inspection indicate signs of widespread weaknesses and the affairs of
                   any banking company being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests
                   of the depositors or in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the banking
                   company, the state bank, under the terms of Section 41 of the BCO, can remove
                   and supersede the board of directors.

                   The state bank publishes reports on the performance and stability of financial
                   sector on a half-yearly basis. Further, banks are required to have themselves
                   rated by credit rating agencies on the approved panel of the State Bank of
                   Pakistan and disclose their credit rating prominently in their published annual
                   and quarterly financial statements. Banks are required to have their financial
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 43


                    statements audited by external auditors on the panel maintained by the state bank
                    for the purposes of auditing banking companies under Section 35 of the BCO
                    and submit them to the state bank. Submission of wrong or misleading
                    information leads to action against banks and auditors under the provisions of
                    the BCO.

                    Under the Banks (Nationalization) Act, 1974, all bank deposits are protected by
                    the government. This provision was introduced at the time when the banks were
                    nationalized, and is no longer appropriate in a system that is largely privately
                    owned. It is also not clear that the GOP would be in a position to honor this
                    guarantee in a timely and orderly manner in the event of a failure of one or more
                    large banks. The mission understands that a draft law establishing an explicit
                    deposit protection scheme (DPS) to provide protection to small depositors was
                    drafted some time ago, but has not been submitted to parliament.


Recommendation      There is a need to clarify the position on depositor protection through
                    appropriate legislation. The proposal outlined in SBP’s “10-Year Strategy
                    Paper” for creating a DPS would appear to be an appropriate solution for
                    Pakistan. A deposit insurance system should limit the scope for discretionary
                    decisions, promote public confidence, help to contain the costs of resolving
                    failed banks, and provide for an orderly process for dealing with bank failures.
                    The law should specify how the system is to be funded on a sustainable basis, as
                    well as its obligations to depositors, and needs to be part of a well-constructed
                    financial system safety net. It would need to be supported by a high level of
                    public awareness about its existence, benefits, and limitations.


Good Practice F.2   Insolvency
                        a. Depositors should enjoy higher priority than other unsecured
                            creditors in the liquidation process of a bank.
                        b. The law dealing with the insolvency of banks should provide for
                            expeditious, cost-effective, and equitable provisions to enable the
                            maximum timely refund of deposits to depositors.
Description         Depositors enjoy higher priority than other creditors, under Section 58 of the
                    BCO, at the time of suspension of business and winding up of a banking
                    company.

                    The BCO, Section 58, deals with bank insolvency. In addition, SBP has prepared
                    a Problem Bank Manual that explicitly lays down a hierarchy of actions to be
                    taken in cases of problem banks. These measures range from informal to strict
                    formal actions (cancellation of license and liquidation of the bank). In practice,
                    there have been no instances of the latter, so the insolvency framework remains
                    untested. In the past, problem banks have typically been resolved through
                    recapitalization or amalgamation. As noted above, under the law (Bank
                    Nationalization Act, 1974) all bank deposits remain under government
                    guarantee.


Recommendation      The new Deposit Protection Act should provide for expeditious, cost-effective,
  44 Banking Sector: Good Practices


                    and equitable refund to depositors in the event of insolvency. If the Deposit
                    Protection Act is enacted, the BCO and Bank Nationalization Act would need to
                    be amended accordingly.



SECTION G           CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT (SEE VOLUME I, FINANCIAL
                    EDUCATION)

Good Practice G.3   Unbiased Information for Investors
                        a. Financial regulators should provide, via the Internet and printed
                           publications, independent information on the key features, benefits,
                           and risks—and where practicable the costs—of the main types of
                           financial products and services.
                        b. Nongovernmental organizations should be encouraged to provide
                           consumer awareness programs to the public regarding financial
                           products and services.


Description             a) SBP does not provide, either via the Internet or through printed
                           publications, independent information on the key features, benefits,
                           risks, or costs of financial products and services. It is the view of SBP
                           that this is a role for the media, consumer organizations, or the bankers’
                           association rather than the regulator. However, in Pakistan, none of
                           these organizations currently fulfill this role.


                        b) Pakistan does not currently have a system of consumer NGOs that are
                           actively engaged in consumer protection in financial services, although
                           one or two consumer protection NGOs look into financial services from
                           time to time. One such NGO conducted and published a study on
                           banking industry competition in 2010.

Recommendation      To the extent feasible, SBP should encourage NGOs to become more actively
                    engaged in financial services, by, among other things, engaging with them on
                    consumer protection issues and consulting with them when considering new
                    guidelines, rules, and regulations in this area. A new system of consumer
                    nongovernmental organizations is needed in particular to serve heavily indebted
                    households. Consideration should be given to the role of nonprofit financial
                    advisors (such as the credit counseling center in operation in Malaysia), which
                    can help indebted people sort out their debts and provide them with necessary
                    counseling. These organizations should also be encouraged to keep records of
                    the cases they receive, conduct trend analysis of this data, and propose changes
                    in legislation where appropriate.


SECTION H
                    COMPETITION AND CONSUMER PROTECTION

Good Practice H.1   Regulatory Policy and Competition Policy
                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 45


                    Regulators and competition authorities should be required to consult one
                    another for the purpose of ensuring the establishment, application, and
                    enforcement of consistent policies regarding the regulation of financial
                    services.
Description         The Competition Commission of Pakistan (CCP) works under Competition Act,
                    2010. The act sets out the principles and norms of sound competitive behavior as
                    well as the manner in which these norms are to be enforced. The CCP has
                    across-the-board sanction powers including over the financial sector, as provided
                    under Competition Act, 2010. In practice, the CCP may consult and seek
                    clarifications from SBP as the major regulator of financial sector.


Recommendation      The CCP and SBP should consider establishing an MOU that outlines the
                    respective roles and outlines a consultative process to be followed.


Good Practice H.2   Review of Competition
                    Given the significance of retail banking to the economy as a whole and to
                    the welfare of consumers, competition authorities should
                          (i) monitor competition in retail banking;
                          (ii) conduct, and publish for general consumption, periodic assessments
                               of competition in retail banking (such as the range of interest rates
                               across banks for specific products); and
                          (iii)make recommendations publicly available on enhancing competition
                               in retail banking.
Description         The CCP does not systematically monitor competition in retail banking, but it
                    has analyzed specific aspects and taken action. The CCP may undertake such an
                    initiative under its broader mandate.


Recommendation      The CCP may wish to consider undertaking and publishing periodic assessments
                    and comparative information about retail banking products.


Good Practice H.3   Impact of Competition Policy on Consumer Protection
                    The competition authority and the regulator should evaluate the impact of
                    competition policies on consumer welfare, especially regarding any
                    limitations on customer choice and collusion regarding interest and other
                    charges and fees.
Description         At SBP, it is an ongoing process to ensure fair trade practices and a level playing
                    field for all stakeholders, so that no class of consumers is put in a
                    disadvantageous position due to particular circumstances or practices. Although
                    the broader context of such evaluations is based on consumer welfare, it is
                    assessed on a qualitative basis for negative or positive impact rather than on a
                    quantifiable level.


Recommendation      The evaluation of the impact of competition policies could be incorporated into
                    the MOU between SBP and CCP, with respective roles and responsibilities.
      46 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


       2. Microfinance providers: Good Practices


SECTION A                      CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

Good Practice A.1              Consumer Protection Regime
                               The law should provide clear consumer protection rules regarding
                               microfinance providers, 4 and there should be adequate institutional
                               arrangements to ensure the thorough, objective, timely, and fair
                               implementation and enforcement of all such rules, as well as of sanctions
                               that effectively deter violations of these rules.
                                    a. There should be specific statutory provisions that create an effective
                                       regime for the protection of consumers of microfinance providers.
                                    b. There should be a government authority responsible for
                                       implementing, overseeing, and enforcing consumer protection in the
                                       area of microfinance providers.
                                    c. The supervisory authority for microfinance providers should have a
                                       register that lists the names of microfinance providers.
                                    d. There should be coordination and cooperation among the various
                                       institutions mandated to implement, oversee, and enforce consumer
                                       protection and financial sector regulation and supervision.
                                    e. The law should provide for, or at least not prohibit, a role for the
                                       private sector, including voluntary consumer associations and self-
                                       regulatory organizations, in respect of consumer protection in the
                                       area of microfinance providers.
Description                    General assessment: The consumer protection regime for microfinance providers
                               is in many respects ineffective because of its fragmentation and incompleteness,
                               which leave a significant portion of the microfinance clients uncovered and
                               another portion only partially protected. A large part of the microfinance sector
                               is not under the purview of any financial authority with regulatory and
                               enforcement powers and does not need to follow minimum standards. There is a
                               lack of coordination among authorities and other bodies with regard to the
                               desirable protection regime for microfinance clients. Microfinance clients are
                               less protected than bank clients and have fewer options to resolve grievances.

                               Microfinance service providers (MSPs) adopt a variety of legal forms:
                               microfinance banks (MFBs), microfinance institutions (MFIs), and rural support
                               programs (RSPs). MSPs operate under separate laws implemented by different
                               federal agencies and provincial governments. The non-regulated sector is
                               comprised of nonprofit organizations (MFIs and RSPs) and cannot mobilize
                               deposits. MFIs and RSPs are not regulated and supervised by any financial
                               authority. There are nine MFBs, but the exact number of MFIs and RSPs is not
                               known. 5

                               While MFBs must comply with consumer protection regulations issued by the
                               State Bank of Pakistan (SBP), MFIs and RSPs fall exclusively under the general

4
 Throughout this assessment, we use the term “microfinance prov iders” to refer generically to prov iders of microfinance, both
bank s and nonbank s.
5
    Among the members of the Pak istan Microfinance Network (PMN), there are 15 MFIs and 5 RSPs.
Pakistan                                                                                           Microfinance Providers


                              consumer protection laws implemented by the provincial governments (see
                              description of the provincial consumer protection laws in volume I), the
                              Competition Ordinance, and voluntary codes of conduct. This leaves MFI/RSP
                              clients less protected than clients of MFBs, and bank clients more protected than
                              all microfinance clients.

                              The primary laws relevant to microfinance and consumer protection of
                              microfinance consumers are listed in the table below.

                                                 Law                        Relevance to microfinance
                                Microfinance Institutions Ordinance, Defines MFBs and MFIs, but applies
                                2001 (hereafter MFB Ordinance 6 )     only to MFBs. It contains a few rules
                                                                      relevant to consumer protection. The
                                                                      MFB Ordinance is implemented by
                                                                      SBP.
                                Societies Registration Act, 1860, and Governs MFIs constituted as
                                related provincial regulations        charitable societies and implemented
                                                                      by provincial governments. There are
                                                                      no provisions directly related to
                                                                      consumer protection.
                                Companies Ordinance, 1984             Governs MFPs constituted as limited
                                                                      liability companies and registered with
                                                                      the Securities & Exchange
                                                                      Commission of Pakistan (SECP).
                                                                      There are no provisions directly
                                                                      related to consumer protection.
                                                                      SECP is responsible for implementing
                                                                      the ordinance and has regulatory
                                                                      powers defined in the ordinance.
                                Voluntary Social Welfare Agencies     Governs MFPs constituted as welfare
                                (Registration and Control)            agencies and registered by the
                                Ordinance, 1961, and related          provincial governments (e.g.,
                                provincial regulations (e.g.,         Directorate General of Social Welfare
                                Voluntary Social Welfare Agencies     of Punjab). Has a few provisions
                                [Registration and Control] Rules      related to consumer protection, but it
                                1962, Government of Punjab)           is not directly relevant for this
                                                                      diagnostic.
                                Trust Act, 1882                       Governs MFPs constituted as trusts.
                                                                      There are no directly relevant
                                                                      provisions for protection of
                                                                      microfinance clients.
                                Provincial consumer protection laws The provincial consumer protection
                                (see full description of such laws in laws apply to all MFPs. For instance,
                                volume I) (e.g., Punjab Consumer      the Punjab Consumer Protection Act,
                                Protection Act, 2005, and Punjab      2005, sets liability of the service
                                Consumer Protection Rule, 2009.       provider, duty of disclosure, and
                                Other provincial laws such as usury prohibition on exclusions from

6
  Although the ordinance is called “the Microfinance Institutions Ordinance,” this document will use the term “MFB Ordinance,” to
av oid confusion, because the ordinance is not applicable to MFIs, but only to MFBs.
48 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                   laws (e.g., the Punjab Usurious         liability; it defines unfair practices and
                   Loans Ordinance, 1959, and the          establishes the Consumer Protection
                   Punjab Relief of Indebtedness Act,      Council and the Consumer Courts of
                   1934)                                   Punjab.
                   Competition Act, 2010                   Prohibits anticompetitive practices and
                                                           creates the Competition Commission
                                                           of Pakistan (CCP), which is
                                                           responsible for its implementation.
                                                           This law applies to all financial
                                                           institutions, including MFPs. It has
                                                           provisions relevant to consumer
                                                           protection, such as prohibition of
                                                           discriminatory pricing and deceptive
                                                           marketing.
                   Banking Companies Ordinance             The BCO (or any other law relating to
                   (BCO) and related regulations           banking companies or financial
                                                           institutions) does not apply to MFBs
                                                           or MFIs, unless otherwise stated. An
                                                           MFB shall not be deemed to be a
                                                           banking company for the purposes of
                                                           the BCO, SBP Act, or any other law or
                                                           regulation relating to banking
                                                           companies. However, some provisions
                                                           of the BCO, such as those related to
                                                           bank secrecy and the winding up of
                                                           institutions, apply to MFBs and are
                                                           relevant for consumers.

                   Payments and Electronic Fund            Sets some protection provisions for
                   Transfers Act, 2007                     payment instruments and payments
                                                           and electronic fund transfers. Applies
                                                           to any entity providing such services.

                  The provincial consumer protection acts apply to all financial service providers,
                  including MFBs and MFIs/RSPs. However, they lose relevance in practice, as
                  they do not have provisions specific for financial services, being clearly focused
                  on manufactured goods and other services. Moreover, only Punjab has passed
                  regulations (Punjab Consumer Protection Rule, 2009) to implement the
                  consumer protection act through the establishment of the Consumer Protection
                  Council and Consumer Protection Courts.

                  The legal framework for MFIs/RSPs is fragmented, which might affect the
                  achievement of policy goals for microfinance. MFPs other than MFBs are
                  believed to have more than 50 percent of the total number of clients of the
                  microfinance sector. The laws under which MFIs and RSPs are incorporated set
                  different frameworks for the company’s statutory organization (i.e., ownership
                  structure, governance, reporting requirements, accountability, and profit-sharing
                  arrangements), creating a fragmented framework in which microfinance services
                  are offered to Pakistani consumers, leaving a good part of the sector without the
                  obligation to follow common consumer protection and conduct standards. For
Pakistan                                                                                           Microfinance Providers


                                  instance, there are no standards for microcredit operations undertaken by MFIs
                                  and RSPs, similar to those applicable to MFBs. There are no minimum
                                  disclosure and transparency standards for them either. There is some concern, by
                                  some stakeholders, that the lack of common standards might drive the industry to
                                  a crisis such as the delinquency crisis of 2008–09 faced by one of Pakistan’s
                                  largest MFIs.

                                  In addition, this fragmentation may have long-term implications, such as on
                                  MFPs’ ability to attract investors and access infrastructure such as the banking
                                  courts. Ultimately, it results in a good portion of the sector being outside the
                                  scope of any financial policy or supervisory authority, which can limit the
                                  country’s ability to achieve the stated policy goals for the microfinance sector
                                  and for an inclusive financial system. The most important policy document for
                                  the microfinance sector in Pakistan, the Strategic Framework for Sustainable
                                  Microfinance in Pakistan, was issued by SBP in January 2011, setting a vision to
                                  transform microfinance into a “dynamic industry, integrated with the overall
                                  financial system, which provides inclusive financial services to the underserved
                                  economic and geographic segments through self-sustaining business models and
                                  demand driven products, while maintaining high standards of governance and
                                  service delivery, supported by agile regulatory environment.” 7 To achieve such
                                  goals, common standards for protecting consumers will need to be established
                                  across currently regulated and unregulated providers.

                                  Only MFIs and RSPs incorporated under the Companies Ordinance are
                                  registered with SECP. SECP does not regulate or supervise MFIs/RSPs
                                  registered under Section 42 of the Companies Ordinance. Although MFIs and
                                  RSPs are not regulated or supervised by SBP, they are defined in the MFB
                                  Ordinance as institutions that extend microcredit and allied services to the poor
                                  through sources other than public savings and deposits. The MFB Ordinance
                                  prohibits MFIs from using the expressions “microfinance bank” and “MFB” on
                                  their names and from taking deposits without an MFB license. Contraventions
                                  are punishable with imprisonment and fines. Where it appears to SBP that a
                                  person is carrying on the business of an MFB, SBP may give directions, conduct
                                  inspections, retrieve books and information, and exercise other powers such as
                                  removing directors.

                                  Only MFBs are regulated and supervised by SBP, under a dedicated regulatory
                                  framework. Microfinance banks (MFBs), which account for nearly 50 percent of
                                  borrowers and 60 percent of total outstanding microcredit, 8 are regulated and
                                  supervised by SBP. MFBs hold only a small portion of total bank deposits. All
                                  MFBs must be licensed by SBP under the MFB Ordinance. 9 The ordinance uses
                                  the term “microfinance institution” in its title and several articles. However, it is
                                  clear that the legislators’ intent was to refer to MFBs, not to MFIs, in nearly all
                                  provisions. The current text of the ordinance could be interpreted to mean that

7
 Strategic Framework for Sustainable Microfinance in Pak istan, January 2011, av ailable at www.sbp.org.pk/MFD/Strategic-
Framework -SM-24-Jan-2011.pdf. This framework supersedes the 2007 national microfinance strategy and is based on a diagnostic
of the state of the industry , compared with the milestones set in the 2007 document, which were only partially achieved.
8
    Pak istan Microfinance Rev iew, 2011, Pak istan Microfinance Network .
9
 The Khushali Microfinance Bank was initially created and gov erned by its own 2000 ordinance, until that was rev ok ed. Khushali
MFB is now operating under the MFB Ordinance.
50 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                  MFIs are subject to the provisions of the ordinance, including the need to obtain
                  a license from SBP and to follow the standards imposed on MFBs.

                  An MFB is defined in the MFB Ordinance as an institution licensed by SBP that
                  must render assistance to microenterprises and provide microfinance services in
                  a sustainable manner to low-income persons, preferably women, with a view to
                  alleviating poverty. Low-income persons are defined as those with an annual
                  household income less than PRs 600,000. In an attempt to keep MFBs targeted
                  on poor segments of the population, SBP has limited loan sizes in accordance
                  with the table below.


                   Type of loans           Type of borrower              Maximum loan size
                   Housing loan            With household annual         PRs 500,000 (at least 60
                                           income up to PRs 600,000      percent of the portfolio
                                                                         must be of loans below
                                                                         PRs 250,000)
                   General loan            With household annual         PRs 300,000
                                           income up to PRs 300,000
                   Microenterprise loan    Microenterprise is defined    PRs 500,000 (at least 60
                   (only MFBs that meet    as a project or business in   percent of the portfolio
                   minimum capital         trading, manufacturing,       must be loans below
                   requirements are        services, and agriculture     PRs 150,000)
                   authorized to extend    that leads to livelihood
                   this type of loan)      improvement and income
                                           generation, undertaken by
                                           self-employed individuals,
                                           or those that employ up to
                                           10 individuals (excluding
                                           seasonal labor)

                  The MFB Ordinance is complemented primarily by the Prudential Regulations
                  for Microfinance Banks, 2007 (PRMFB). In addition, some circulars and other
                  regulatory or legal instruments apply to MFBs, which are mostly focused on
                  matters other than consumer protection.

                  The main SBP regulations applicable to MFBs or to microfinance undertaken by
                  other regulated institutions are listed in the table below.



                       Regulatory Instrument                           Topics covered
                   PRMFB (updated March 2012)              Focuses on prudential and operational
                                                           requirements for MFBs, and has a
                                                           few consumer protection provisions.
                   Microfinance Credit Guarantee           Establishes the MCGF, administered
                   Facility (MCGF) Guidelines (Circular    by SBP. The MCGF is available to
                   03, 2012)                               MFBs and MFIs seeking financing
                                                           from banks and development finance
                                                           institutions (DFIs).
Pakistan                                                        Microfinance Providers


            Licensing Requirements and              Explains minimum requirements for
            Guidelines for Setting up MFBs          MFIs or others applying for an MFB
                                                    license.
            Branch Licensing Policy and BPRD        Sets minimum physical, security, and
            Circular No. 15, 2007                   other requirements for branches of
                                                    MFBs. SBP assesses, before
                                                    approving branch expansion plans of
                                                    MFBs, the convenience and needs of
                                                    the population of the area to be
                                                    served. There are a few provisions
                                                    related to consumer protection.
            Guidelines for Islamic Microfinance     Establishes rules for Islamic
            Business by Financial Institutions      microfinance business by financial
                                                    institutions.
            Guidelines for Commercial Banks to      Establishes rules for microfinance
            Undertake Microfinance Business         business undertaken by commercial
                                                    banks.
            NGO Guidelines                          Guidance for NGOs considering
                                                    applying for an MFB license.
            BPRD Circular No. 9, 2007               Guidelines on outsourcing for banks
                                                    and DFIs. Outsourcing arrangements
                                                    must ensure they do not reduce the
                                                    protection afforded to depositors or
                                                    investors, and must not be used to
                                                    avoid regulatory compliance.
            Branchless Banking Guidelines, 2007     Sets guidelines for the use of
                                                    branchless banking channels and
                                                    basic provisions to protect customers
                                                    using these channels.

           The Competition Commission of Pakistan has jurisdiction over all businesses in
           Pakistan, including MFPs. It deals with some issues directly related to consumer
           protection. The CCP was created by the Competition Ordinance, 2007, but it
           does not conduct prudential or consumer protection supervision. However, it has
           legal authority to
               • initiate proceedings and make orders in cases of contravention of the
                    provisions of the Competition Ordinance;
               • conduct studies for promoting competition;
               • conduct inquiries into the affairs of any undertaking (including financial
                    service providers) in Pakistan;
               • to give advice to undertakings so that their businesses are conducted
                    according to the Competition Ordinance;
               • to engage in competition advocacy; and
               • take any other action necessary for carrying out the purposes of the
                    Competition Ordinance, including giving orders, entering and searching
                    premises, imposing penalties in case of noncompliance with the
                    ordinance or orders, and requesting information.

           The CCP’s advocacy mandate allows it to, among other things, review policy
           frameworks for fostering competition and making recommendations for
52 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                  amendments to the Competition Ordinance and any other law that affects
                  competition in Pakistan (Competition Ordinance, Section 29). Financial
                  institutions aggrieved by the CCP’s decisions can appeal to the Appellate Bench
                  of the Commission. With such a broad mandate, the CCP may have an increasing
                  role in the overall framework for protection of microfinance consumers, and has
                  expressed interest in doing so, particularly with regard to deceptive marketing (it
                  has launched a nationwide campaign to increase consumer awareness against
                  deceptive marketing) and consumer agreements.

                  SBP has constituted the Microfinance Consultative Group (MFCG), with
                  representation from the Ministry of Finance, the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation
                  Fund (PPAF), and microfinance investors active in Pakistan, with the intent to
                  discuss the industry’s long-term goals and related policy strategy. The MFCG
                  has, for instance, ratified SBP’s Strategy for Sustainable Microfinance in
                  Pakistan. There are no stated goals in the strategy specific to consumer
                  protection, and the issue of legal and institutional fragmentation has not been
                  addressed by the MFCG.


                  1. Assessment: There is institutional and legal fragmentation with regard
                     to MFIs and RSPs.

                  MFIs and RSPs do not follow a common legal framework and are not under the
                  supervision and regulation of any financial authority. Part of the sector is
                  registered by SECP, but that body acts solely as a registrar, not as a financial
                  regulator and supervisor. According to the Companies Ordinance, SECP would
                  have investigative and regulatory powers in some limited circumstances, and it
                  has broad investigative powers and power to revoke licenses in some
                  circumstances (when the business of the MFI/RSP is conducted with the intent to
                  defraud any person or is not in accordance with sound business principles or
                  prudent commercial practices, and when the financial position of the company
                  endangers its solvency). SECP has power to initiate action against managers in
                  many situations. The licenses of nonprofit organizations, in particular, are
                  granted subject to regulations SECP may issue, although this has not been done
                  in practice.

                  The interviews conducted for this diagnostic indicate that SECP has been
                  considering using such prerogatives to regulate and supervise MFIs/RSPs
                  registered under Section 42 of the Companies Ordinance. So far, no concrete
                  action has been taken. It is not clear whether bringing MFIs and RSPs under
                  SECP is the best alternative to improve protection of microfinance consumers in
                  Pakistan. Extending SECP’s mandate to regulating and supervising consumer
                  protection in MFIs/RSPs would require supervisory and regulatory capacity
                  (knowledge, expertise, staff, budget) that SECP may not have and may not be
                  able to gain at least in the medium term, despite its regulatory and supervisory
                  mandate regarding insurance and securities markets. Moreover, SECP has
                  historically considered MFPs as charity or welfare concerns with supervision
                  regimes similar to those for nonprofits working in nonfinancial sectors and may
                  not be familiar with financial or market conduct supervision of these institutions.
Pakistan                                                                                            Microfinance Providers


                                 The CCP has expressed interest in influencing the microfinance sector as well,
                                 and even issuing regulations under its broad mandate to foster competition in the
                                 markets (e.g., rules against deceptive marketing and sales practices).

                                 Although regulated MFBs are expected to account for a significant proportion of
                                 the microfinance industry going forward, in terms of loan portfolio, in terms of
                                 client outreach, MFIs and RSPs are expected to remain relevant. 10 Hence, there
                                 is some urgency in setting a clear path for the industry to follow minimum
                                 conduct and consumer protection standards based on long-term goals, with the
                                 objective of protecting borrowers and the overall health of the industry.

                                 2. Assessment: The regulation of MFBs is fragmented, incomplete, and
                                    sometimes unclear with regard to consumer protection. The regime for
                                    MFIs and RSPs is inadequate.

                                 The laws covering MFIs and RSPs are not sufficient to provide protection to
                                 MFI clients. The provincial consumer protection laws are not enforced in
                                 practice and are focused on nonfinancial sectors; the interviews suggest that
                                 microfinance consumers, as in other countries, are largely unaware of such laws
                                 and their impact on their relationship with microfinance providers. Such laws
                                 also do not establish an effective institutional framework in which MFIs/RSPs
                                 would be subject to regulation and supervision, and an effective framework for
                                 resolving grievances of clients.

                                 With regard to MFBs, the regulation pertaining to consumer protection is
                                 fragmented and incomplete. Consumer protection topics are dealt with in
                                 different regulations dedicated to varied topics, such as credit cards, branch
                                 licensing, branchless banking, and payments. Also, the framework lacks depth
                                 and breadth to be more effective and provide a greater level of protection to
                                 MFB clients, while catering to financial inclusion goals. For instance, there are
                                 areas, such as disclosure standards, that have been regulated for the bank sector
                                 but not for MFBs. Overall, the framework issued by SBP to protect payment
                                 services users is more developed than the framework for basic credit and deposit
                                 services. The framework for branchless banking is also more developed (e.g.,
                                 with regard to complaints resolution), although it is particular to such alternative
                                 means of service delivery.

                                 There is no consensus within either SBP or the market with respect to the
                                 applicability, to MFBs, of some regulations issued for scheduled banks. Some
                                 believe circulars and guidelines apply equally to MFBs, others are certain they
                                 do not apply. Some interviews suggest that even when regulations are not
                                 applicable, compliance is checked in practice by SBP’s inspectors, revealing
                                 inconsistency between policy and supervisory decisions inside SBP. Some of the
                                 regulations issued by SBP for banks with potential relevance to microfinance
                                 consumer protection include:
                                      • BPD Guidelines 17, 2004, on Dealing with Customer Complaints
                                      • BPRD Circular 01, 2012, on Minimum Return on Savings Deposits
                                      • CPD Circular 02, 2012, on Sale of Third-Party Products by Banks

10
     Regulating Pak istan’s Non-bank Microfinance Institutions. December 2011. Pak istan Microfinance Network .
54 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                      •   BPRD Circular No. 23, 2003, on service charges on deposit accounts
                      •   BPD Circular No. 30, 2005, on basic bank account
                      •   BPRD Circular No. 7, 2011, on Service Charges on PLS Deposit
                          Accounts
                      •   BPRD Circular No. 12, 2011, which prohibits charging for cash
                          handling/deposit services at counters
                      •   BPD Circular Letter No. 21, 2004, and NPD Circular No. 7, 2006, on
                          unclaimed deposits
                      •   BPD Circular No. 7, 2006, on statement of accounts to PLS/current
                          account holders and basic bank account holders
                      •   Prudential Regulations for Consumer Financing, which, among other
                          things:
                              o Sets limits and rules for consumer loans, including the need to
                                  limit client exposure according to the client’s income
                              o Sets rules for credit card financing, including rules for
                                  unauthorized or wrong transactions
                              o Sets rules for auto loans, housing loans, and personal loans
                      •   Operational Guidelines for Credit Card Business in Pakistan


                  3. Assessment: There is no central registry of microfinance providers
                     (MFIs, RSPs, and MFBs)

                  At present, it is difficult to find a precise number of existing microfinance
                  providers other than MFBs and outside the members of the Pakistan
                  Microfinance Network. There is no central registry of microfinance providers or
                  a common source of information that compiles updated lists from different
                  bodies for the benefit of the general public. Some interviews suggest there are
                  hundreds of unregistered MFIs/RSPs serving low-income populations in
                  Pakistan, but information about them is scarce and their total number is
                  unknown. The size and relevance of the financial cooperative sector is also
                  unknown. The most accessible source of information for the industry are PMN’s
                  reports and website. Although high-quality and relevant, the information is
                  limited to PMN’s membership. SBP publishes some information about MFBs in
                  its quarterly Development Finance Review.

                  The Securities & Exchange Commission of Pakistan does not publish an updated
                  list of MFIs/RSPs registered under the Companies Ordinance. Likewise, SBP
                  does not publish online a list of all licensed MFBs. Although the State Bank of
                  Pakistan Act 1956 (SBP Act) requires SBP to maintain in all its offices and
                  branches an up-to-date list of licensed banks, there is no such requirement for
                  MFBs in the MFB Ordinance. According to the interviews conducted for this
                  diagnostic, SBP maintains a list of licensed MFBs in its offices and any person
                  may obtain access to it upon request. It would be useful if an up-to-date list was
                  readily available online for any person, company, or investor.

                  4. Assessment: SBP’s authority to regulate consumer protection in MFBs
                     does not emanate from a specific mandate and may be questioned.

                  The MFB Ordinance empowers SBP to “systematically monitor and evaluate the
Pakistan                                                           Microfinance Providers


           performance of a MFB to ensure that it is complying with the applicable criteria
           and prudential rules and regulations.” With approval of the federal government,
           SBP may make rules for carrying out the purposes and provisions of the MFB
           Ordinance. SBP is authorized to make regulations to provide for all matters for
           which provision is necessary or expedient, for the purpose of giving effect to the
           ordinance and for efficient conduct of the affairs of an MFB. Any person who
           contravenes any provision of the MFB Ordinance or any rule, regulation, order,
           instruction, or condition made, given, or imposed under the ordinance shall be
           liable to fines (MFB Ordinance, Section 23.3). Some of the fines are determined
           in the ordinance and some are left to SBP’s discretion.

           SBP may cause inspections and evaluations based on receipt of complaints
           (MFB Ordinance, Section 21). Finally, where SBP is satisfied that
              • in the interest of the public;
              • to prevent the affairs of an MFB being conducted in a manner
                 detrimental to the of the depositors or in a manner prejudicial to the
                 interest of the MFB;
              • in furtherance of monetary or financial sector policy; or
              • to secure the proper management of the MFB;

           it is necessary to issue directions to MFBs generally or to any MFB in particular,
           it may issue such directions and MFBs shall comply with them. SBP may also
           remove directors or other managers and make them ineligible for managerial
           positions in any MFB for up to three years, and supersede the board of directors
           of an MFB for up to three years. Based on its broad mandate, SBP is regarded as
           competent to issue consumer protection rules. However, because such powers
           with regard to consumer protection in MFBs are not explicit, they could
           conceivably be questioned and therefore would benefit from greater clarity.

           5. Assessment: There is insufficient interdepartmental coordination inside
              SBP with regard to consumer protection in microfinance.

           The incomplete and fragmented consumer protection framework for MFBs, as
           well as the lack of clarity with regard to applicability of existing regulations, is
           related to insufficient coordination among departments of SBP involved in
           microfinance: the Banking Policy and Regulations Department (BPRD), the
           Agricultural Credit and Microfinance Department (ACMFD), the Banking
           Surveillance Department (BSP), the Banking Inspection Department (BID), and
           the Consumer Protection Department (CPD). This deficiency is intensified by the
           lack of clarity regarding the responsibility (among the CPD, BPRD, and
           ACMFD) for issuing consumer protection regulations for MFBs specifically. The
           ACMFD is responsible for some aspects of microfinance regulation, but is more
           focused on agricultural finance and advocacy of financial inclusion, and has not
           been dealing with consumer protection more specifically (except financial
           literacy). The ACMFD does not conduct supervision, which is done by the BSD
           and BID. The BSD, BID, and CPD do not generate new regulatory proposals
           specifically for MFBs, let alone for consumer protection in MFBs. The
           information generated by the CPD and BID does not seem to be used by the
           BPRD or ACMFD on an ongoing basis to set regulatory priorities. All
           departments, including the ACMFD and CPD, participate in regulatory changes
       56 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                                  proposed by the BPRD or any other department, but there seems to be limited
                                  awareness of or emphasis on consumer protection in microfinance, and a need to
                                  increase consistency between supervision and policy in this area, as well as the
                                  need to have a cohesive, comprehensive framework for consumer protection. The
                                  ACMFD believes that the current regulation provides an adequate level of
                                  protection and that more regulatory action could result in excessive costs for
                                  MFBs, frustrating financial inclusion goals. Striking a balance between
                                  regulatory protection and compliance costs to spur financial inclusion is a
                                  laudable goal, but the current protection framework is not adequate for the
                                  particularities of microfinance clients and operations and may negatively impact
                                  inclusion goals in the medium and long term.

                                  6. Assessment: There are no self-regulatory bodies with regulatory and
                                     enforcement powers.

                                  PMN is the industry association and the main source of information on
                                  microfinance in Pakistan. PMN has 27 members 11 among MFBs, MFIs, and
                                  RSPs. All MFBs (with the exception of the recently licensed Waseela MFB) and
                                  all large MFIs/RSPs are members of PMN. PMN has done a remarkable job in
                                  providing reliable information on its membership, including periodic sector
                                  performance and trend analyses. It also launched its Consumer Protection
                                  Initiative in 2009, with important measures in this regard, including an initiative
                                  to assess compliance with PMN’s Code of Conduct.

                                  To become a member of PMN, an MFP needs to be in operation for at least a
                                  year, have at least 5,000 clients, comply with PMN Code of Conduct, and render
                                  information to PMN on a regular basis. PMN reserves the right to, based on a
                                  performance review, request members to surrender PMN membership. PMN
                                  plays an important advocacy role and has also engaged in projects that benefit
                                  both the industry and its clients, such as the national rollout of a credit
                                  information bureau dedicated to microfinance (MF-CIB) in 2013.

                                  PPAFPPAF is the leading poverty alleviation agency in Pakistan, operating
                                  under the public-private partnership model sponsored by the government of
                                  Pakistan and international development organizations. PPAF is by far the largest
                                  provider of funding to MFPs, covering institutions approximately 50 percent of
                                  the total gross loan portfolio in Pakistan and reaching nearly 900,000
                                  borrowers. 12 PPAF also provides grants for human and institutional development
                                  of MFPs. MFP funding constitutes 57 percent of overall PPAF disbursements. In
                                  2011, PPAFPPAF funded 41 MFPs 13 and has maintained a focus on loans to
                                  women, who account for 64 percent of all borrowers; 79 percent of PPAF’s
                                  portfolio is in rural areas.

                                  PPAFPPAF funding to MFPs is concretized through partnership agreements.
                                  MFPs applying for funds from PPAF must have a track record of at least two

11
     Pak istan Microfinance Network . www.microfinanceconnect.info/. A ccessed January 14, 2013.
 Pak istan Pov erty Allev iation Fund Annual Report 2011 and information prov ided by PPAF (it is not clear how the total loan
12

portfolio in Pak istan was calculated, as not all existing MFIs report their financial data).
13
     Pak istan Pov erty Allev iation Fund Annual Report 2011.
Pakistan                                                                                           Microfinance Providers


                                  years, prove their capacity to grow and expand, have transparent funding
                                  structures and proper accounting systems, show bank statements, have internal
                                  controls and external audits, and be financially sustainable or on the path of
                                  sustainability. They must also have good governance and strong management,
                                  and must not be political, discriminatory, ethnic, sectarian, or exclusionary in
                                  nature. PPAFPPAF also helps MFPs to access commercial funds through its
                                  Program for Increasing Sustainable Microfinance.

                                  Today, there are about 50 MFIs funded by PPAF. PPAF plays an important role
                                  in imposing and monitoring conduct and financial performance standards of its
                                  partners, through its grant and loan arrangements. It has created a code of
                                  conduct based on the Client Protection Principles of the Smart Campaign 14 as
                                  part of its partnership agreements and the Seal of Excellence for Poverty
                                  Outreach and Transformation in Microfinance and has been working to increase
                                  awareness of social performance standards in the industry. According to
                                  information provided, compliance with this and other terms and conditions is
                                  checked annually by PPAF during monitoring activities, which include onsite
                                  inspections and reviews of financial information. PPAF has not identified, in the
                                  course of such reviews, important consumer issues in MFIs or deviations from its
                                  client protection code.

                                  In addition to PPAF and PMN, there are a few consumer associations in
                                  operation in Pakistan, but they do not focus on financial services and are largely
                                  unaware of consumer protection issues in microfinance.

                                  Both PMN and PPAF have been playing relevant roles, but neither can be
                                  considered a self-regulatory body with a formal mandate. PMN’s Code of
                                  Conduct is voluntary as long as PMN membership is also voluntary. Besides,
                                  there is no enforcement mechanism to make sure the code is being implemented
                                  in practice and there are no means to sanction noncompliance. PMN
                                  management has recently announced a plan to increase its role in consumer
                                  protection, including undertaking monitoring activities to assess compliance with
                                  the code of conduct and implementing an ombudsman mechanism for
                                  microfinance clients. 15 However, these activities have stalled due to lack of
                                  agreement among market participants and relevant regulators, regarding whether
                                  an industry association should play such a role, because it could conflict with the
                                  interests of PMN members.

                                  As the apex institution for the microfinance industry, PPAF has some powers to
                                  push for better practices. However, its monitoring actions, although highly
                                  relevant, are unlikely to drive long-term adherence to good business practices
                                  and a desirable level of consumer protection. PPAF’s influence lasts only as long
                                  as the financing instrument. Moreover, PPAF does not cover all unregulated
                                  MFPs and does not have a formal regulatory and enforcement mandate.

                                  7. Assessment: There is limited coordination among relevant bodies on


 The Smart Campaign is a global effort to unite microfinance leaders around the common goal to k eep clients as the driv ing force
14

of the industry . See http://www.smartcampaign.org.
15
     The PPAF has also been inv olv ed in the formulation of the griev ance redressal mechanism.
    58 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                                   consumer protection in microfinance.

                              There is a good level of interaction among SBP, PMN, and PPAF on the
                              development goals and vision for the microfinance sector in Pakistan. For
                              instance, these institutions participate and exchange ideas in regular conferences
                              and other forums (such as the Microfinance Consultative Group – MFCG) about
                              microfinance, and have come to a consensus that the industry should work
                              toward reaching financial and social sustainability.

                              There seems to be much less coordination, however, with respect to consumer
                              protection. For instance, no action has been agreed on by the various players to
                              address the important gaps of the current framework, and no solutions or even
                              palliative arrangements have come out of a coordinated effort. They have not
                              been able to, for example, implement a pragmatic solution, even if temporary, to
                              set common standards for consumer protection in MFPs under SBP, PMN, or
                              PPAF. They have also failed to set up a redress mechanism that covers the
                              majority of microfinance clients. Similarly, they have failed to produce and
                              maintain a list of all (or at least the large majority) of MFPs operating in
                              Pakistan. Finally, there is a surprising lack of awareness by relevant stakeholders
                              about consumer issues in microfinance, which might be related to the lack of
                              information sharing and research on this topic. Some undesirable practices are
                              known to exist (e.g., discrimination against women, pass-on of loans from
                              female borrowers to men, unfair collection practices, overlending, and lack of
                              price disclosure), but there is no concrete coordinated action to conduct an
                              assessment of consumer issues in microfinance or take measures to improve
                              business practices across all types of MFPs. Indeed, some interviews suggested
                              that some bad practices, particularly those related to gender and the lack of
                              recourse mechanisms for microfinance clients, are considered acceptable.

                              Also, there is limited coordination on this subject among SBP, PMN, PPAF,
                              SECP, and CCP. Based on various interviews, SECP and CCP seem to be
                              increasing or planning to increase their roles in microfinance. There are
                              discussions (involving other government agencies) about SECP’s potential role
                              in regulation and supervision of microfinance. Also, the CCP has expressed
                              interest in issuing specific regulations on deceptive marketing and pricing
                              practices. 16 Without a coordinated effort, such endeavors can end in a less than
                              optimal arrangement, and inconsistent or overlapping initiatives.

Recommendation                1. SBP, SECP, PMN, PPAF, and other relevant authorities should coordinate to
                              conduct an assessment and implement the most suitable and pragmatic
                              institutional arrangements and related coordination mechanisms to address gaps
                              resulting from the fragmentation in microfinance consumer protection. 17 The
                              reforms should not only work to extend rights and protections to unregulated
                              markets, but also lay the ground for the most effective oversight and enforcement
                              mechanism, and a range of nonregulatory measures, including consumer
                              awareness. This will take a good level of coordination among the concerned

16
   See, for instance, the CCP’s ruling ov er A TM and switching charges/fees.
http://www.cc.gov.pk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=249&Itemid=151
17
   The SECP formed a Steering Committee on MFIs in Nov ember 2012, consisting of the SECP, SBP, PPA F, and relev ant MFIs to
consider the dev elopment of a v iable regulatory framework for MFIs.
Pakistan                                                                                         Microfinance Providers


                              stakeholders. This will require an adequate forum for discussion. This forum
                              could be the existing Microfinance Consultative Group, or a new body to discuss
                              specifically consumer protection in microfinance. PMN and PPAF should
                              continue to play an important role in setting and implementing minimum
                              standards for microfinance, because they have influence over the large majority
                              of the MFI/RSP market.

                              Addressing the institutional and regulatory gaps is the most important challenge
                              to improve consumer protection in microfinance in Pakistan and sustain the
                              healthy growth of this nascent industry. It will affect all the specific regulatory
                              and nonregulatory recommendations of this report, which are made without
                              specifying under which institutional arrangement such recommendations should
                              be implemented.

                              2. Consideration should be given to clarifying SBP’s authority in consumer
                              protection in MFBs in the next amendment of the MFB Ordinance. It would also
                              be useful to provide consistency in the use of the terms “microfinance
                              institution” versus “microfinance bank,” which are sometimes used
                              interchangeably in the ordinance.

                              3. In consultation with the industry and coordination with PMN and PPAF, SBP
                              should strengthen the regulatory framework for MFBs, with regard to consumer
                              risks. It should consider reviewing the existing regulations according to the
                              specific recommendations in this report, and disclose to the market the entire list
                              of regulations issued by the BPRD and other departments that are applicable to
                              MFBs. SBP should more clearly embrace consumer protection in microfinance
                              as a supervisory matter, and increase interdepartmental coordination and
                              information exchange to set supervisory and regulatory priorities as well. The
                              roles of each department involved in consumer protection and microfinance
                              advocacy, regulation, and supervision should be fully clarified. The mechanisms
                              through which such departments exchange information on a regular basis,
                              particularly for the purposes of setting supervisory priorities in consumer
                              protection issues, should be improved and formalized.

                              4. SBP should publish an up-to-date list of licensed MFBs on its website, to
                              facilitate access to this information and increase awareness of MFBs by the
                              general public and microfinance clients who have access to the Internet.

                              5. A central registry of all MFIs and RSPs in operation in Pakistan, regardless of
                              their legal status, should be created and an updated list should be kept and be
                              available to the general public, at least online.

                              6. MFIs and RSPs should be encouraged or required to register with SECP,
                              under Section 42 of the Companies Ordinance. 18

Good Practice A.2             Code of Conduct for Microfinance Providers


18
   According to our consultations, the PPAF has been encouraging their partners to register under the Companies Ordinance, Section
42.
     60 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                                   a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for microfinance
                                       providers devised in consultation with the nonbank microfinance
                                       industry and with relevant consumer associations and monitored by
                                       a statutory agency or an effective self-regulatory agency.
                                   b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, it should be publicized
                                       and disseminated to the general public.
                                   c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary codes
                                       on matters specific to the industry (credit unions, credit
                                       cooperatives, other microfinance providers).
                                   d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and
                                       disseminated.
Description                   There are no mandatory codes that are monitored by a statutory agency or a self-
                              regulatory body with enforcement powers. Both PMN members and PPAF
                              partners have subscribed to the Client Protection Principles, a principles-based
                              model code adopted by microfinance providers globally. 19 The principles are: (i)
                              appropriate product design and delivery; (ii) prevention of overindebtedness; (iii)
                              transparency; (iv) responsible pricing; (v) fair and respectful treatment of clients;
                              (vi) privacy of client data; and (vii) mechanisms for complaints resolution. All
                              MFBs, being PMN members, have subscribed to the code, but SBP does not
                              have power to enforce voluntary industry codes. There are weaknesses in
                              industry practices related to failures to observe these principles, including those
                              pertaining to breaches of privacy of client data. This indicates that neither PMN,
                              PPAF, nor SBP have effectively monitored adherence to the principles and the
                              voluntary codes.

                              PMN has neither the authority nor the resources to closely monitor each member
                              for compliance with its code of conduct. PMN has made public 20 an upcoming
                              exercise to assess adherence to the Client Protection Principles through member
                              self-evaluations, using a questionnaire based on Smart Campaign’s Getting
                              Started Questionnaire. The data from the self-assessments (which is to be carried
                              out by the members’ own internal and external auditors) would be compiled by
                              PMN to identify weak client protection practices in the industry, track member
                              compliance, and refine the code over time. A first assessment of the industry,
                              based on these self-assessments, is expected by mid-2014. There is no legal basis
                              for addressing or sanctioning noncompliance.

                              The CCP has a Voluntary Competition Compliance Code that provides guidance
                              to businesses operating in Pakistan. It requires them to establish an internal
                              compliance mechanism to observe the provisions of the Competition Act, 2010.
                              In addition to providing a basic framework for compliance, the CCP’s code
                              establishes that the CCP might apply more lenient treatment and reduce penalties
                              to businesses that, though found in breach of the act, show that they have sought
                              compliance with the code in good faith. Businesses interested in adopting the
                              code may do so by registering with the CCP, which has pledged to publish a list


19
   The Client Protection Principles that hav e been incorporated by the PPAF and PMN were dev eloped by the Smart Campaign.
http://www.smartcampaign.org/about-the-campaign/smart-microfinance-and-the-client-protection-principles.
 Implementing an Industry Code of Conduct at Pak istan Microfinance Network . 2010. Smart Notes No. 5. October 2010. Pak istan
20

Microfinance Network .
Pakistan                                                                  Microfinance Providers


                    of participants in its website.
Recommendation      1. The adoption of voluntary codes that are not enforced by a regulatory or self-
                    regulatory body with power to impose sanctions and penalties in case of
                    noncompliance has had limited impact in market practices. SBP should consider
                    checking an MFB’s compliance with industry codes to which they have
                    subscribed, in the course of its supervision, and supporting PMN and PPAF in
                    dissemination efforts to increase consumer awareness of the code. It should, at a
                    minimum, require MFBs’ internal auditors to include this theme in their
                    evaluations, and review the auditors’ reports on a regular basis.

                    2. Initiatives (like PMN’s) that publicize assessments of compliance with
                    industry codes have the potential to spur improvements in market practices, by
                    pinpointing widespread weaknesses or exposing noncompliant entities. SBP
                    should consider undertaking a similar exercise, taking into consideration the
                    existing industry codes to which MFBs subscribe.

                    3. The SPB, PPAF, and PMN should consider coordinating in order to adopt
                    similar assessment methodologies to check compliance with industry codes. The
                    assessment tool developed by PMN could be a starting point for such
                    coordination.
Good Practice A.3   Other Institutional Arrangements
                        a. Whether microfinance providers are supervised by a financial
                           supervisory agency, the allocation of resources between financial
                           supervision and consumer protection should be adequate to enable
                           their effective implementation.
                        b. The judicial system should ensure that the ultimate resolution of any
                           dispute regarding a consumer protection matter with a microfinance
                           provider is affordable, timely, and professionally delivered.
                        c. The supervisory authority for microfinance providers should
                           encourage media and consumer associations to play an active role in
                           promoting consumer protection regarding microfinance providers.

Description         In the case of MFBs, which are regulated and supervised by SBP, there is no
                    indication that the allocation of resources between financial supervision and
                    consumer protection supervision is inadequate. However, as stated in Good
                    Practice A.1, there is limited awareness about consumer protection issues in
                    microfinance, the need to set specific minimum standards for protecting
                    microfinance consumers, and the need to devise a pragmatic and effective
                    solution to the fragmented institutional and legal framework for microfinance.
                    There is also limited coordination among different departments dealing directly
                    or indirectly with microfinance at SBP, as stated earlier, and there is room for
                    improving clarity with regard to the role of each department.

                    Courts are not commonly used by microfinance clients in Pakistan or other
                    developing countries. They generally have lengthy, expensive, and sometimes
                    complicated processes, making formal dispute resolution through courts too
                    burdensome given the amounts involved in microfinance loans, deposits, and
                    services. However, the law has created a potentially workable solution for formal
  62 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                    redress mechanisms in Pakistan, the provincial Consumer Courts. The problem
                    is that such courts exist only in Punjab. Moreover, there seems to be little
                    awareness about them in Punjab. There is also little awareness by authorities of
                    the deterrents for microfinance clients seeking redress in general, and formal
                    redress in particular. Such deterrents require further investigation and will need
                    to be addressed in a coordinated effort involving not only the courts in an
                    awareness campaign, but other empowerment measures.

                    SBP has not systematically engaged with consumer associations and the media
                    with regard to consumer protection in microfinance. In the case of microfinance
                    clients, there would be limited value in involving consumer protection
                    associations at this time, given their focus on goods and other nonfinancial
                    services.
Recommendation      1. Following the example of Punjab, the other provinces that have consumer
                    protection acts should consider implementing their own consumer courts to
                    provide affordable, speedy, professional resolution mechanisms to microfinance
                    consumers (see Good Practice E in this chapter).

                    2. Beyond consumer associations, the concerned stakeholders (SBP, PPAF,
                    SECP, and PMN) should consider engaging with other supporting organizations,
                    such as community groups, mobile network operators, and radio stations, that
                    could help increase awareness of consumer rights when dealing with MFPs,
                    including the right to file complaints with the intent to improve the services
                    received from MFPs.
Good Practice A.4   Licensing of Microfinance Providers
                    All financial institutions that extend any type of credit to households should
                    be registered with a financial supervisory authority.
Description         The MFB Ordinance requires MFBs to register with SECP as companies under
                    Section 42 of the Companies Ordinance, 1984, and be licensed by SBP. MFBs
                    must operate in accordance with the regulations issued by SBP and the terms and
                    conditions of the license granted by SBP. For instance, SBP shall satisfy itself,
                    by an inspection, that the affairs of the MFB are not being, and are not likely to
                    be, conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of its members and present
                    or future customers. SBP has full supervisory powers over MFBs, based on each
                    license granted. In addition, all MFBs need to comply, on an ongoing basis, with
                    prudential requirements such as liquidity levels, capital adequacy ratios, reserves,
                    and other requirements established from time to time by SBP.

                    All MFBs must meet minimum entry requirements. During licensing, SBP
                    reviews the MFB’s business plan, financial projections, and description of the
                    products, services, and delivery channels, which should all be based on market
                    surveys. There is no specific requirement with regard to policies to comply with
                    consumer protection regulations or codes of conduct. In addition, sponsors,
                    board members, and MFB managers are all subject to fit and proper tests. For
                    instance, members of a political party or government officials do not qualify to
                    own an MFB.

                    SBP has provided additional guidance and requirements for MFIs/RSPs applying
Pakistan                                                                                           Microfinance Providers


                               for an MFB license (NGO Guidelines). Usually, only an institution that has
                               demonstrated experience as MFI/RSPs for at least three years can apply for an
                               MFB license. However, SBP states that in exceptional circumstances, it may
                               consider applications from other persons with extensive exposure to or
                               experience with micro, agriculture, or small and medium enterprise lending, or
                               another related area. No person or group will be granted permission to operate
                               more than one MFB. All MFBs shall start operations within six months of the
                               granting of the license. SBP may cancel or suspend an MFB license under certain
                               circumstances.

                               MFIs and RSPs are not subject to licensing or a common registering authority.
                               Only MFIs and RSPs constituted as limited liability companies must register
                               with SECP under Section 42 of the Companies Ordinance (“Associations not for
                               profit”). 21 MFPs registered with SECP are subject to all requirements applicable
                               to other limited liability companies, with the exception that they do not need to
                               use the word “limited” in their names. For example, MFIs are required to file
                               changes to their memorandum/articles of association with SECP within 90 days
                               of the change (Sections 24 and 25). According to Section 42(1), the license is
                               granted on such conditions and subject to such regulations as SECP thinks fit,
                               and those conditions and regulations shall be binding on the association and
                               shall, if SECP so directs, be inserted in the memorandum/articles of the MFI.
                               Although this provides seemingly broad regulatory power, SECP in practice acts
                               exclusively as a registrar, and the conditions and regulations are primarily related
                               to the formalities of the company’s memorandum/articles of association and
                               procedures intended to protect a company’s members and creditors. They do not
                               set financial performance or business conduct standards. The license may at any
                               time be revoked by SECP, if it decides the company is not conducting its
                               business appropriately for a not for profit company.

                               Other MFPs operating under a variety of legal forms under different laws are not
                               required to be licensed or registered by any financial supervisory authority. They
                               are registered by different provincial registry authorities and do not follow
                               common registration, operational, or reporting standards.
Recommendation                 All MFPs in Pakistan should be required to at least register with a financial
                               supervisory authority, which has the power to set requirements for registration,
                               such as for minimum disclosure and financial reporting. Registration does not
                               necessarily mean subjecting all registered entities to the same supervisory
                               intensity, scope, and depth. Most likely, not all MFPs will require prudential
                               supervision, and some will be subject only to monitoring but not to supervision.
                               This approach is adopted, for instance, by the National Bank of Cambodia, as
                               well as by the Bank of Mozambique, which divide the supervision of
                               microfinance providers according to their size, scope, and market relevance.

SECTION B                      DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES



21
  The Companies Ordinance Section 14(1) requires all partnerships or companies consisting of more than 20 persons, formed for
the purpose of carry ing on any business in Pak istan, to be registered as a company under the ordinance. This obligation does not
apply to joint family businesses (Section 14(2)[b]).
  64 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


Good Practice B.1   Information on Customers
                        a. When making a recommendation to a consumer, a microfinance
                           provider should gather, file, and record sufficient information from
                           the consumer to enable the institution to render an appropriate
                           product or service to that consumer.
                        b. The extent of information the microfinance provider gathers
                           regarding a consumer should
                                (i) be commensurate with the nature and complexity of the
                                    product or service either being proposed to or sought by the
                                    consumer; and
                                (ii) enable the institution to provide a professional service to the
                                    consumer in accordance with that consumer’s capacity.
Description         Disclosure regulation for MFBs is highly fragmented and at times unclear. There
                    is not a single regulation dealing with disclosure, or a regulation dealing with
                    consumer protection or transparency issues. Disclosure rules are spread across
                    different regulations dealing with varied topics, such as the Prudential
                    Regulations for Microfinance Banks, the Branch Licensing Guidelines, the
                    Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards (OGCC), and the Branchless Banking
                    Guidelines. These regulations focus on products, channels, or services, not on a
                    topic such as disclosure.

                    MFBs are subject to a few regulations setting minimum information that needs to
                    be gathered and recorded. First, PRMFB, Section 17, sets documentation
                    requirements for anti-money-laundering and combating the financing of
                    terrorism (AML/CFT) purposes. There is no specific requirement that such
                    information be commensurate with the nature and complexity of the product or
                    service, although SBP has implemented a risk-based approach to AML/CFT
                    requirements according to the risk of each account or transaction. The PRMFB
                    determines that MFBs need to obtain copies of a client’s national identity card,
                    passport, or driver’s license, and certify, by stamping the copy, that it was
                    verified against the original document. In remote areas and for microfinance
                    clients who lack identity documents, particularly women, the MFB may establish
                    other appropriate means to verify the identity of the client. This diagnostic is not
                    able to conclude whether such alternative methods are being used in practice and
                    there is some indication that, at least in the case of women, they are not.

                    The Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards (OGCC (Section 2.4), when
                    applicable to MFBs, requires collection of a written application and verification
                    of the client’s identity through reference such as the NADRA database.

                    The client’s needs assessment in a loan operation is usually done by all types of
                    MFPs, through an analysis of the household economy and financial flows, and
                    the economic activity that is in need of financing. Traditionally, an MFP applies
                    a labor-intensive process of visiting the household and the family business, and
                    sometimes conducting interviews with community leaders or acquaintances, to
                    assess the client’s payment capacity and willingness, and financing needs. The
                    depth or even the adoption of all phases of this procedure depends on each MFP,
                    but in all cases less formal documentation is gathered about the client, when
                    compared with traditional banking loan documentation. The documentation and
Pakistan                                                            Microfinance Providers


           background information produced by the microfinance methodology is expected
           to give the MFP a thorough understanding of the client’s needs and capacity, but
           the adherence to the principle of suitability and affordability depends on the
           policies of each MFP.

           PRMFB Regulation 15 requires MFBs to implement appropriate pricing to
           ensure access to affordable financial services by the poor as well as the
           operational and financial sustainability of MFBs. PRMFB Regulation 11 requires
           MFBs to monitor the level of indebtedness of their clients, including by
           obtaining a written declaration from the client detailing the credit facilities he or
           she has, before extending a loan. MFBs must ensure a client’s exposure does not
           exceed her or his repayment capacity. MFBs shall obtain a credit report from
           SBP’s Credit Information Bureau (CIB) or any other appropriate bureau of
           which they are members. Put together, these provisions create a good framework
           for MFBs to assess the client’s payment capacity, without imposing burdensome
           and inflexible procedures on the MFB.

           It is common knowledge in Pakistan that there is multiple borrowing by
           microfinance clients, particularly in urban areas. MFPs tend to concentrate on the
           same areas and focus on the same clients. There is less information available,
           though, as to whether such multiple borrowing is generating overindebtedness.
           Specific research in this field is lacking. The advent of the credit bureau for the
           microfinance sector (see Good Practice D.2 in this chapter) should help shed
           some light on this topic.

           Many stakeholders interviewed believe that multiple borrowing exists because
           MFPs fail to design adequate, suitable products that cater to the specific needs of
           each client. Instead, they tend to offer standardized products and limit
           themselves to assessing the clients’ payment capacity rather than trying to meet
           their financing needs. Even in individual lending (as opposed to group lending),
           the options of products are limited and the terms and conditions are highly
           standardized (including payment schedules). These practices are common in
           Pakistan and elsewhere and are the core of commercial microfinance. However,
           lack of product flexibility and innovation may be causing clients to use multiple
           borrowing sources which, in addition to increasing transaction costs for clients,
           may facilitate over-indebtedness. SBP has introduced some flexibility by
           permitting MFBs to offer larger loans to microenterprises.

           In addition to weak product design, there are some worrisome practices in
           Pakistan that go against the suitability and fair treatment principles. MFIs and
           RSPs (more often) and MFBs (less often) lend primarily to women, for reasons
           such as pressure from donors and set gender-related targets. However, this
           policy faces challenges in cultures where women’s access to finance can be
           exploited by close male relatives or husbands. The client assessment is based on
           the woman’s creditworthiness and the household financial situation, as is usual in
           microfinance. The problem is that the loan is often used in another activity, by a
     66 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                              male related to the female borrower, such as the husband. The pass-on of loans in
                              Pakistan was documented in 2012 World Bank research. 22 The report shows
                              evidence that microfinance loans do not always benefit women borrowers, who
                              are given the loans only to comply with gender targets set by international
                              funders or the provider itself. Men, who need loans, including those who have
                              defaulted in the past, use women to access credit. Between 50 percent and 70
                              percent of microloans to women in Pakistan may actually be used by their male
                              relatives, and a good part may be used in businesses in which the female
                              borrower has no participation or from which she does not benefit indirectly.

                              According to our interviews, all stakeholders acknowledge this practice, which
                              seems to be widely accepted. MFBs, which are under the prudential supervision
                              of SBP, are less prone to follow this practice, given its potential negative impact
                              on the credit risk of the microcredit portfolio, and because the practice infringes
                              the PRMFB requirement for loans to be extended in the name of the
                              entrepreneur, to ensure traceability and reduce multiple borrowing (PRMFB
                              Regulation 10). Indeed, if the beneficiary of the loan is not the registered
                              borrower, the assessment of the borrower’s creditworthiness becomes less
                              relevant. This has consequences for the institution’s risk profile. According to
                              information gathered in this diagnostic, SBP onsite inspectors may be
                              discouraging the pass-on of loans. The PRMFB also subjects borrowers who use
                              their loans for any purpose other than that for which the loan is granted to
                              penalties of fine and imprisonment. The combination of this provision with the
                              prevalent practice puts women MFB borrowers in a very vulnerable position
                              where they bear the risk (and its legal consequences), while not having control
                              over the use of the loan. As a result, MFBs tend to lend more to men, reflecting
                              more closely the reality of Pakistan’s cultural gender bias and the fact that men
                              tend lead family businesses. There are no regulations for MFIs and RSPs besides
                              the broad goal of suitability embedded in the client protection principles.

                              The practice of passing on loans raises important issues not only on suitability of
                              microfinance products and services, but also on the quality of MFPs’ loan and
                              client monitoring systems, and therefore the quality of their financial
                              management and internal controls. And, if the creditworthiness of the real
                              beneficiary of the loan is not being rightly assessed, this practice also contradicts
                              the efforts by PMN to implement a credit bureau for the microfinance sector.
                              This scenario has deep implications for the achievement of the policy goals
                              defined by both SBP and PMN of constructing a fair, healthy, consumer-oriented
                              microfinance sector.

                              In addition to the pass-on of loans, another gender-related practice in Pakistan
                              goes against consumer protection principles advocated by PMN and PPAF. It is
                              not uncommon to find discriminatory loan approval processes and requirements
                              adopted by all types of microfinance providers, including MFBs. It is usually
                              much more difficult for women entrepreneurs, and single and widowed women,
                              to access microfinance loans on an individual basis. One of the discriminatory
                              requirements is for women to present one or two male guarantors, while female

22
  The research, titled “A re Pak istan’s Women Entrepreneurs Being Serv ed by the Microfinance Sector?” can be found at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/282884-1339624653091/8703882-
1339624678024/Format_Pak istan_women_entrepreneurs_10-16-12.pdf.
Pakistan                                                                 Microfinance Providers


                 guarantors are not accepted in most cases. This might be one of the explanations
                 for the relatively low percentage of women microentrepreneurs who are
                 microfinance borrowers in Pakistan (less than 25 percent according to the World
                 Bank study). According to the study, such discriminatory lending practices force
                 Pakistan’s women entrepreneurs to seek informal funding sources such as
                 informal savings, personal assets, and family loans.

                 Another deterrent for women to access and use loans and file complaints with the
                 MFP is the low number of female MFP personnel interacting with the
                 overwhelming majority of female borrowers. Female personnel could listen to
                 and understand women borrowers more easily, helping the MFP to provide more
                 suitable products, avoid discriminatory practices, and monitor the use of the loan
                 to avoid pass-ons. Some interviews suggest that it might be dangerous for female
                 staff to work in some areas, but this is not believed to be a widespread problem.

Recommendation   1. SBP should consider consolidating existing disclosure rules into a
                 comprehensive regulation, to ensure clarity and cohesiveness. It should also
                 consider evaluating whether it is necessary to amend the Branchless Banking
                 Guidelines or other regulations to ensure that disclosure standards apply when
                 branchless banking is use for service delivery.

                 2. The regulation issued by SBP should be more specific on the need for MFBs
                 to design and implement their own internal policies to ensure product suitability
                 and fair treatment, in addition to affordability. This should cover client
                 documentation, loan approval processes, and client monitoring after the loan is
                 granted. The regulation should prohibit discriminatory practices against women
                 and other groups. Adherence to such policies should be checked by SBP in the
                 course of its supervisory review, which needs to be strengthened to reduce or
                 eliminate practices such as the passing on of loans from women borrowers to
                 men. Ideally, MFIs and RSPs should follow similar rules. They should have
                 policies that are consistent with the client protection principles to which they
                 subscribe, particularly the principle of product suitability. They should be subject
                 to some form of monitoring for adherence to such rules and principles, by a
                 financial supervisory authority or other body with formal enforcement powers.

                 3. Resolving the gender issues in microfinance in Pakistan will take more than
                 regulatory measures and will demand a continuous, long-term commitment,
                 including awareness efforts to empower women and discourage men from using
                 loans taken by women. The relevant stakeholders should consider forming a
                 working group to deal with gender and protection issues in microfinance,
                 involving the industry, regulators, policymakers, and representatives of civil
                 society.

                 4. Additional research on the reasons, forms, and consequences of multiple
                 borrowing should be conducted, to help SBP, PMN, PPAF, and MFPs in their
                 efforts to avoid over-indebtedness. A definition of over-indebtedness could also
                 be explored, to serve as a reference.
  68 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                    5. MFPs should exercise greater flexibility to offer differentiated products that fit
                    the financing needs of clients, without jeopardizing the business case of each
                    offer and the company’s financial sustainability. MFPs should also, to the extent
                    possible, hire, train, and support more female staff, because a large share of
                    clients are women and the interaction between staff and customers could run
                    more smoothly. Clients may feel more comfortable with female staff.
Good Practice B.2   Affordability
                        a. When a microfinance provider makes a recommendation regarding
                           a product or service to a consumer, the product or service it offers to
                           that consumer should be in line with the need of the consumer.
                        b. Sufficient information on the product or service should be provided
                            to the consumer to enable him or her to select the most suitable and
                            affordable product or service.
                        c. When a microfinance provider offers a new credit product or service
                            that significantly increases the amount of debt assumed by the
                            consumer, the consumer’s creditworthiness should be properly
                            assessed.
Description         In microfinance, financial advice about products and services is not common,
                    particularly in markets dominated by group lending methodology. MFPs usually
                    limit themselves to guiding the client on how to use the loan, the client’s rights
                    and obligations, the payment schedule, the payment method, and the
                    consequences of defaulting. This is consistent with the lower level of
                    sophistication of the microfinance clientele and the simplicity and inflexibility of
                    microfinance products and services.

                    Although MFIs and RSPs are not subject to any enforceable regulation, the
                    PRMFB Regulation 30 requires MFBs to help the public make informed
                    decisions. MFBs shall make adequate efforts to educate their clients on important
                    terms and conditions of all their products, including loans and savings, while
                    fully disclosing the lending and deposit rates in annualized percentage terms in
                    signed contracts and documents. The MFB staff should also read these terms in
                    front of their clients. MFBs must display important terms and conditions
                    prominently at their branches. In addition, MFBs shall educate customers about
                    the charges as well as customer’s obligations in respect of other services such as
                    ATMs and microinsurance (PRMFB Regulation 30).

                    MFPs in Pakistan present varied levels of transparency and effectiveness in their
                    disclosure practices. Some MFPs post prices, terms, and conditions visibly in
                    their offices and in their marketing materials, whereas others do not. Some use
                    interest rates over the declining loan balance, whereas others use flat interest
                    rates. Some MFPs use an effective interest rate containing all charges and costs
                    incurred by the borrower in a loan operation (e.g., loan application fee, monthly
                    account handling fees, and the insurance premium). Others disclose rates that
                    include only a few items and disclose other items separately or do not disclose
                    them at all. Some do not disclose to the customer that the loan is covered by an
                    insurance policy whose premium is being charged directly to the client.
Pakistan                                                                                                Microfinance Providers


                                 There are no standardized formats and formulas for all MFPs to follow, and no
                                 specific standard formulas to calculate and disclose costs and returns of
                                 microfinance products and services. The lack of industry standards makes it
                                 difficult for microfinance clients to compare prices and conditions across
                                 different providers.

                                 PMN is coordinating with PPAF to conduct a review of product pricing practices
                                 in Pakistan, with MFTransparency. 23 The exercise aims to provide important
                                 information on how and how much MFPs charge their clients. This could support
                                 additional guidance, regulatory, and supervisory efforts toward improved
                                 transparency and disclosure. For instance, based on the findings of
                                 MFTransparency, PMN plans to implement standard formulas and a standard
                                 format for price disclosure within its membership. SBP has not created a specific
                                 regulatory measure to institute standard disclosure formats, and believes the
                                 existing regulation is sufficient to provide an adequate level of protection to
                                 consumers. PPAF also does not require any standardized disclosure formats by
                                 its partners.

                                 Similarly, there are no standard formats for loan agreements and other consumer
                                 contracts, with the exception of rules for credit card contracts, set out in the
                                 OGCC, and the standards for payment services set out in the Payment Systems
                                 and Electronic Funds Transfer Act, 2007 Sections 26 and 29.

                                 Loan agreements and account opening agreements are often long documents,
                                 with small print and complex language, making it very difficult for the average
                                 microfinance customer to understand. Whether contracts need to be long will
                                 depend on legal traditions, but in Pakistan, there are no common standards for
                                 highlighting important terms and conditions in long contracts. This is done, for
                                 instance, in Mexico, where the most relevant terms of the usually extremely long
                                 contracts need to be bolded and in much bigger font, so the consumer can easily
                                 identify the key terms of the operation. 24 Lastly, there are no regulations or
                                 standards with regard to minimum and prohibited clauses in the consumer
                                 agreements. Standards for consumer contracts for payment services are set in the
                                 Payment and Electronic Funds Transfer Act, Section 30. This states that the
                                 language must be clearly understood by the consumer and must include the
                                 consumer’s liability for unauthorized transactions, the phone number for the
                                 fraud department, what types of transactions the consumer is allowed to conduct
                                 and related charges, the consumer’s right to stop payment of preauthorized
                                 transfers and to receive information, and the liabilities of the service provider.

                                 The CCP is interested in regulating consumer contracts in the financial sector,
                                 defined as those standardized contracts over which the consumer usually has
                                 little influence. This has already been done in other sectors. Regulators and
                                 industry bodies will need to coordinate to set common and appropriate standards

23
   MicroFinance Transparency is an international nongov ernmental organization that promotes transparency by facilitating
microfinance pricing disclosure, offering policy adv isory serv ices, and dev eloping training and education materials for all mark et
stak eholders. http://www.mftransparency.org.
24
     In Mexico, these standards are set by the financial consumer protection agency , Condusef. http://www.condusef.gob.mx.
  70 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                    in the whole microfinance industry, to avoid issuing conflicting guidance.

                    The microfinance methodology traditionally relies on the promise of future
                    larger loans as an incentive for loan repayment. It is expected that, when offering
                    a bigger loan to a client, all MFPs will reassess the client’s payment capacity. In
                    practice, this varies from MFP to MFP; some may decide not to conduct the
                    assessment again, particularly when the next bigger loan is within the
                    indebtedness capacity originally set for that client. As a result, MFPs may
                    overlook new loans and other financing that the client may have contracted in the
                    meantime. MFIs and RSPs do not need to follow any regulation, but are
                    supposed to abide by the broad client protection principles related to
                    affordability and suitability embedded in the codes of conduct to which they
                    subscribe.

                    There is no specific rule for MFBs offering new bigger loans to existing clients,
                    but the regulation requires them to assess the client’s capacity in all cases. The
                    intensity and depth of such assessment will depend on the MFB’s own internal
                    policies, but all MFBs are subject to the same minimum requirements and to
                    SBP’s supervisory review. Also, MFBs must develop policies, to be approved by
                    their board of directors, for rescheduled and restructured loans (PRMFB
                    Regulation 13).


Recommendation      1. The concerned authorities (at minimum, SBP, SECP, and CCP), in
                    coordination with PMN and PPAF, should develop minimum common standards
                    disclosing price and other terms and conditions, including the need to post
                    relevant information in places of business, consumer contracts, and marketing
                    materials. SBP may wish to evaluate whether it is necessary to amend the
                    Branchless Banking Guidelines or other regulations to ensure disclosure
                    standards are also applicable when branchless banking channels are used.
                    The standards should be common for all MFPs, regardless of whether they are
                    regulated by a financial authority or not, to allow consumers to compare across
                    different providers. There should be some level of standardization of terms and
                    expressions used by MFPs in marketing materials and in their consumer
                    agreements. There should be common methods and formulas to calculate
                    effective interest rates and rates of return. It is preferable that MFPs use the
                    declining balance method to charge interest from their borrowers, which is a
                    much fairer method than the flat rate. There should be explicit guidance with
                    regard to prohibited contractual clauses, including in accessory products such as
                    credit life insurance, and minimum clauses that should be in all contracts.

                    2. All MFPs should be required to reassess the payment capacity of the borrower
                    when offering a new larger loan, at least by consulting a credit bureau, to make a
                    sound judgment regarding the borrower’s indebtedness level and any change
                    since the client’s creditworthiness was last assessed.

                    3. Authorities should devise an oversight scheme to effectively monitor MFPs’
                    compliance with the recommended minimum standards, including by MFIs and
Pakistan                                                                    Microfinance Providers


                    RSPs.
Good Practice B.3   Cooling-off Period
                        a. For financial products or services with a long-term savings
                             component, or those subject to high-pressure sales contracts (unless
                             explicitly waived by the consumer in writing), a microfinance
                             provider should provide the consumer a cooling-off period of a
                             reasonable number of days (at least three to five business days)
                             immediately following the signing of an agreement between the
                             institution and the consumer.
                         b. On his or her written notice to the microfinance provider during the
                             cooling-off period, the consumer should be permitted to cancel or
                             treat the agreement as null and void without penalty to the
                             consumer of any kind.
Description         The practice of allowing a cooling-off period is not as common in microfinance
                    as in banking and insurance services. This is a reality not only in Pakistan, but
                    globally, including in more developed markets, such as Bolivia and Peru. This is
                    related to the more usual short-term, inflexible nature of microfinance loans and
                    other financing instruments offered by microfinance providers. It is also related
                    to the prevalence, in some markets including Pakistan, of group lending
                    methodologies, which make cooling-off periods more difficult to implement
                    without increasing the costs and the uncertainty considerably, or at least breaking
                    the logic of the group lending methodology. The interviews conducted for this
                    diagnostic indicate that some MSPs offer a cooling-off period of up to two
                    weeks, allowing the client to cancel a loan agreement without incurring
                    additional penalties other than losing the loan application fee and any other
                    upfront fee charged by the MSP. However, this practice seems ad hoc and
                    informal, adopted in case the client seeks cancellation, rather than being part of
                    the disclosed terms and conditions of the loan agreements. This subject has not
                    found consensus in publications about microfinance consumer protection
                    regulation globally, but there are strong arguments in favor of establishing
                    cooling-off periods and procedures—at least for individual lending, and for other
                    types of services provided by MSPs, such as deposit accounts, insurance, mobile
                    money accounts, and investment products, if any.

                    For cooling-off periods to be effective in microfinance, they need to be longer
                    than three to five days, given the longer distances microfinance clients typically
                    need to travel to get to the microfinance provider should that be necessary, and
                    also the relatively higher opportunity costs in spending partial or full working
                    days in dealing with financial services providers to cancel a transaction. Also, the
                    procedures for customers to cancel their operations during the cooling-off period
                    should not be unduly burdensome or complex. Clients should be able to easily
                    request cancellation, without being dragged into unnecessary bureaucratic
                    procedures (e.g., writing a signed letter to the head office to explain the reasons
                    for desisting) and should be in consonance with the methods and channels used
                    by the MFP to sell the product (e.g., if clients are able to buy a product through a
                    retail or mobile money agent and sign electronic contracts, they should also be
                    able to cancel their operations using the same channels and electronic means).
  72 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


Recommendation      The concerned authorities and stakeholders may wish to consider requiring
                    MFPs to offer a cooling-off period on their loan, insurance, and savings services,
                    during which clients can cancel the operation without any penalty or additional
                    fee. The period should allow enough time for the microfinance client to benefit
                    from it in practice, taking into consideration the context in which the products
                    are offered and in which the clients operate. The establishment of a common
                    cooling-off period and guidance for its implementation could be agreed to among
                    SBP, PMN, PPAF, and industry. An oversight arrangement for monitoring
                    compliance could be developed. The existence and terms of cooling-off periods
                    should be effectively disclosed to clients in a timely manner.


Good Practice B.4   Bundling and Tying Clauses
                       a. As much as possible, microfinance providers should avoid the use of
                           tying clauses in contracts that restrict the choice of consumers.
                        b. In particular, whenever a borrower is required by a microfinance
                            provider to purchase any product, including an insurance policy, as
                            a precondition for receiving a loan, the borrower should be free to
                            choose the provider of the product and this information should be
                            made known to the borrower.
                        c. Also, whenever a microfinance provider contracts with a merchant
                            as a distribution channel for its credit contracts, no exclusionary
                            dealings should be permitted.
Description         Section 3 of the Competition Act, 2007, prohibits tie-ins—where sales of the
                    service are made conditional on the purchase of another service—when it
                    prevents, restricts, reduces, or distorts competition. There are no specific
                    requirements by SBP, besides Regulation 30 of the PRMFB, which states that
                    MFBs are required to educate their customers about the charges as well as a
                    customer’s obligations in respect of services like microinsurance. Likewise,
                    PPAF does not set common standards for the disclosure of compulsory credit life
                    insurance and there is no specific guidance from PMN.

                    Requiring microfinance borrowers to acquire an insurance policy to cover the
                    debt amount in case of the borrower’s death (and other situations, depending on
                    the insurance policy) is a widely adopted practice in Pakistan and other
                    countries. The credit life insurance premium is typically 1 to 2 percent of the
                    loan value, paid once with the payment of the loan application fee and other
                    upfront costs imposed on the client. In Pakistan, there is little transparency of the
                    items included in the upfront costs, including bundled insurance. Some MFPs do
                    not even disclose to their client that they are paying an insurance premium. There
                    is also lack of transparency, in some instances, with regard to the terms and
                    condition of the insurance coverage, which vary depending on the insurance
                    provider. Moreover, the diversity of types of insurance coverage used by
                    different providers, in a context where disclosure is not standardized to facilitate
                    comparison, makes it hard for microfinance clients to shop around or refuse
                    insurance coverage if she or he has another policy covering the same events (not
                    very common, but possible), or to decline to enter into the loan agreement
                    altogether, because of the insurance cost.
Pakistan                                                                                          Microfinance Providers



                              Lastly, the insurance coverage is often tied to an exclusive arrangement with a
                              particular insurance provider, and the client is not free to choose the insurer. In
                              some cases, the MFP does not even hire an insurance company; instead, it builds
                              up a fund to self-insure and requires the client to accept the coverage in order to
                              get the loan. This is also a common practice in microfinance in other countries,
                              although less common than making an arrangement with an insurer. However,
                              there are a very few cases where, in a more competitive microinsurance market,
                              the microfinance provider is able to offer options with regard to the insurer, or at
                              least the coverage type.

                              The use of retailers for the distribution of microfinance services is an emerging
                              market in Pakistan. MFBs are more actively involved in different types of
                              branchless banking, including the use of agent networks. There are no regulatory
                              obstacles for MFBs to share their agents with other MFBs or even other financial
                              institutions, but the current practice is to have exclusivity arrangements between
                              agent networks and MFBs, due to agreements between the MFB and the agent
                              network manager (often a mobile network operator). Given the initial stage of
                              development of agent networks in Pakistan, it is premature to take any regulatory
                              action to encourage the sharing of retail networks by several MFPs. Prohibiting
                              exclusive arrangements could jeopardize the initial investment in and further
                              development of such networks.


Recommendation                1. SBP should establish and implement a standardized disclosure format (see
                              Good Practice B.5) that includes and increases transparency of all upfront fees,
                              including bundled insurance. MFBs should be required to disclose the basic
                              terms and conditions of mandatory credit life insurance. MFBs should also be
                              required to check whether the client has any other insurance policy with similar
                              coverage, to avoid unnecessary double coverage and related costs. SBP should
                              consider working with SECP’s insurance department to (i) conduct an
                              assessment of the microinsurance industry (credit life insurance and others) to
                              decide whether it is feasible to require MFBs to provide more than one option for
                              insurance coverage when signing microcredit agreements; and (ii) to review
                              other relevant practices in microinsurance to protect the client, such as
                              prohibiting or at least minimizing exclusions in policies and simplifying
                              policies. 25

                              2. Similar standards and practices should be adopted by MFIs and RSPs, and an
                              effective monitoring scheme to ensure compliance with the standards should be
                              developed.


Good Practice B.5             Key Facts Statement
                                    a. Microfinance providers should have a Key Facts Statement for each

25
   The SECP issued draft microinsurance regulations that touch on this and many other relev ant points for protecting microinsurance
clients. Subsequently , SECP has issued Microinsurance Rules in February 2014. See Microinsurance Rules at
http://www.secp.gov.pk/notification/pdf/2014/SRO_116_Microinsurance_Rules_20140219.pdf and the consultation paper at
http://secp.gov .pk/corporatelaws/doc/MI_Consultation_09102012.docx
  74 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                            type of account, loan, or other products or services.
                        b. The Key Facts Statement should be written in plain language,
                             summarizing in a page or two the key terms and conditions of the
                             specific financial product or service, and allowing consumers the
                             possibility of easily comparing products offered by different
                             institutions.
Description         MFBs are subject to a few disclosure and sales practice requirements, whereas
                    MFIs and RSPs are not subject to any regulation outside the very broad
                    principles of the provincial consumer protection laws. For instance, the Punjab
                    Consumer Protection Act creates the Duty of Disclosure for service providers
                    (Section 16), but it is not specific enough to be relevant for this analysis.

                    MFBs are required by the PRMFB to assist the public in making informed
                    decisions and educate clients on the terms and conditions of products, including
                    loans and savings. Lending rates must be disclosed as an annualized percentage
                    rate. MFBs must also display important terms and conditions of the products on
                    the entrance or window of their branches and educate consumers on the charges
                    as well as obligations regarding services like ATM and microinsurance. The
                    Payment Systems and Electronic Funds Transfer Act, 2007 Section 29, sets
                    requirements for disclosure of fees and charges in electronic payment channels,
                    such as ATMs. There is no specific guidance on the type and format (beyond
                    being an annualized percentage rate) of the disclosures required by regulation.
                    There is no mention of other types of disclosure, such as the contact number for
                    complaints (except for credit cards in the OGCC), the ability of the client to
                    repay a loan before maturity, the existence of a cooling-off period, or
                    information about compulsory microinsurance.

                    In practice, the quality of the information provided to consumers and the
                    materials used by MFIs, RSPs, and MFBs vary widely across the industry,
                    making it difficult for clients to have a full understanding of the cost, terms, and
                    conditions of products, and to compare different options. Disclosure of effective
                    rates or total cost of loans is rare, as is the full disclosure of upfront costs and
                    other important terms and conditions, such as mandatory insurance coverage.
                    Key Facts Statements are not used in Pakistan. There are no requirement by SBP
                    for MFBs to use a common, standardized statement, to allow the client easy
                    access to the key characteristics of microfinance products. Likewise, there are no
                    standards set by PPAF or PMN.

                    There appears to be inadequate awareness, by SBP, SECP, and PPAF of the
                    weaknesses in disclosure practices in microfinance, how they affect clients, and
                    what could be done to improve the level of client protection. As mentioned
                    previously, the MFTransparency pricing study being coordinated by PMN will
                    shed some light about disclosure practices in Pakistan and will provide valuable
                    information for future minimum disclosure standards. So far there has been no
                    concerted effort by relevant authorities and industry representatives to develop
                    common disclosure formats such as Key Facts Statements (KFSs).
Recommendation      1. All MFPs should strengthen disclosure by developing and adopting common
                    KFSs for the most relevant microfinance products. SBP should develop
                    regulations requiring a standardized KFS for MFBs. All other MFPs should
Pakistan                                                                   Microfinance Providers


                    adopt KFSs, with support and pressure from PMN and PPAF. KFSs should have
                    plain language and highlight the key characteristics of the main microfinance
                    products, using standard methodologies to calculate and disclose total costs and
                    returns. KFSs should be handed or made available through other forms (e.g.,
                    electronically) to the client at the appropriate moment, before contract signing.
                    Clients should be able request additional guidance from MFP personnel to fully
                    understand the KFSs. It is important to note that a KFS model that works for
                    commercial banking customers will not necessarily work for microfinance
                    clients. Ideally, the KFS for microfinance will be developed in consultation with
                    the industry, and will also be consumer-tested, through field surveys. There
                    should be an effective monitoring scheme to check whether KFSs are being used
                    and in the right manner.

                    2. SBP should evaluate whether it is necessary to amend the Branchless Banking
                    Guidelines or other regulations to ensure that Key Facts Statements are properly
                    used when branchless banking schemes and other third parties (such as sales
                    agents) are used for service delivery.


Good Practice B.6   Advertising and Sales Materials
                        a. Microfinance providers should ensure that their advertising and
                            sales materials and procedures do not mislead customers.
                        b. All advertising and sales materials should be easily readable and
                            understandable by the general public.
                        c. Microfinance providers should be legally responsible for all
                            statements made in advertising and sales materials (i.e., be subject to
                            the penalties under the law for making any false or misleading
                            statements).
Description         With regard to MFBs, the only specific applicable regulation on marketing and
                    sales material is in the Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards, Section 1 (see
                    description in Good Practice C.4).

                    The Competition Ordinance, 2007, Section 10, prohibits deceptive marketing,
                    defined as including the following:
                        • Distribution of false or misleading information to consumers, including
                            the distribution of information lacking a reasonable basis or related to
                            the price, character, method or place of production, property, suitability
                            for use, or quality of goods; and
                        • False or misleading comparison of goods in the process of advertising.

                    The Punjab Consumer Protection Act describes some prohibited unfair practices,
                    such as false, deceptive, or misleading representation (Section 21 and 22). There
                    are no regulations from SBP setting minimum standards for advertising and sales
                    materials used by MFBs, and no guidance from PMN and PPAF, other than the
                    general client protection principles to which MFIs and RSPs subscribe.

                    The above framework provides only principles-based guidance, but there are no
  76 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                    specific regulatory requirements such as the calculations and type of price
                    disclosure, and disclosures about cooling-off periods, important contact numbers
                    (e.g., the complaints handling unit at the MFP), and so forth.
Recommendation      1. SBP should issue specific regulations dealing with advertising and sales
                    materials to prohibit misleading statements and require full disclosure of key
                    product characteristics and costs, to the extent possible, using standardized
                    formulas and formats consistent with those used in Key Facts Statements and
                    consumer contracts. SBP should consider incorporating some useful provisions
                    from the Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards.

                    2. MFIs and RSPs should be subject to similar standards to those applicable to
                    MFBs.

                    3. All sectors should be subject to a monitoring scheme that ensures effective
                    enforcement of the standards.
Good Practice B.7   General Practices
                    Specific rules on disclosure and sales practices should be included in the
                    microfinance providers’ code of conduct and monitored by the relevant
                    supervisory authority.
Description         There are no specific rules in the Client Protection Code of Conduct adopted by
                    PMN members and the code adopted by PPAF partners. A principles-based code
                    is limited to encourage transparency, without being specific on desirable or
                    prohibited market and sales practices. Moreover, neither PMN nor PPAF have
                    statutory power to enforce their codes.


Recommendation      1. When specific common standards for disclosure in microfinance are
                    developed, as recommended in Good Practices 1-6, the principles-based codes
                    adopted by PMN and PPAF should be updated and complemented to require
                    completeness, accuracy, and fairness of marketing and sales materials.

                    2. SBP should consider monitoring compliance with industry codes, by MFBs.

                    3. All MFPs, including MFBs, should be subject to an effective and formal
                    monitoring scheme that ensures compliance with such codes.
Good Practice B.8   Disclosure of Financial Situation
                        a. The relevant supervisory authority should publish annual public
                            reports on the development, health, strength, and penetration of the
                            microfinance providers, either as a special report or as part of the
                            disclosure and accountability requirements under the law that
                            governs these.
                        b. Microfinance providers should be required to disclose their financial
                            information to enable the general public to form an opinion
                            regarding the financial viability of the institution.

Description         The MFB Ordinance requires MFBs to have their accounts audited annually by
                    auditors approved by SBP according to the Chartered Accountants Ordinance,
Pakistan                                                                  Microfinance Providers


                    1961. Within three months of the end of the financial year, the audited accounts
                    shall be published in a daily newspaper of wide circulation in the area of
                    operation of the MFBs, and be submitted to SBP. SBP does not publish financial
                    reports of MFBs, but publishes consolidated financial and performance analysis
                    of the microfinance sector in its Development Finance Newsletter. MFBs do not
                    appear as a separate segment in SBP’s Financial Stability Report, which focuses
                    on banks and development financial institutions. In addition to these public
                    disclosures, MFBs are subject to regulatory reporting requirements set in the
                    PRMFB (Regulation 27), such as biweekly cash reserve requirements and
                    statutory liquidity requirement statements, along with a statement of affairs, and
                    quarterly financial data.

                    MFIs and RSPs registered under Section 42 of the Companies Ordinance are
                    required to submit financial reports on an annual basis to SECP. They are not
                    required to publish this information and SECP does not publish it and does not
                    produce any analytical report about these markets. MFIs constituted under other
                    laws, and therefore not registered with SECP, do not follow any regulatory or
                    legal disclosure requirement. PPAF partners are required to report their
                    financials to PPAF, but this information is not made public. MFIs registered
                    under the Voluntary Social Welfare Agencies Ordinance, 1961, must file their
                    financial statements and annual report with the Registration Authority at the
                    close of each financial year. They should also publish such documents. The
                    annual report should include information on the following:
                        • General management
                        • Nature and extent of services rendered in the year
                        • Program for next year
                        • Audited accounts

                    The largest MFIs operating in Pakistan report their financial information to the
                    Mix Market, but this reporting is voluntary and not based on any legal
                    requirement.

                    Finally, PMN requires its members, regardless of being MFBs, RSPs, or MFIs,
                    to report their financial and social performance information on a yearly basis.
                    Based on this material, PMN provides the richest source of information on the
                    microfinance sector in Pakistan.

Recommendation      All MFPs should be required to report to a financial authority at least once every
                    year, and such information should be made available to the general public
                    through easily accessible platforms such as the Internet, and through analytical
                    reports and studies conducted or commissioned by a designated financial
                    authority.


SECTION C           CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE


Good Practice C.1   Statements
                        a. Unless a microfinance provider receives a customer’s prior signed
     78 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                                       authorization to the contrary, the microfinance provider should
                                       issue, and provide the customer with, a monthly statement regarding
                                       every account the microfinance provider operates for the customer.
                                    b. Each such statement should (i) set out all transactions concerning
                                       the account during the period covered by the statement; and (ii)
                                       provide details of the interest rate(s) applied to the account during
                                       the period covered by the statement.
                                    c. Each credit card statement should set out the minimum payment
                                       required and the total interest cost that will accrue if the cardholder
                                       makes only the required minimum payment.
                                    d. Each mortgage or other loan account statement should clearly
                                       indicate the amount paid during the period covered by the
                                       statement, the total outstanding amount still owed, the allocation of
                                       payment to the principal and interest, and, if applicable, the up-to-
                                       date accrual of taxes paid.
                                    e. A microfinance provider should notify a customer of long periods of
                                       inactivity of any account of the customer and provide reasonable
                                       final notice in writing to the customer if the funds are to be
                                       transferred to the government.
                                    f. When a customer signs up for paperless statements, such statements
                                       should be in an easy-to-read and readily understandable format.
Description                    MFBs are not required to provide monthly statements to clients on their deposit
                               or loan accounts. The PRMFB is silent with regard to statement of accounts. The
                               Branch Licensing Guidelines, Section 9.4, requires MFBs to provide a statement
                               of accounts to their clients at regular intervals, even if the services are rendered
                               through mobile branches. There is no specific requirement for statements to be
                               paper-based, and their frequency is also up to each MFB. The Payment and
                               Electronic Funds Transfer Act, Section 33, requires institutions to provide a
                               monthly statement of payment accounts, which can be electronic. Such
                               statements should clearly set forth the balances and the account at the beginning
                               and the close of the period, and the amount of any fee charged. However, this
                               requirement does not seem to apply to deposit and loan accounts handled by
                               MFBs.

                               Although it is not clear whether BPD Circular No. 8, 2006, applies to MFBs, in
                               practice most MFBs follow the requirement for banks to provide a statement of
                               accounts every six months. MFBs offering mobile phone–based services usually
                               offer more frequent statements in electronic form. There are no specific
                               requirements with regard to the items that need to be in the statements or to the
                               language that is used (e.g., language that is easily understood, and if/how
                               abbreviations are permitted).

                               MFIs and RSPs are not allowed to issue credit cards, but MFBs are. They seem
                               to be subject to the OGCC. 26 The OGCC, Section 4, requires issuers to send a
                               monthly statement of account to credit card holders at least 15 days before the
                               due date. It is allowed to use electronic formats, if they have appropriate security


 According to interv iews, the Operational Guidelines for Credit Card Business in Pak istan, issued by SBP’s Pay ment Sy stem
26

Department, apply to MFBs, despite the fact that the guidelines do not mention MFBs at all.
Pakistan                                                                   Microfinance Providers


                    measures. In case the client lodges a complaint that the statement has not been
                    sent, the issuer is required to send a statement in no more than two days. In
                    addition to statements, credit card issuers need to send monthly bills, even in
                    cases of zero billing. The monthly statement must have, at a minimum


                        •   a breakdown of total amount due and the minimum amount payable;
                        •   annualized rate of interest and interest amount along with the method of
                            calculation;
                        •   acceptable modes of payment, expected number of days each mode takes
                            to clear, and handling charges, if any; and
                        •   due date for payment.


                    In practice, there seem to be many problems in using the postal services in
                    Pakistan, which are considered highly unreliable. Alternatively, banks and MFBs
                    have been using expensive courier services to mail statements to clients. This
                    justifies in part the choice of biannual statements rather than monthly. However,
                    to compensate for this low frequency, MFBs should offer free monthly
                    statements in some electronic format, if such means are already being used by
                    the customers to repay their loans or conduct other transactions.

                    There are no common standards being followed by MFIs and RSPs for account
                    statements. Because they do not offer deposit accounts and long-term products,
                    they usually do not offer any statements to their clients, and in a group lending
                    methodology this type of information is handled at the group level, with support
                    from the loan agents. It is common for MFPs offering only loans to substitute
                    account statements for informal methods such as “passbooks” in which the client
                    or group writes down the quantity being paid and the quantity being kept as
                    savings (if any). According to the microfinance technology, these informal
                    instruments serve the purpose of educating borrowers on financial management
                    and control.


Recommendation      1. SBP should issue a specific regulation to set some standards for the language,
                    content, frequency, and format of account statements, to ensure they are frequent
                    enough, readable, complete, and easily understood by microfinance clients. Such
                    standards are likely to be different from those applicable to banks, given the
                    nature of the microfinance business and the level of sophistication of
                    microfinance clients. MFBs should be encouraged to provide account statements
                    more frequently than every six months. However, given the practical challenges
                    and the costs of dealing with postal and courier services in Pakistan, there should
                    be flexibility for MFBs to use electronic channels.

                    2. MFIs and RSPs should be subject to common minimum standards similar to
                    those applicable to MFBs. SBP, PMN, and PPAF should coordinate to develop
                    such standards whenever they are relevant. An effective monitoring scheme
                    should be created to ensure compliance with the standards.
Good Practice C.2   Notification of Changes in Interest Rates and Noninterest Charges
  80 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                        a. A customer of a microfinance provider should be notified in writing
                            by the microfinance provider of any change in
                                (i) the interest rate to be paid or charged on any account of the
                                    customer as soon as possible; and
                                (ii) a noninterest charge on any account of the customer a
                                    reasonable period in advance of the effective date of the
                                    change.
                        b. If the revised terms are not acceptable to the customer, he or she
                             should have the right to exit the contract without penalty, provided
                             such right is exercised within a reasonable period.
                        c. The microfinance provider should inform the customer of the
                             foregoing right whenever a notice of change under paragraph a. is
                             made by the institution.
Description         As mentioned in previous items, disclosure regulation is fragmented, spread
                    across regulations dealing with services, channels, and other topics. These
                    regulations have some provisions related to notifications of price and cost and
                    changes in them. For instance, the Branch Licensing Guidelines prohibit MFBs
                    using mobile ATMs to impose extra charges for transactions in this channel,
                    other than the existing charges for ATM transactions. Also, MFBs, with relation
                    to customers from other banks using their ATMs, cannot charge more than the
                    agreed fee for interswitch transactions (about PRs 15). The Payment and
                    Electronic Funds Act also protects the consumer’s right to be notified of relevant
                    changes at least 21 days prior to the effective date of any material change in any
                    term or condition of the consumer’s account. Also, the Operational Guidelines
                    for Credit Cards requires revisions in the agreed terms and conditions or removal
                    or withdrawal of an incentive to be communicated to the customer at least 30
                    days before the actual effective date.

                    There are no provisions regarding the customer’s foregoing right. There are no
                    specific provisions related to rates paid or charged to deposit accounts at MFBs.
                    There is no consensus in the market on whether the existing rules for scheduled
                    banks related to interest paid on customer accounts apply equally to MFBs (e.g.,
                    a minimum rate of return on savings accounts).

                    The Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards, Section 3, require that changes in
                    schedule of charges, revision in the agreed terms and conditions, or removal or
                    withdrawal of an incentive be communicated to the customer at least 30 days
                    before the actual effective date.


Recommendation      1. SBP should consider issuing a specific regulation dealing with notifications
                    that MFBs need to give in case of changes in prices and costs. Such notifications
                    should be done in due time, and through means that are consistent with the
                    services being provided to the client (e.g., electronic means could be used for
                    such alerts). Customers should have the right to cancel the service if they are not
                    in agreement with the change. SBP may consider incorporating some of the rules
                    from the Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards in this regard.
Pakistan                                                                    Microfinance Providers


                    2. MFIs and RSPs should be subject to similar minimum requirements on
                    notifications to clients, and their compliance with such requirements should be
                    effectively monitored by an authority with enforcement powers.
Good Practice C.3   Customer Records
                        a. A microfinance provider should maintain up-to-date records in
                           respect of each customer of the microfinance provider that contain
                           the following:
                            (i) a copy of all documents required to identify the customer and
                                  provide the customer’s profile;
                            (ii) the customer’s address, telephone number, and all other
                                  customer contact details;
                            (iii) any information or document in connection with the customer
                                  that has been prepared in compliance with any statute,
                                  regulation, or code of conduct;
                            (iv) details of all products and services provided by the
                                  microfinance provider to the customer;
                            (v) a copy of all correspondence from the customer to the
                                  microfinance provider and vice-versa and details of any other
                                  information provided to the customer in relation to any
                                  product or service offered or provided to the customer;
                            (vi) all documents and applications of the microfinance provider
                                  completed, signed, and submitted to the microfinance provider
                                  by the customer;
                            (vii) a copy of all original documents submitted by the customer
                                  in support of an application by the customer for the provision
                                  of a product or service by the microfinance provider; and
                            (viii) any other relevant information concerning the customer.
                        b. A law or regulation should provide the minimum permissible period
                           for retaining all such records and, throughout this period, the
                           customer should be provided ready free access to all such records.

Description         The PRMFB, Section 17, requires MFBs to maintain records of transactions and
                    client identification data, for at least five years following the termination of the
                    business relationship. This includes account files and business correspondence.
                    Transaction records must be sufficient for reconstruction of individual
                    transactions for the purposes of investigations on criminal activities. The
                    Guidelines on Outsourcing Arrangements (BPRD Circular No. 9, 2007), Section
                    30, requires MFBs to satisfy SBP that outsourcing activities do not violate
                    statutory or prudential requirements on anti-money-laundering or record-keeping
                    procedures. The Payments and Electronic Transfers Act, 2007, Section 7,
                    requires institutions providing funds transfer facilities to retain complete records
                    of electronic transactions in electronic form in the same manner as provided in
                    Section 6 of the Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2002, for a period as
                    determined by SBP. Moreover, the Branchless Banking Guidelines, Section 5.4,
                    requires agents to ensure safekeeping of all relevant documents and files for at
                    least five years, or such information may be kept by the MFB itself for the same
                    minimum period.
  82 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                    MFIs and the RSP fall into the definition of financial institutions established in
                    the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2010. Hence, they are subject to client due
                    diligence and record-keeping rules, which seem to be adequate for the purposes
                    of this Good Practice. In this regard, they report to and are monitored by the
                    Financial Monitoring Unit only.
Recommendation      None

Good Practice C.4   Credit Cards
                        a. There should be clear rules on the issuance of credit cards and
                            related customer disclosure requirements.
                        b. Microfinance providers, as credit card issuers, should ensure that
                           personalized disclosure requirements are made in all credit card
                           offers, including fees and charges (including finance charges), credit
                           limit, penalty interest rates, and method of calculating the minimum
                           monthly payment.
                        c. Microfinance providers should not be permitted to impose charges
                           or fees on pre-approved credit cards that have not been accepted by
                           the customer.
                        d. Consumers should be given personalized minimum payment
                           warnings on each monthly statement and the total interest costs that
                           will accrue if the cardholder makes only the requested minimum
                           payment.
                        e. Among other things, the rules should also

                                (i) restrict or impose conditions on the issuance and marketing
                                    of credit cards to young adults (below age 21) who have no
                                    independent means of income;
                               (ii) require reasonable notice of changes in fees and interest rate
                                    increases;
                               (iii)prevent the application of new higher-penalty interest rates
                                    to the entire existing balance, including past purchases made
                                    at a lower interest rate;
                               (iv)limit fees that can be imposed, such as those charged when
                                    consumers exceed their credit limits;
                               (v) prohibit a practice called double-cycle billing by which card
                                    issuers charge interest over two billing cycles rather than
                                    one;
                               (vi)prevent credit card issuers from allocating monthly
                                    payments in ways that maximize interest charges to
                                    consumers; and
                               (vii) limit upfront fees charged on subprime credit cards issued
                                    to individuals with bad credit.
                        f. There should be clear rules on error resolution and reporting of
                           unauthorized transactions and of stolen cards, with the ensuing
                           liability of the customer being made clear to them prior to their
                           acceptance of the credit card.
                        g. Microfinance providers and issuers should conduct consumer
                           awareness programs on the misuse of credit cards, credit card
                           overindebtedness, and prevention of fraud.
Pakistan                                                             Microfinance Providers


Description   It is not entirely clear whether the Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards
              (OGCC) applies to MFBs, as it makes reference to only banks and development
              financial institutions. However, because MFBs are allowed to issue credit cards,
              this section assumes they apply to MFBs. The OGCC establishes many consumer
              protection standards that are relevant for this Good Practice. For instance, MFBs
              shall quote interest rates on an annual basis, and inform such rates to customers
              through advertising or mailing (OGCC, Section 3). MFBs shall not levy any
              charge that was not explicitly mentioned in the user guide, application form, or
              schedule of charges provided to the customer at the moment of sale. Changes in
              the schedule of charges, revision of the agreed terms and conditions, or removal
              or withdrawal of an incentive must be communicated to the customer at least 30
              days before the actual effective date.

              The OGCC, Section 1, states that issuers should follow the code of conduct for
              marketing of credit cards that would be issued by the Pakistan Banks’
              Association (PBA) in consultation with SBP. They should discourage aggressive
              selling and marketing during work hours, except with a prior appointment. If a
              prospective client is called during office hours, she should be asked first if she
              would like to continue the call. Providers must first seek authorization from
              clients to inform them about new products and services by phone. Providers must
              maintain a “don’t call” list comprised of customers who have opted out.
              Marketing personnel must disclose their official identity before or while meeting
              with prospective customers. Marketing and sales personnel should be trained
              regularly, provide complete information on credit cards to prospective
              customers, and not make false claims on the card features. Institutions are
              required to do “surprise checks” to verify the marketing approach and to take
              immediate remedial steps and disciplinary actions against staff who do not
              comply with these guidelines.

              There are no rules limiting upfront fees charged on subprime cards issued to
              individuals with bad credit.

              There is a clear regulatory framework for error resolution in credit cards, which
              is in partly set by the OGCC (see description of internal complaint-handling
              mechanisms in Good Practice E.1), and partly set by the rules imposed by card
              brands such as Visa, MasterCard, and American Express.

              In addition, the OGCC, Section 2.3, prohibits stipulations, caveats, clauses, or
              provisions in the terms and conditions of the contract, which may result in
              curtailment of customer rights.

              There are no regulations requiring MFBs to undertake consumer awareness
              campaigns with regard to the misuse of credit cards, overindebtedness, and
              prevention of fraud. The OGCC simply requires issuers to describe, in the
              application form to be provided to cardholders in English and Urdu, the
              liabilities of all parties in case of credit card loss or fraud. Also, in order to
              mitigate fraudulent use of cards, issuers must have functionality built into their
              systems to monitor the usage of the card, and promptly identify unusual
  84 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                    transactions. Lastly, issuers are required to maintain a track record of merchants’
                    performance and categorize them, based on risks and involvement in fraud and
                    disputed transactions, and develop a database of merchants involved in
                    fraudulent activities, to minimize the occurrence of frauds.


Recommendation      1. SBP should clarify whether the Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards apply
                    equally to MFBs.
                    2. SBP should consider reviewing the OGCC to align them with the items listed
                    in this Good Practice.
Good Practice C.5   Debt Recovery
                        a. All microfinance providers, agents of a microfinance provider, and
                             third parties should be prohibited from employing any abusive debt
                             collection practice against any customer of the microfinance
                             provider, including the use of any false statement, any unfair
                             practice, or the giving of false credit information to others.
                         b. The type of debt that can be collected on behalf of a microfinance
                             provider, the person who can collect any such debt, and the manner
                             in which that debt can be collected should be indicated to the
                             customer of the microfinance provider when the credit agreement
                             giving rise to the debt is entered into between the microfinance
                             provider and the customer.
                         c. A debt collector should not contact any third party about a
                             microfinance customer’s debt without informing that party of the
                             debt collector’s right to do so and the type of information the debt
                             collector is seeking.
                         d. Where sale or transfer of debt without borrower consent is allowed
                             by law, the borrower should be
                                 (i) notified of the sale or transfer within a reasonable number
                                       of days;
                                 (ii) informed that the borrower remains obligated on the debt;
                                       and
                                 (iii) provided with information as to where to make payment, as
                                       well as the purchaser’s or transferee’s contact information.
Description         There are no regulations setting accepted and unaccepted lending and collection
                    practices for microfinance loans, including for MFBs. There is also no mention
                    to the incentive structure offered by MFPs to avoid abuses, such as compensation
                    of loan officers. There are no rules with regard to sales or transfers of debts.

                    MFIs and RSPs are not subject to any regulation with regard to collection
                    practices. PPAF partners and PMN members subscribe to the Client Protection
                    Principles, including treating their clients fairly and respectfully and ensuring
                    adequate safeguards to detect and correct corruption and aggressive or abusive
                    treatment by their staff and agents, particularly during the loan sale and debt-
                    collection processes. These institutions are not subject to statutory supervision to
                    ensure compliance with the principle. As stated earlier, PPAF conducts yearly
                    monitoring of its partners, and one of the topics reviewed is adherence to the
                    client protection principles. However, it lacks legal enforcement powers.

                    There are reports of abusive collection practices, such as physically intimidating
Pakistan                                                                  Microfinance Providers


                 delinquent borrowers (particularly female borrowers), threatening clients with
                 imprisonment based on the issuance of bounced checks, and other types of
                 harassment.

                 It is common for MFIs and MFBs to require, from clients with an account (MFB
                 borrowers are usually required to open a current account), a series of post-dated
                 checks as backup for each loan installment. The checks are returned to the client
                 at the end of the loan contract, if all installments were made. In the case of a
                 delay in payment, the MFB reportedly notifies the client that the check will be
                 deposited. This is an effective pressure on the borrower, because issuing checks
                 without funds is a criminal offense in Pakistan. Hence, the borrower can end up
                 in jail for delaying a payment for more than 60 days. MFBs clarify that very
                 rarely they need to involve the police; in most cases, borrowers pay their
                 installments after the first warning that the checks will be deposited. Although
                 this practice would be considered unacceptable in many markets, it is widely
                 accepted in Pakistan, because of the difficulties and costs of applying other
                 collection and enforcement practices.

                 With regard to credit cards, the OGCC requires the issuer to ensure that recovery
                 letters issued to cardholders bear the designation, contact number, and office
                 address of the collection official. They should respond to queries arising out of
                 the recovery letters within a reasonable time period, which must be specified in
                 the issuer’s public policy and properly communicated to the customer. Issuers
                 must ensure that their recovery/collection officers do not resort to any verbal or
                 physical harassment of the delinquent cardholder, their family members,
                 referees, and friends. Officers shall not humiliate publicly or in private or intrude
                 the privacy of the cardholder’s family members, referees, and friends. Telephone
                 calls and visits to cardholders for recovery should be restricted to a convenient
                 time and it must be defined in the issuer’s public policy and properly
                 communicated to customers when the card is issued. Recovery should be made
                 only from the principal cardholder and in no case shall supplementary
                 cardholders be subject to any sort of pressure to pay the unpaid amount.
                 Supplementary cardholders may be contacted only to inquire about the
                 whereabouts of the principal cardholder. Transactions that are being disputed (at
                 either the issuer, the ombudsman, or SBP) shall not be subject to the recovery
                 process.


Recommendation   1. SBP should improve the regulation for MFBs, to include more specific rules
                 for debt collection practices, highlighting prohibited practices and some
                 minimum standards such as the ones listed in this Good Practice. It should
                 consider incorporating some of the provisions from the OGCC.

                 2. The practice of using post-dated checks signed by borrowers should be
                 monitored to ensure it does not involve abusive behavior by agents or staff
                 responsible for collecting the loans.

                 3. MFIs and RSPs should be subject to standards similar to those issued for
                 MFBs and should also be subject to a monitoring scheme to ensure compliance
    86 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                               with such standards and other broad principles embedded in codes to which they
                               subscribe.

SECTION D                      PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

Good Practice D.1              Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                                   a. The financial transactions of any customer of a microfinance
                                        provider should be kept confidential by the institution.
                                   b. The law should require microfinance providers to ensure that they
                                        protect the confidentiality and security of personal data of their
                                        customers against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security
                                        or integrity of such information, and against unauthorized access.
Description                    There are no specific regulations requiring MFBs to put in place procedures to
                               ensure the confidentiality, security, and integrity of consumer’s personal
                               information. There is a fragmented framework with rules spread across different
                               regulations dealing with varied topics, such as outsourcing and branchless
                               banking. The Guidelines on Outsourcing Arrangements (BPRD Circular No. 9,
                               2007) require MFBs, when entering outsourcing arrangements that involve the
                               transfer of customer data to third parties, to ensure that the outsourcing
                               arrangements comply with the relevant statutory requirements related to
                               confidentiality of its customers, specifically the provision of the BCO on fidelity
                               and secrecy (Section 33A27 ), relevant local laws, regulations, and instructions
                               issued by SBP. MFBs must establish proper safeguards to protect the integrity
                               and confidentiality of customer information, including obtaining prior consent to
                               data sharing. In case the outsourcing arrangement involves sharing confidential
                               information to service providers abroad, it will be subject to prior approval from
                               SBP.

                               The OGCC, Section 2, requires issuers to ensure confidentiality of their
                               customers’ information and to not divulge, share, or sell customers’ information
                               to any other body or institute, except SBP’s Electronic Credit Information
                               Bureau (eCIB) and any other approved credit bureau to which the issuer belongs.
                               The limitation also does not apply to the companies who have an agreement with
                               the issuer for data sharing because of outsourcing arrangements. However,
                               outsourcing arrangements must enforce the confidentiality requirement for the
                               third party. The Payment and Electronic Fund Transfers Act, Section 15, requires
                               service providers to ensure that secure means are used for transfer, compliant
                               with current international standards and as may be prescribed by SBP from time
                               to time.

                               MFIs and RSPs are not subject to any regulation. They subscribe to the Client
                               Protection Principles, which include ensuring privacy of client data: “the privacy
                               of individual client data will be respected in accordance with the laws and
                               regulations of individual jurisdictions. Such data will only be used for the
                               purposes specified at the time the information is collected or as permitted by law,

27
   Ev ery bank and financial institution shall not, except as otherwise required by law or according to customary practices in the
bank ing sector, div ulge any information relating to the affairs of its customers.
Pakistan                                                                 Microfinance Providers


                 unless otherwise agreed with the client.” However, the principles are not subject
                 to enforcement by a statutory entity with enforcement powers. PPAF conducts
                 annual reviews of its partners, including with regard to compliance with the
                 Client Protection Principles, and it has not highlighted data privacy as a
                 consumer issue with its partners.

                 Branchless banking (defined according to the Branchless Banking Guidelines,
                 2007) has become an important instrument for financial inclusion and a policy
                 priority of SBP, which has been encouraging its adoption. The regulatory
                 framework for branchless banking is relatively robust for consumer risks,
                 providing protections such as data confidentiality. Compliance officers and
                 internal auditors at MFBs are required to ensure compliance with all applicable
                 regulations when branchless banking is used. Moreover, MFBs must implement
                 agent due diligence policies and procedures. MFBs are responsible for data and
                 network security to ensure authenticity, confidentiality, and integrity of data, and
                 assign responsibility to each involved actor to mitigate risks. The Branchless
                 Banking Guidelines also recommend standards for end-to-end secure
                 communication in electronic channels, such as authentication, user personal
                 identification number (PIN), and other techniques.

                 In addition to keeping MFBs responsible for protecting customer data, the
                 Branchless Banking Guidelines also require MFBs to orient customers of their
                 roles and responsibilities which, at a minimum, include (i) securing password or
                 PIN; (ii) keeping personal information private; (iii) keeping records of wireless
                 transactions; (iv) being vigilant while initiating or authorizing transactions; (v)
                 taking special care of the mobile device; and (vi) other measures related to
                 ATMs and cards.

                 However, MFI clients remain less protected. Only banks and MFBs can operate
                 branchless banking platforms and agent networks, but MFIs use their services
                 without having to follow any consumer protection standard such as data privacy.
                 There have been instances of agent fraud and abuse (e.g., overcharging of fees
                 and fraudulent transactions using client information) and other problems with
                 electronic and agent transactions, but the industry is in its infancy, and the lack
                 of information on consumer complaints makes it difficult to assess the
                 performance of branchless banking at the consumer level.

                 With branchless banking taking off in Pakistan, it is important to monitor
                 consumer issues in all types of MFPs.
Recommendation
                 1. It is recommended that SBP review existing rules pertaining to confidentiality,
                 security, and integrity of consumer’s personal information, and compile relevant
                 rules in a cohesive regulation extending such principles to all operations
                 undertaken by MFBs (i.e., not only for credit cards or for outsourcing
                 arrangements). A complete and cohesive regulation would have specific
                 requirements for MFBs to develop and implement data security policies and
                 procedures, which are enforced by SBP through its supervisory review.
  88 Microfinance providers: Good Practices



                    2. MFIs and RSPs should follow similar standards, and compliance should be
                    checked by an authority with effective enforcement powers.

                    3. SBP should introduce a consumer protection perspective to the oversight of
                    branchless banking models in MFBs, in accordance with the general principles
                    stated in the Branchless Banking Guidelines, 10.1 and 10.3. For instance, SBP
                    may wish to design and review standard complaint reports to identify and
                    address any industry-wide problems in branchless banking channels.

                    4. With regard to MFIs and RSPs using branchless banking schemes provided by
                    authorized financial institutions, consumer protection risks should be addressed
                    by setting and monitoring compliance with standards similar to those applicable
                    to MFBs.

Good Practice D.2   Credit Reporting
                       a. Credit reporting should be subject to appropriate oversight, with
                            sufficient enforcement authority.
                       b. The credit reporting system should have accurate, timely, and
                            sufficient data. The system should also maintain rigorous standards
                            of security and reliability.
                       c. The overall legal and regulatory framework for the credit reporting
                            system should be (i) clear, predictable, nondiscriminatory,
                            proportionate, and supportive of consumer rights; and (ii)
                            supported by effective judicial or extrajudicial dispute resolution
                            mechanisms.
                       d. Proportionate and supportive consumer rights should include the
                            right of the consumer
                                (i) to consent to information sharing based on the knowledge of
                                     the institution’s information-sharing practices;
                                (ii) to access his or her credit report free of charge (at least once
                                     a year), subject to proper identification;
                                (iii)to know about adverse action in credit decisions or less-than-
                                     optimal conditions or prices due to credit report
                                     information;
                                (iv)to be informed about all inquiries within a set period of time,
                                     such as six months;
                                (v) to correct factually incorrect information or to have it
                                     deleted and to mark (flag) information that is in dispute;
                                (vi)to reasonable retention periods of credit history; and
                                (vii) to have information kept confidential and with sufficient
                                     security measures in place to prevent unauthorized access,
                                     misuse of data, or loss or destruction of data.
                       e. The credit registers, regulator, and associations of microfinance
                            providers should undertake campaigns to inform and educate the
                            public on the rights of consumers in the above respects, as well as
                            the consequences of a negative personal credit history.
Description         SBP manages and operates the eCIB, created in 1992, based on Section 25(a) of
Pakistan                                                                                            Microfinance Providers


                                 the Banking Companies Ordinance. See a full description of the eCIB and its
                                 general compliance with this Good Practice, in volume I.

                                 The eCIB collects data on all borrowers irrespective of any limit (there was a
                                 data reporting minimum amount of PRs 500,000, which was eliminated in
                                 2006 28 ) and it provides credit reports including the client’s exposure as of a
                                 certain date. While banks need to obtain a credit report on borrowers before
                                 extending facilities of PRs 500,000 and above, MFBs are required to get such
                                 reports before extending loans of any size. 29 The eCIB maintains records for 12
                                 months.

                                 The eCIB information is not sufficient for MFBs to assess the aggregate credit
                                 exposure of a microfinance client, as it is accessed and populated only by entities
                                 regulated by SECP or SBP. This leaves out MFIs and RSPs. Also, it does not
                                 contain other useful information, such as positive payment history of utilities and
                                 other bills, which helps first-time microfinance borrowers without a credit
                                 history get credit. MSPs, including MFBs, need to rely on informal procedures to
                                 assess the existence of other loans extended to a loan applicant, such as requiring
                                 a declaration from the client herself, and calling other providers, one by one, to
                                 check on individual clients, and getting credit reports from other bureaus. 30 This
                                 increases costs for providers and clients, and is less effective than an accessible
                                 and effective bureau. Microfinance clients in Pakistan end up being more
                                 vulnerable to high levels of indebtedness than bank clients, as has already been
                                 proved by the delinquency crisis in Punjab in 2008/2009. Also, the lack of
                                 positive payment information on first-time borrowers makes it more difficult for
                                 them to get approved.

                                 There are not many rules pertaining to the specific rights of consumers included
                                 in the eCIB. BSD Circular No. 16, 2004, requires reporting institutions to send a
                                 letter to the borrower about the implications of reporting to the eCIB, and allow a
                                 reasonable time period (at least 15 days) for reconciliation or settlement of
                                 overdue liabilities. The Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards, Section 6.8,
                                 makes the card issuer responsible for correcting erroneous information provided
                                 to eCIB, or any other approved credit bureau, within a reasonable time. Also,
                                 SBP does not make any correction in the system at the request of a borrower.
                                 Accuracy is the responsibility of financial institutions and only the reporting
                                 institution is able to alter data about a borrower. Updates in the borrower’s
                                 record are made every 10 days, although overdue amounts that were paid are
                                 only cleared in the next month’s reporting by the concerned financial institution.
                                 Lastly, the right for privacy is taken to the extreme by SBP, and not even
                                 corporations and individuals are able to obtain their own credit information
                                 reports.


28
     BSD Circular No. 6, 2006.
29
  MFBs can get credit reports from other bureaus for loans up to PRs 30,000. A bov e that v alue, accessing the eCIB is mandatory ,
regardless of whether another bureau is also accessed.
30
  Besides the eCIB, there are other priv ately owned credit bureaus operating in Pak istan: Datacheck (Pv t.) Limited, News-VIS Credit
Information Sy stems, ICIL/Pak BizInfo, and Credit Chex (Pv t.) Limited.
   90 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                     The microfinance industry, through a joint initiative by SBP, PMN, and PPAF
                     (with funding from the Department for International Development), has piloted
                     its own credit bureau in Lahore, separate from SBP’s eCIB, which is now being
                     expanded to the rest of the country. This is to address the lack of credit
                     information on MFI and RSP clients. It is called MF-CIB and will be regulated
                     and supervised by SBP. A separate bureau has been established because of
                     resistance by banks to share their clients’ information deposited in the eCIB, and
                     because, as an SBP-hosted bureau, the eCIB is not an adequate system to host
                     other types of information that can be useful for microfinance lending, such as
                     utility bill payment history. It is not clear yet whether nonmembers of PMN will
                     be able to use this new bureau.
                     The interviews suggest that some MFIs are resistant to being required to access
                     any bureau, because this could reduce their lending capability in areas where
                     several MSPs overlap. Overall, MFIs in the same region tend to target the same
                     customers, exposing them to higher risk of overindebtedness in the absence (or
                     lack of usage) of credit information.

                     SBP has a consumer awareness campaign specifically to increase knowledge
                     about and trust in the CIB. SBP has also implemented the eCIB helpdesk to
                     assist individuals and members of the eCIB with their queries and complaints
                     about the system.
Recommendation       1. The MF-CIB is expected to provide many benefits to the industry and
                     microfinance borrowers, including the potential to reduce risk of over-
                     indebtedness. However, it will only achieve such benefits if the majority of
                     microfinance providers become members. At least PMN members and PPAF
                     partners should be required to become members of the MF-CIB. Also, PMN and
                     PPAF should consider incorporating positive credit history and alternative
                     payment information, such as utility bill payment history, to encourage lending
                     to first-time borrowers.

                     2. Borrowers should be able to request their own credit reports from the eCIB,
                     MF-CIB, or any other credit bureau for that matter. SBP should consider
                     introducing regulatory changes to allow this.



SECTION E            DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISM

Good Practice E.1    Internal Complaints Procedure
                     Complaint resolution procedures should be included in the microfinance
                     providers’ code(s) of conduct and monitored by the supervisory authority.


Description          There is no clear legal or regulatory requirement for MFBs, MFIs, or RSPs to
                     have an internal structure to deal with customer complaints referent to any type
                     of operation in which these institutions engage. The Client Protection Principles
                     adopted by PMN and PPAF establish that MFPs will have in place timely and
                     responsive mechanisms for complaints and problem resolution for their clients
                     and will use these mechanisms both to resolve individual problems and to
                     improve their products and services. However, most MFPs do not have a formal
Pakistan                                                         Microfinance Providers


           internal complaint-handling mechanism and adherence to the code is not
           monitored by a supervisory authority. PPAF does conduct monitoring of their
           partners, but it has no legal enforcement power, nor does it have specific
           standards aside from what is in the code. In practice, most MFBs, but only a few
           MFIs or RSPs have instituted redress channels. The availability, structure, and
           quality of this service vary widely across providers, due to the lack of common
           standards. With some exceptions, microfinance clients served by MFIs and RSPs
           are left with no complaints channel other than the courts, because they do not
           have access to third-party redress as well (see Good Practice E.2 below).

           The fact that MFBs have instituted complaint-resolution mechanisms more often
           than RSPs and MFIs is due to the existence of some regulations mentioning the
           need for MFBs to have complaint mechanisms. For instance, MFBs providing
           branchless banking facilities are required to put in place proper complaint
           redressal mechanisms (Branchless Banking Guidelines, 10.1 and 10.3) capable of
           (i) receiving and processing costumer’s complaints within 24 hours through text
           messages, automated phone service, and e-mail; (ii) general acknowledgment of
           complaints       through a unique complaint identification number; (iii)
           communicating the acknowledgement to the client with estimated time for
           redressal; (iv) redirecting the complaint to the appropriate section; and (v)
           keeping track of all complaints and giving the status of every complaint.

           Regardless, the framework for MFBs remains unclear and fragmented, with
           existing rules included in specific product-, channel-, or service-related
           regulations, rather than in an instrument that clearly applies to all products and
           providers regardless of their scope of operation. There should be minimum
           standards harmonized across the industry. For instance, the quality of customer
           service (which arguably includes complaint resolution) is used as criteria for
           approving annual branch expansion plans of MFBs (Branch Licensing
           Guidelines, Section 55), but the regulation does not spell out any minimum
           standards such as those found in the Branchless Banking Guidelines. Also, SBP
           requires MFBs to, before extending the facility of cash and check deposits
           through ATMs, develop and put in place a well-defined procedure for dispute
           resolution related to ATM transactions. When using third-party ATM networks,
           the MFB must be responsible for resolving disputes (Branch Licensing
           Guidelines, Sections 30 and 32). MFBs are allowed to have sales and service
           centers, which can work as a channel for clients to lodge their complaints and
           other requests (Branch Licensing Guidelines, Section 19). These centers must
           have clear and proper signage. Also, the Guidelines on Outsourcing
           Arrangements (BPRD Circular No. 9, 2007), Section 31, requires MFBs to give a
           well-defined mechanism for redressal of complaints regarding outsourced
           services, and the service provider will make sure they facilitate the redressal
           mechanism. Lastly, the Payment Systems and Electronic Funds Transfer Act
           2007 requires institutions, when investigating a possible error such an
           unauthorized transaction, to deliver or mail to the consumer an explanation of its
           findings within three business days from the conclusion of the investigations.

           This fragmented framework creates some confusion in the market as to whether
           MFBs are required to have complaint mechanisms and follow the same standards
           imposed on banks in this regard. It also seems that SBP inspectors review
    92 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                                complaint-handling mechanisms put in place by MFBs, following the
                                supervisory practices used to evaluate banks, which is based on BPRD Circular
                                No. 17, 2004. 31

                                Specifically with regard to MFBs’ credit card operations (MFIs and RSPs are not
                                allowed to offer credit cards), the Operational Guidelines for Credit Cards
                                (which seems to apply to them on the same basis as to banks) requires, in Section
                                6, that the card issuer have an appropriate complaint resolution structure in place
                                commensurate with the volume of complaints and better service considerations.
                                The mechanism should be prominently disclosed on the official website, and
                                online complaint filing should be provided. A unique number should be created
                                for each new complaint. The complaints should be solved promptly and as per
                                the franchise rules of Visa, MasterCard, American Express, or another, not to
                                exceed 45 days total.

                                Authorities have not demonstrated a strong interest in investigating the
                                availability and quality of internal complaint resolution mechanisms in
                                microfinance. Despite covering this topic in the course of its supervisory review
                                of MFBs, SBP does not require reporting of and does not use complaint statistics
                                on a regular basis. PPAF also has not pointed out complaint resolution as an area
                                of concern. The lack of apparent concern with improving redress mechanisms in
                                microfinance might be related to some prevalent views and prejudices. Some
                                think that microfinance clients have no reason to complain because they benefit
                                from access to finance. Others think that clients might be afraid of losing access
                                to credit if they file complaints against the institution. Furthermore, because
                                many microfinance clients are women, they would feel intimidated to make a
                                complaint, particularly because most staff are men. Others seem to believe that
                                microfinance in Pakistan has developed with a charity mindset, and hence it does
                                not give rise to consumer complaints.

Recommendation                  1. SBP should address the regulatory fragmentation and specifically require
                                MFBs to have internal complaint resolution mechanisms to deal with all types of
                                problems and queries, not only in particular areas as is the case today (e.g., credit
                                cards). It should set minimum standards for complaint handling, such as
                                establishing the maximum period within which the MFBs should respond to a
                                complaint, and require MFBs to appoint an official to be in charge of managing,
                                monitoring, and improving the complaint-handling function. MFBs should also
                                be required to disclose the phone number and other means of communication for
                                clients to reach the complaints unit, including in sales and marketing materials,
                                communications, receipts, marketing materials, and, to the extent possible,
                                during electronic transactions (e.g., during a cash withdrawal).

                                2. SBP should review the effectiveness of complaint-handling systems, and use
                                complaint data (collected through regulatory returns) for regulatory and
                                supervisory planning purposes. Improving complaint handling and using

31
   According to this circular, bank s and dev elopment financial institutions hav e to handle complaints in an efficient and effectiv e
manner. Ev ery bank is required under the guidelines to hav e a complaint resolution unit or department, and dev ise a sy stem for
redress of complaints in an appropriate and courteous manner, and the reply to the complainant must be clear and indicate the
rationale of the decision. The bank s and DFIs are also required to respond to the complaints within a period of 10 work ing days.
The final reply should be sent to the customer in no more than 45 work ing day s.
Pakistan                                                                    Microfinance Providers


                    complaint data will become increasingly important as the microfinance sector
                    grows in number and complexity, and adopts electronic and other indirect means
                    of service delivery (branchless banking). These developments can spur the
                    number of complaints and reveal failures not only in consumer protection
                    systems, but also in internal controls that could create other risks in MFBs.
                    Analyzing complaint data is also useful to shape financial literacy and awareness
                    campaigns. Complaint statistics should be reported to SBP on a regular basis,
                    using a standard complaint report template defining the types and status of
                    complaints. SBP should also use such statistics to publish data on consumer
                    complaints in the MFB sector.

                    3. Complaint handling by MFBs, MFIs, and RSPs should have clear, affordable,
                    and accessible procedures that work for microfinance clients. MFIs and RSPs
                    should be subject to similar rules and conditions imposed on MFBs, and there
                    should be an effective monitoring scheme to ensure compliance with the
                    principles and regulations.

                    4. Lastly, as there is some belief that microfinance clients are not expected to file
                    complaints and may feel intimidated from doing so out of fear of losing access to
                    their loans or because of cultural biases, there should be a concerted effort by at
                    least SBP, PMN, and PPAF, to make microfinance clients aware of internal
                    complaint resolution channels, and empower clients, particularly women, to use
                    these channels as a manner to influence the quality of the service provided by
                    MPFs.

Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                       a. A system should be in place that allows consumers to seek affordable
                          and efficient third-party recourse, such as an ombudsman, in the
                          event the complaint with the microfinance provider is not resolved
                          to the consumer’s satisfaction in accordance with internal
                          procedures.
                       b. The role of an ombudsman or equivalent institution in dealing with
                          consumer disputes should be made known to the public.
                        c. The ombudsman or equivalent institution should be impartial and
                            act independently from the appointing authority, the industry, and
                            the parties to the dispute.
                        d. The decisions of the ombudsman or equivalent institution should be
                            binding on microfinance providers. The mechanisms to ensure the
                            enforcement of these decisions should be established and publicized.
Description         Although commercial bank clients have access to the banking ombudsman (the
                    Office of the Banking Mohtasib), microfinance clients and MFB clients do not.
                    This is because the ombudsman was created by the BCO (Section 82A), and
                    applies only to institutions covered in the ordinance. The procedures imposed by
                    the Mohtasib seem accessible enough, even for microfinance clients, and the
                    decisions of the Mohtasib are binding on the provider. Also, clients unsatisfied
                    with the Mohtasib’s decision may appeal to the SPB Governor.

                    MFB clients can seek third-party redress using the Consumer Protection
94 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                  Department at SBP, which offers a free and simplified procedure to deal with
                  complaints against financial institutions in general. After receiving a response (or
                  not) from the MFB about a complaint, the customer who feels dissatisfied may
                  write to the CPD or send an e-mail with all the necessary information about the
                  case. Cases pending at legal forum cannot be addressed by the CPD. Cases by
                  MFI and RSP clients cannot be processed by the CPD, as it only covers
                  institutions related to and supervised by SBP.

                  All that is left for MFI and RSP clients are the courts, including the District
                  Consumer Courts of Punjab, which can be accessed by any financial consumer
                  dealing with any type of financial institution. However, only Punjab has a
                  consumer court, whereas in the other provinces microfinance clients need to go
                  through the nonspecialized courts. The Punjab Consumer Courts require clients
                  to first seek redress with financial institutions, by written notice (signed on
                  solemn affirmation or oath). The provider is required to reply to the consumer
                  within 15 days. The courts will not accept any case where the consumer does not
                  prove that he has contacted the service provider first. Claims can be filed at the
                  court only within 30 days of the cause of the action (the court may allow an
                  extension to up 60 days, which might help in microfinance cases). The court
                  shall decide the claim within six months. If the court concludes that any or all of
                  the allegations contained in the claim are true, it shall issue an order to the
                  provider for the adoption of a range of corrective measures described in the
                  Punjab Consumer Protection Act, Section 31. If the provider fails to perform
                  such actions, it shall be punished with imprisonment up to three years or fine up
                  to PRs 20,000. Consumers aggrieved by the court’s final order may file an
                  appeal with the Lahore High Court within 30 days. The Punjab Consumer Courts
                  received approximately 700 cases against banks and insurance companies in
                  2013, but not many (the number is not available) from microfinance consumers.

                  The consumer court system could be a workable third-party solution for
                  microfinance clients, if it were implemented in other provinces. There are five
                  provincial consumer protection laws in Pakistan, and they all create a framework
                  for formal dispute settlement for small claims with the same powers as are vested
                  in civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. However, the other
                  provinces need to pass regulations to implement the consumer protection acts in
                  practice, and establish the consumer protection council, as well as the consumer
                  courts in the provinces. The Punjab Consumer Protection Act, 2005, and the
                  Punjab Consumer Protection Rules, 2009, create the system for dealing with
                  consumer claims in an expedited manner, in cases where the consumer believes
                  the service provider is in contravention of the Consumer Protection Act.

                  There was a plan, by PMN, to implement a complaint-handling structure to
                  attend cases from clients of all its members, as part of PMN’s Consumer
                  Protection Initiative. Although it was supposed to be a short-term solution until
                  another third-party mechanism (e.g., an ombudsman) could be offered to
                  microfinance clients, the project did not move forward because of resistance of
                  concerned stakeholders, based on the belief that there is an inherent conflict of
                  interest when a member-based industry association deals with consumer
                  complaints.
Pakistan                                                                  Microfinance Providers


                 There seems to be a very low level of awareness or understanding of all these
                 channels, including the CPD and the consumer courts. Only a few complaints
                 from MFB clients have been registered at the CPD and at the consumer courts in
                 Punjab. There is no research on the underlying reasons for microfinance clients
                 not to seek third-party redress, and their perceptions about these channels and
                 their processes. Some relevant stakeholders believe that microfinance clients
                 would not have reasons to complain against MFPs, because they have access to
                 services that are otherwise inaccessible, or that problems between providers and
                 customers are less common in microfinance, given the charitable origin of MFPs
                 in Pakistan. With regard to courts, they are usually considered to impose
                 complex, lengthy procedures that might intimidate a typically unsophisticated
                 microfinance client. There is also a belief that because most microfinance clients
                 are women, they would not feel that they should present a case against an MFP,
                 or feel intimidated by the procedures, particularly since MFP personnel and court
                 personnel are mostly males. Also, awareness about the Punjab Consumer Courts
                 may be low because the other provinces do not have these courts. Finally,
                 microfinance clients may fear losing access to microfinance services in cases
                 where they complain about the provider.

Recommendation   1. As soon as possible, the concerned stakeholders (at least SBP, PMN, PPAF,
                 OBM, and SECP) should coordinate and find the most pragmatic solution to
                 provide effective, speedy, and low-cost third-party alternative dispute resolution
                 to microfinance clients, and devise plans to increase awareness of microfinance
                 clients about redress channels and procedures, and their right to file complaints
                 without losing rights to access financial services. Complaint mechanisms in
                 microfinance need to be as simple and straightforward as possible, and
                 improving awareness about such mechanisms should be a policy priority. There
                 should also be specific measures to deal with gender-related issues in complaint
                 handling and filing, to empower women to exercise their rights (e.g., by
                 employing women to deal with customer complaints, or having female loan
                 officers to help clients file their complaints). It will also be necessary to increase
                 awareness and knowledge among authorities that consumer issues and
                 complaints can happen in microfinance, and that microfinance clients may want
                 and have the right to present complaints and resolve grievances with their
                 providers, similarly to bank and insurance clients.

                 2. The OMB has powers, expertise, capacity, and resources to also deal with
                 grievances from microfinance clients. Its procedures may be accessible to most
                 microfinance clients with few adaptations to allow clients in rural areas to
                 present claims in a cost-effective manner (e.g., by presenting claims by mail or
                 mobile phone), and some procedures might be streamlined to accommodate
                 microfinance clients’ lower level of sophistication. Stakeholders should consider
                 expanding the Mohtasib’s mandate to include all MFPs, regardless if they are
                 regulated by SBP or not. Because expanding the mandate of the OMB involves
                 legal reforms, palliative or short-term solutions may be required in the interim,
                 such as the one once proposed by PMN.

                 3. In addition to alternative conflict resolution channels, it would be useful if
                 consumer courts were operational in provinces other than Punjab, to offer
  96 Microfinance providers: Good Practices


                    speedy, specialized judicial procedures to all microfinance clients. Authorities
                    might want to consider implementing the necessary legal and regulatory changes
                    to establish such courts, and increase awareness efforts so consumers,
                    particularly female consumers, know how to use the courts to solve their
                    grievances and feel comfortable doing so.

SECTION F           CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT
                    (See Volume I, Financial Education)
Pakistan                                                                             Insurance Sector


   3. Insurance Sector: Comparison with Good Practices


SECTION A           CONSUMER PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

Good Practice A.1 Consumer Protection Regime
                  The law should provide for clear rules on consumer protection in all matters of
                  insurance and there should be adequate institutional arrangements for
                  implementation and enforcement of consumer protection rules.
                  a. There should be specific provisions in the law that create an effective
                      regime for the protection of retail consumers of insurance.
                  b. The rules should prioritize a role for the private sector, including
                      voluntary consumer organizations and self-regulatory organizations.


Description         The Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP), through its
                    Insurance Division, has supervisory responsibility for all aspects of insurance
                    activities in Pakistan. The primary piece of legislation governing the insurance
                    industry is the Insurance Ordinance, 2000 (the Insurance Ordinance). Further
                    regulations, rules, and guidelines can be (and have been) issued by SECP.

                    The importance of consumers of insurance is highlighted at the beginning of the
                    Insurance Ordinance: “An Ordinance to regulate the business of the insurance
                    industry to ensure the protection of the interests of insurance policyholders and to
                    promote sound development of the insurance industry and for matters connected
                    therewith and incidental thereto.”

                    In practice, many links in the chain that leads from the purchase through to a
                    conclusion (claim or termination) of insurance policies can be strengthened. In
                    some cases, this requires legal changes or the prescription of further rules by SECP,
                    but in many cases the legal framework already exists and simply needs to be
                    implemented and enforced.

                    However, there is a lack of capacity both at SECP and in the industry, even though
                    SECP has commenced enhancing its regulatory and supervisory capacity regarding
                    insurance.

                    The problems of consumer protection outcomes for retail insurance consumers are
                    exacerbated by the general lack of awareness and understanding of insurance, and a
                    lack of awareness of consumer rights in insurance (which is part of a wider issue in
                    financial services and more generally). The situation is also aggravated by the poor
                    implementation of mandated third-party motor vehicle insurance and some
                    reputational issues.

                    With the laudable efforts being made to develop microinsurance in Pakistan, the
                    importance of consumer protection and developing financial literacy is heightened.
                    Within SECP, to date, the regulatory and supervisory focus appears to have been
                    more on prudential supervision of insurers than on consumer protection of holders
                    and potential holders of insurance policies. An increased emphasis on consumer



                                                 97
                             protection matters would benefit both consumers and the industry in the long run.

                             As discussed in the overview, the legislation mandating third-party motor vehicle
                             insurance is separate from the Insurance Ordinance, and the supervision of those
                             providing such insurance needs to be addressed.

                             The Competition Act, 2010, provides another channel for consumer protection via
                             the Competition Commission of Pakistan. Some financial services entities,
                             including an insurer, have been prosecuted under this act. There are also provincial
                             Consumer Protection Acts in place. 32 These have general coverage, but they cover
                             services, which suggest that they cover insurance. Insurance-related matters have
                             been dealt with through the consumer courts established by these acts.

                             a. There are some high-level requirements included in Part XI of the Insurance
                                  Ordinance. As noted above, the issue may lie more with implementation and
                                  enforcement than the legal framework. (see Section 12(4) of the Insurance
                                  Ordinance).

                             b. This requirement is not met.


Recommendation               A.1-1. SECP should consider increasing its emphasis on consumer protection–
                             related matters and establishing a section focused on addressing all aspects of
                             consumer protection including, but not limited to, marketing practices, sales
                             practices (including illustrations), disclosure (including policy documents),
                             policyholder management processes (including statements), complaint management
                             and resolution, awareness of insurance, and consumer education. This may be
                             particularly relevant in the area of microinsurance. Consumer protection–related
                             issues should be given increased priority in SECP onsite and offsite inspection
                             processes.

                             A.1-2. As part of wider initiatives, awareness of insurance and consumer rights
                             should be published, made accessible, and promoted. These activities would best
                             be undertaken by a broad-based partnership involving SECP and the insurance
                             industry (potentially through the Insurance Association of Pakistan, or IAP) as well
                             as other parties interested in consumer protection in the financial services. This
                             may also include establishing relationships with media and other interested
                             organizations to promote insurance and policyholder consumer rights. In particular,
                             it may be appropriate to use work being undertaken in the banking sector,
                             especially with regard to microinsurance.

                             A.1-3. Greater clarity and coordination with respect to the various avenues
                             available for consumer redress should be sought. This may lead to closer links
                             between SECP and other agencies, and the courts.



32
     See, for example, the Punjab Consumer Protection A ct, 2005.
Pakistan                                                                            Insurance Sector


Good Practice A.2 Contracts
                  There should be a specialized insurance contracts section in the general
                  insurance or contracts law, or ideally a separate Insurance Contracts Act. This
                  should specify the information exchange and disclosure requirements specific
                  to the insurance sector and the basic rights and obligations of the insurer and
                  the retail policyholder and allow for any asymmetries of negotiating power or
                  access to information.


Description         There is no separate Insurance Contracts Act in Pakistan.
                    Part XI of the Insurance Ordinance deals with market conduct. At a high level it
                    specifies a number of requirements, including

                    (i) a duty of utmost good faith on all parties to insurance contracts,
                    (ii) prohibition on insurers engaging in misleading or deceptive conduct, and
                    (iii) some further policyholder protections.

                    Some further clarifications are provided in the rules.

                    Although some policyholder protections are provided, it is not clear how carefully
                    these protections, and their intent, are abided by or how strongly breaches (if and
                    when identified) are dealt with.

                    SECP intends to include requirements with regard to contracts and disclosure for
                    microinsurance in the microinsurance regulations and guidelines currently being
                    developed.


Recommendation      A.2-1. SECP’s ongoing efforts to establish specific disclosure requirements for
                    microinsurance provide an opportunity to review and improve disclosure
                    requirements for insurance products more generally.

                    A.2-2. See Recommendation A.1-1.
Good Practice A.3 Codes of Conduct for Insurers
                  a. There should be a principles-based code of conduct for insurers devised in
                     consultation with the insurance industry and with relevant consumer
                     associations, and that is monitored and enforced by a statutory agency or
                     an effective self-regulatory agency.
                    b. If a principles-based code of conduct exists, insurers should publicize and
                        disseminate it to the general public through appropriate means.
                    c. The principles-based code should be augmented by voluntary codes for
                       insurers on such matters specific to insurance products or channels.
                    d. Every such voluntary code should likewise be publicized and disseminated.


Description         a. There is no statutory code of conduct for either life or nonlife insurers in


                                                 99
                                  Pakistan.
                                  There was broad support from the life insurers for the establishment of an
                                  industry-wide code of conduct. There was also support for SECP being
                                  involved and giving such a code (or codes) their official endorsement. Sections
                                  83 and 84 of the Insurance Ordinance appear to provide a basis by which SECP
                                  can achieve this.
                                  SECP intends to include requirements with regard to compliance with a code of
                                  conduct for microinsurance in the microinsurance regulations and guidelines
                                  currently being developed (see Section F3). SECP Consultation Paper covers
                                  both life and nonlife insurance. This provides the opportunity to establish a
                                  coordinated and consistent set of codes of conduct applicable to all types of
                                  insurance.


                            b. Not applicable.

                            c. The IAP has a code of conduct that is applicable to its nonlife insurer members.
                                  The extent to which the IAP enforces this code of conduct among its members
                                  is not clear. As of October 2012, the membership of the IAP does not include
                                  any Takfaul insurers (although it was reported that this may change in the near
                                  future), but does include all other life insurers in Pakistan and most nonlife
                                  insurers.
                                  It was reported to the mission that most insurers, life and nonlife, have internal
                                  codes of conduct (all those interviewed, with the exception of Postal Life
                                  Insurance, reported they had a code of conduct), although the extent to which
                                  these codes are enforced by insurers is not clear. None of the major (top three
                                  life and nonlife) insurers had a code of conduct available on their websites (as
                                  of October 2012).

                            d. The IAP Code of Conduct is available on its website. 33


Recommendations A.3-1. SECP should establish appropriate codes of conduct for insurance, life and
                nonlife, in Pakistan. This should be done with industry participation. The IAP
                Code of Conduct for nonlife insurers provides a good starting point.

                            A.3-2. SECP should follow through on its intention of establishing a specific code
                            of conduct for microinsurance.

                            A.3-3. SECP should include in its supervisory activities assessments of compliance
                            with all codes of conduct and put in place processes (including penalties and
                            redress to adversely impacted consumers) to remedy breaches of codes of conduct.

                            A.3-4. As part of wider initiatives to promote awareness of insurance and
                            consumer rights, codes of conduct should be published, made accessible, and

33
     See http://www.iap.net.pk.
Pakistan                                                                           Insurance Sector


                   promoted. These activities would best be undertaken by a broad-based partnership
                   involving SECP, the insurance industry (potentially through the IAP), and other
                   parties.


Good Practice A.4 Other Institutional Arrangements
                  a. Prudential supervision and consumer protection can be placed in separate
                     agencies or lodged in a single institution, but allocation of resources
                     between prudential supervision and consumer protection should be
                     adequate to enable the effective implementation of consumer protection
                     rules.
                   b. The judicial system should provide credibility to the enforcement of the
                      rules on financial consumer protection.
                   c. The media and consumer associations should play an active role in
                      promoting consumer protection in the area of insurance.


Description        a. SECP is a unified regulator and supervisor for insurance, so all regulation and
                      supervision of insurers is done by SECP. The prime focus of SECP is on
                      prudential supervision of insurers. Although SECP has capacity limitations
                      affecting its supervision of insurance matters, the emphasis on consumer
                      protection–related issues is low. This is aggravated, particularly in the context
                      of retail consumers, by SECP only indirectly supervising agents (through
                      insurers).

                   b. The judicial system in general in Pakistan is reported to be slow and costly to
                      use. Thus, while in theory aggrieved consumers have the right to use the
                      judicial system to seek redress, in practice this would only very rarely be a
                      viable route.
                      See also Section E.2.


                   c. This does not occur. There appears to be little interest by either the media or
                      consumer associations in insurance matters. Such lack of interest does not help
                      raise awareness of the industry or support improving financial literacy or
                      consumer protection.


Recommendations A.4-1. See Recommendation A.1-1.

                   A.4-2. SECP and the industry should consider developing an ongoing campaign to
                   raise the profile and awareness of insurance education and related matters with the
                   media and consumer protection bodies.


Good Practice A.5 Bundling and Tying Clauses
                  Whenever an insurer contracts with a merchant or credit grantor (including
                  banks and leasing companies) as a distribution channel for its contracts, no
                  bundling (including enforcing adhesion to what is legally a single contract),



                                               101
                           tying, or other exclusionary dealings should take place without the consumer
                           being advised and able to opt out.
Description                It appears that Section 86 of the Insurance Ordinance may address this issue, but it
                           also appears that this section is not enforced. 34


Recommendation             A.5-1: SECP should consider applying Section 86 of the Insurance Ordinance as
                           part of its assessment of insurance products and contracts. This may be particularly
                           relevant to corporate leasing, bancassurance, and microinsurance products.


SECTION B
                           DISCLOSURE & SALES PRACTICES

Good Practice B.1          Sales Practices
                           a. Insurers should be held responsible for product-related information
                               provided to consumers by their agents (i.e., intermediaries acting for the
                               insurer).
                           b. Consumers should be informed whether the intermediary selling them an
                               insurance contract (known as a policy) is acting for them or for the insurer
                               (in the latter case, the intermediary has an agency agreement with the
                               insurer).
                           c. If the intermediary is a broker (i.e., acting on behalf of the consumer) then
                               the consumer should be advised at the time of initial contact with the
                               intermediary if a commission will be paid to the intermediary by the
                               underwriting insurer. The consumer should have the right to require
                               disclosure of the commission and other costs paid to an intermediary for
                               long-term savings contracts. The consumer should always be advised of the
                               amount of any commission and other expenses paid on any single premium
                               investment contract.
                           d. An intermediary should be prohibited from filling both brokering and
                               agency roles for a given general class of insurance (i.e., life and disability,
                               health, general insurance, credit insurance).
                           e. When a bank is the intermediary, the sales process should ensure that the
                               consumer understands at all times that he or she is not purchasing a bank
                               product or a product guaranteed by the bank.
                           f.   Sanctions, including meaningful fines and, in the case of intermediaries,
                                loss of license, should apply for breach of any of the above provisions.


Description                a. Insurers are responsible for all materials and information provided to
                              policyholder and potential policyholders by their agents (Section 95 of
                              Insurance Ordinance). The extent to which this obligation is enforced by SECP
                              is not clear.
                           b. Agents are required to disclose their status as an agent for an insurer (Section

34
  A specific instance of this is reported in “Consumer Financing in Pak istan: Issues, Challenges and Way Forward,” published by
the Consumer Rights Commission of Pak istan, 2008, in its section 7.10. Because bank s are not regulated by the SECP, SBP should
enforce the prov isions of Section 86.
Pakistan                                                                             Insurance Sector


                       100 of the Insurance Ordinance). The extent to which this obligation is
                       enforced by SECP is not clear.
                    c. All insurance brokers are required to be licensed by SECP. Only companies
                       may be so licensed. There is no explicit requirement for a broker to disclose
                       information regarding commission payment to policyholders or prospective
                       policyholders. It is possible that such a requirement could be implied under the
                       general requirement for brokers to disclose their relationship with insurer(s)
                       (Section 105 of Insurance Ordinance). However, in practice, it appears
                       commission disclosure is not required, or made.
                    d. A broker may hold agency agreements with insurer(s) but an agent may not be
                       a broker. A broker is presumed to be an agent for an insurer if a contract of
                       agency is in place. Beyond disclosure requirements, there is no prohibition on
                       a broker acting for one insurer as a broker and as an agent for another insurer
                       for the same class of insurance business.
                    e. The definition of “bancassurance” in SECP’s Bancassurance Guidelines of
                       2010 includes insurance products that are (i) bundled with banking products,
                       (ii) actively sold as independent products through the branch banking network,
                       (iii) actively sold through other channels, or (iv) sold through any other channel
                       that is recognized as an acceptable sales channel for banks by the State Bank of
                       Pakistan. Section 4 of the guidelines includes requirements regarding
                       marketing brochures and sales materials, claims handling, and the code of
                       conduct for the bank (as agent for the insurer). The understanding that a
                       purchase is not a bank product or guaranteed by the bank is not explicitly
                       stated, but follows from the specified required disclosures. The extent to which
                       such requirements are enforced by the insurer the bank is acting as agent for is
                       not clear.
                    f. SECP does not directly supervise the behavior of agents, banks or otherwise,
                       hence does not apply sanctions for breaches of behavior by agents. SECP does
                       license brokers and surveyors. It is unclear to what extent there is active
                       supervision of them or what steps may be taken in the case of breaches of
                       obligations.


Recommendation      B.1-1. While much of the regulatory framework to manage and supervise sales
                    practices is in place (or can be put in place), SECP should ensure during
                    supervision that the regulations are effectively being implemented. See also
                    Section B.6 and Recommendation A.1-1.


Good Practice B.2   Advertising and Sales Materials
                    a. Insurers should ensure that their advertising and sales materials and
                       procedures do not mislead customers. Regulatory limits should be placed
                       on investment returns used in life insurance value projections.
                    b. Insurers should be legally responsible for all statements made in
                       marketing and sales materials they produce related to their products.
                    c. All marketing and sales materials should be easily readable and
                        understandable by the general public.
Description         a. SECP publishes circulars specifying the rates of interest required to be used in
                       life insurance (and family takaful) product descriptions The most recent such


                                                 103
                       circular (01/2011), dated January 4, 2011, referred to the calendar year 2011.
                       It is noted that the long-term illustration template provides financial outcomes
                       in nominal interest rates. The use of nominal interest rates, as opposed to real
                       interest rates, can be misleading because the nominal rate results in very large
                       numbers over a long projection period (for example, more than 10 years), and
                       readers often interpret results using nominal rates of interest as if they were
                       determined using real rates of interest. This would require the specification of
                       an appropriate inflation rate. If the use of real rates of interest was required,
                       care would need to be taken to ensure both that illustration guidelines become
                       rules, so that all insurers are required to provide illustrations on a level playing
                       field, and also that other providers of comparable products (in particular
                       unitized investment products) are also required to provide illustrations under
                       the same conditions to avoid the risk of the life insurers being put at a
                       marketing disadvantage.
                    b. Insurers are legally responsible for marketing and sales materials produced or
                       used by their agents; however, the extent to which such requirements are
                       enforced by the insurer responsible for the agent is unclear. The legal position
                       and concerns about level of enforcement were recently reiterated by SECP in
                       Circular No. 19 of 2011.
                    c. This issue, in the context of websites, has been recently highlighted by SECP
                       through Circular No. 18 of 2011. This also highlights the desirability of having
                       information available in both English and Urdu. The extent to which such
                       requirements are applied by SECP as part of their “file and use” (see Section
                       F.1) process for life insurance products is unclear.
                       SECP in its Circular No. 18 of 2011 requires all insurers to present information
                       regarding their products on their websites in an easy to follow manner and in
                       both English and Urdu. Suggestions were also made that materials should be
                       provided in major regional languages, although it was acknowledged that this
                       may not always be practical.
                       SECP also intends to include requirements with regard to readability of
                       marketing and sales materials for microinsurance products in the
                       microinsurance regulations and guidelines currently being developed (Section
                       F1). SECP Consultation Paper covers both life and nonlife insurance.


Recommendations B.2-1. SECP should consider increasing its focus on the readability and access to
                marketing and sales materials used by insurers and their agents. More widely, see
                also Recommendation A.1-1.
                B.2-2. SECP should consider requiring illustrations for life insurance products to
                provide outcomes based on real rates of interest (without introducing competitive
                disadvantage).
                B.2-3. SECP should follow through on its intention of requiring marketing and
                sales materials to be readable and understandable to the public for microinsurance
                products, and extend this requirement to other insurance it covers.
Good Practice B.3   Understanding Customers’ Needs
                    The sales intermediary or officer should be required to obtain sufficient
                    information about the consumer to ensure an appropriate product is offered.
                    Formal “fact finds” should be specified for long-term savings and investment
Pakistan                                                                              Insurance Sector


                    products and they should be retained and be available for inspection for a
                    reasonable number of years.
Description         Formal fact finds (and associated documentation) are not required. There are
                    requirements that insurance advice provided, in writing, to a person, be relevant to
                    the circumstances of that person. The burden of proof that due regard was given to
                    the circumstances of the policyholder and that the advice given was reasonable rests
                    with the insurer (or broker). In practice, it is unclear that the extent to which such
                    requirements may be followed or enforced or the extent of records retained
                    throughout the industry.


Recommendation      B.3-1. As part of broader initiatives to enhance consumer awareness, SECP and
                    industry should consider how policyholder and potential policyholder needs can be
                    better identified, recorded, and then addressed. See also Recommendation A.1-1.
Good Practice B.4   Cooling-off Period
                    There should be a reasonable cooling-off period associated with any traditional
                    investment or long-term life savings contract, after the policy information is
                    delivered, to deal with possible high-pressure selling and mis-selling.
Description         Section 39 of SECP (Insurance) Rules, 2002, specifies a trial period of 14 days
                    from commencement for life insurance policies (excluding group insurance and
                    those having a term exceeding one year). There are no corresponding requirements
                    for nonlife insurance products.


Recommendation      No recommendation.
Good Practice B.5   Key Facts Statement
                    A Key Facts Statement should be attached to all sales and contractual
                    documents, disclosing the key factors of the insurance product or service in
                    large print.
Description         Key Facts Statements are not required at any point during the sales or policy
                    issuance process.


Recommendation      B.5-1. SECP and the industry should consider the appropriate use of Key Facts
                    Statements during the sales process and in policy contracts.
Good Practice B.6   Professional Competence
                    a. Sales personnel and intermediaries selling and advising on insurance
                       contracts should have sufficient qualifications based on the complexities of
                       the products they sell.
                    b. Educational requirements for intermediaries selling long-term savings and
                       investment insurance products should be specified, or at least approved, by
                       the regulator or supervisor.
Description         a. There are no prescribed educational, or other, requirements for sales personnel
                       (that is, employees of insurers, not agents or brokers). However, insurers are
                       obliged to take responsibility for the actions of their employees. In practice, it
                       is unclear the extent to which such requirements may be followed or enforced



                                                 105
                         by insurers or supervised by SECP.

                         There are only minimal prescribed educational (or other) requirements for
                         intermediaries (that is agents or brokers). Section 97 of the Insurance
                         Ordinance permits SECP to prescribe minimum qualifications, including
                         educational requirements, for agents. Section 102 permits SECP to prescribe
                         educational requirements for brokers as part of the licensing requirements.

                         It appears there are differing levels of industry requirements for agents. Most
                         (at least the leading) insurers report they have invested in developing their own
                         training programs for sales personal and their agents. Future changes should
                         recognize this investment and seek to leverage it and not waste it.
                         Especially with the introduction of microinsurance and, to a lesser extent,
                         bancassurance, consideration needs to be given to different types of agents
                         needing different skills.

                         SECP intends to include requirements on training of agents for microinsurance
                         products in the microinsurance regulations and guidelines currently being
                         developed (Section E3). SECP Consultation Paper covers both life and nonlife
                         insurance. This raises the possibility of establishing a more consistent
                         approach to the development of strengthened agent training for all types of
                         insurance.

                         It is noted that the Pakistan Insurance Institute already provides training courses
                         for agents of nonlife insurers, and other intermediaries. The Institute of Capital
                         Markets has also recently been established (with support from SECP among
                         others) with a mandate that includes developing human capacity in both capital
                         markets and insurance (with the first certified insurance training programs
                         planned to be offered in 2013), and coordinating with SECP and others to
                         develop financial services consumer and investor education programs to
                         address the current lack of awareness.
                         There is broad consensus that it would be valuable for SECP to specify more
                         rigorous minimum training requirements for intermediaries, and agents in
                         particular.
                         There is also broad agreement that it would be valuable for SECP to license
                         (even if in a devolved manner) agents industry-wide. This would permit the
                         establishment of an industry-wide register, accessible to both insurers and a
                         wider public, regarding the licensing status and history of agents.

                     b. Following from a. above, there are only minimal prescribed educational
                        requirements for intermediaries selling long-term savings and investment
                        insurance products.


Recommendations B.6-1. SECP should prescribe educational (and other as appropriate) requirements
                for all agents to satisfy, recognizing that agents selling different classes of business
                may need different qualifications.
Pakistan                                                                               Insurance Sector


                     B.6-2. SECP should supervise the capabilities and activities of agents more
                     vigorously, either directly or through the insurers. After a suitable transition
                     period, it should be required of insurers that all agents meet the minimum specified
                     SECP requirements.
                     B.6-3. SECP should license all insurance agents, either directly or in a devolved
                     manner. Such licensing (and associated training) should take into account
                     programs already established by some insurers, to avoid losing the value and
                     expertise already developed.


Good Practice B.7    Regulatory Status Disclosure
                     a. In all of its advertising, whether print, television, radio, or other, an
                        insurer should disclose
                            (i) that it is regulated, and
                            (ii) the name and address of the regulator.
                     b. All insurance intermediaries should be licensed and proof of licensing
                        should be readily available to the general public, including through the
                        Internet.
Description          a. These conditions are not met. In Circular No. 3 of 2012, SECP has specifically
                        banned insurers from mentioning the name or logo of SECP in their “publicity
                        ads” regarding their products (newspapers, websites, posters, leaflets, etc.).
                        Previously, the 2009 SECP guidelines (which are not compulsory) for life
                        insurance and family takaful specified that a footer must state that the insurer is
                        registered and supervised by SECP. Also, SECP Circular No. 22 of 2005
                        contains the following: “On the first page of the policy document, brochures,
                        leaflets, advertisements and any other promotional material whether used
                        electronically or in print, it shall be clearly mentioned that the insurer is
                        ‘Registered and Supervised by the Securities and Exchange Commission of
                        Pakistan.’ This must be done by 31 January 2006.”
                     b. SECP currently does not license insurance agents and does not maintain lists of
                        agents. It does license insurance brokers and insurance surveyors. Lists of
                        registered insurance brokers and insurance surveyors are available on SECP
                        website.
                        The issue of licensing insurance agents is a major one. The mission
                        understands that SECP supports an initiative to develop a database that includes
                        all insurance agents and historical data. This would be a valuable tool in
                        general and, in particular, for insurers who wish to review the history of agents
                        with prior experience. Such a register could be made mandatory through a
                        requirement that all insurers keep their agent force fully recorded. Insurers
                        report that they sometimes make informal checks with each other when an
                        agent changes insurer, but there are no formal or established processes to
                        support such checks in the industry.


Recommendations B.7-1. SECP should reconsider its approach to clarifying that registered insurers are
                supervised by SECP with respect to all appropriate materials and publicity
                produced by insurers. This may assist raising the profile and status of the industry
                and be particularly relevant to microinsurance and mandated third-party motor
                vehicle insurance.


                                                  107
                    B.7-2. SECP should continue to support the development of an industry-wide,
                    comprehensive, and mandatory data base of insurance agents of all types.
Good Practice B.8   Disclosure of Financial Situation
                    a. The regulator or supervisor should publish annual public reports on the
                        development, health, strength, and penetration of the insurance sector
                        either as a special report or as part of the disclosure and accountability
                        requirements under the law governing it.
                    b. Insurers should be required to disclose their financial information to
                        enable the general public to form an opinion on the financial viability of
                        the institution.
                    c. If credible claims paying ability ratings are not available, the regulator or
                        supervisor should periodically publish sufficient information on each
                        insurer for an informed commentator or intermediary to form a view of
                        the insurer’s relative financial strength.
Description         a. There is no requirement that SECP publish annual reports as to the status of the
                       insurance industry. Some industry summary information has been provided on
                       SECP website and in recent annual reports, but this includes no insurer-specific
                       information. Other information is not provided by SECP on an ongoing basis.
                       SECP collects information from insurers in prescribed formats. It has recently
                       introduced an electronic data collection process. This should facilitate the data
                       collection and validation processes, permitting SECP to develop its capacity for
                       statistical analysis of the industry.
                    b. Insurers are required to fulfil the requirements of the relevant accounting
                       standards in force and, for those insurers that are listed, also required to fulfil
                       exchange requirements. Summary information is also published in the annual
                       reports of Insurance Association of Pakistan.
                    c. SECP does not publish additional information to allow an informed
                       commentator to form a view of insurer’s financial strength. A number of
                       insurers, particularly the larger ones, are currently rated by ratings agencies in
                       Pakistan.


Recommendation      B.8-1. SECP consider developing its capacity to do statistical analysis of the
                    insurance industry and then consider producing annual reports for public access.
                    Appropriate confidentiality requirements also need to be put in place.


SECTION C
                    CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE

Good Practice C.1 Customer Account Handling
                  a. Customers should receive periodic statements of the value of their policy in
                     the case of insurance savings and investment contracts. For traditional
                     savings contracts, this should be provided at least yearly; however, more
                     frequent statements should be produced for investment-linked contracts.
                  b. Customers should have a means to dispute the accuracy of the transactions
                     recorded in the statement within a stipulated period.
Pakistan                                                                       Insurance Sector


              c. Insurers should be required to disclose the cash value of a traditional
                 savings or investment contract on demand and within a reasonable time.
                 In addition, a table showing projected cash values should be provided at
                 the time of delivery of the initial contract and at the time of any
                 subsequent adjustments.
              d. Customers should be provided with renewal notices a reasonable number
                 of days before the renewal date for nonlife policies. If an insurer does not
                 wish to renew a contract it should also provide a reasonable notice period.
              e. Claims should not be deniable or adjustable if nondisclosure is discovered
                 at the time of the claim but is immaterial to the proximate cause of the
                 claim. In such cases, the claim may be adjusted for any premium shortfall
                 or inability to recover reinsurance.
              f. Insurers should have the right to cancel a policy at any time (other than
                 after a claim has occurred if material nondisclosure can be established.
Description   a. There is no prescribed requirement for insurers—life insurers in particular—to
                 provide policyholders with regular statements.
              b. Strictly speaking, this item is not applicable because detailed statements are not
                 required. In practice, policyholders are typically able to contact their life
                 insurer and obtain information regarding their policies (e.g., total bonuses
                 available on their participating life policies). Assuming a statement (either
                 formal or informal) has been obtained, policyholders could use standard
                 complaint procedures to query values and transactions if dissatisfied.
              c. Insurers are required to disclose the projected cash values of life insurance
                 policies at inception of the policy (via the illustrations). For unitized
                 investment policies, life insurers are required to publish “in a newspaper having
                 general circulation” unit values on a monthly basis. For current policyholders,
                 there are no prescribed requirements; however, it was reported that life insurers
                 consider it good practice to respond to such requests. There are not prescribed
                 time frames for responses to policyholder requests to insurers.
              d. Such notices are required to be given at least one month prior to the renewal
                 date.
              e. These conditions are met for both life and nonlife insurance (Section 79 of the
                 Insurance Ordinance).
              f. These conditions are met. Section 82 of the Insurance Ordinance is specific
                 regarding life insurance. More generally, material misrepresentation can be
                 considered a breach of the “utmost good faith” obligations (Section 75 of the
                 Insurance Ordinance)

              Further commentary:
              From a consumer perspective, the management of claims is also of critical
              importance. This issue is of higher importance in for insurance than for other
              financial services sectors because of the nature and purpose of insurance contacts
              and their longer-term nature. There seems widespread, although not universal,
              agreement that claims processes, both before and after disputes may arise, need to
              be improved. From the perspective of consumer confidence in insurance, the
              quality and fairness of claims management must be addressed, both in terms of
              actual processes and in terms of perception.



                                           109
                     Many anecdotal instances of poor claims management and the perception (at least)
                     of claims being inappropriately denied were reported. Some industry respondents
                     felt that a significant part of this issue revolved around lack of consumer
                     understanding leading to inappropriate expectations. However, this belies the
                     insurer’s obligation to manage consumer expectations (both at point of sale and at
                     the time of claim) given the typical knowledge imbalance between consumers and
                     providers (including their agents). The experience with the mandated third-party
                     motor vehicle insurance also does not help create a positive perception of
                     insurance. The argument that a low level of complaints demonstrates there is not a
                     major issue is problematic because it belies the issue of lack of awareness of
                     consumers and the lack of promotion of dispute resolution processes. On a
                     positive note, some insurers also indicate that they were taking a more proactive
                     approach to claims management and initiating contact with claimants when they
                     could. This is a good initiative.

                     In non-life insurance, insurance surveyors (including loss adjusters and loss
                     assessors) are required to be licensed by SECP unless they are performing their
                     duties as an employee of an insurer. In the context of microinsurance, there may be
                     a need to review the processes by which nonlife claims may be assessed, to avoid
                     the need to use insurance surveyors (in the traditional ways they are used). Such a
                     review may require changes to the Insurance Ordinance or the prescription of
                     relevant rules or regulations under the ordinance with regard to microinsurance.

                     Claim dispute resolution processes, while they exist in the law, need to be better
                     implemented, and consumers need to be made more aware of their rights.
                     However, claim dispute resolution processes, although necessary, are reactive in
                     nature. See also Section E.

Recommendations C.1-1. Requirements for periodic (at least annual) statements for life insurance
                policies should be clarified and enforced. It is noted that SECP is in the process of
                developing guidance for the management of unitized investment products. This
                guidance should include appropriate disclosure and information requirements for
                policyholders. See also Recommendation A.1-1.
                C.1-2. SECP should consider requiring more detailed data regarding claims and
                their processing from insurers under its powers to collect data. It should also
                consider increasing the priority given to inspection activities regarding claims
                management. Not only would this support consumers, but it would also support
                prudential oversight of insurers because poor claims management may threaten
                solvency.
                C.1-3. As part of a broader campaign to increase the awareness of insurance and its
                benefits, the adverse perceptions around the payment of claims (whether valid or
                not) should be addressed. This may have particular relevance to the development
                of microinsurance.



                     PRIVACY & DATA PROTECTION
SECTION D
Good Practice D.1 Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
Pakistan                                                                                      Insurance Sector


                             Customers have a right to expect that their financial transactions are kept
                             confidential. Insurers should protect the confidentiality and security of
                             personal data, against any anticipated threats, or hazards to the security or
                             integrity of such information, and against unauthorized access.
Description                  SECP does not require specific steps to be taken by insurers to preserve the
                             confidentiality and security of customer information they hold. This is the case
                             both with regard to internal management and integrity of data held by insurers and
                             with regard to protecting data held from any form of unauthorized access.

                             Insurers reported awareness of the importance of data security and correctness from
                             the perspective of good business practice for delivering service to policyholders and
                             for reputational reasons.

                             According to a recent survey, 35 as of March 2012, there is “‘no legislation
                             regulating the protection of data in Pakistan.” Consequently, issues regarding
                             privacy, confidentiality, data integrity, and data protection are broader than
                             insurance and broader than financial services, although there may be a heightened
                             need for such protections in insurance and the financial services because they can
                             hold sensitive personal information, including personal information collected
                             through “know your customer” requirements under anti-money-laundering
                             procedures and information collected from prospective policyholders as part of a
                             needs analysis. With the development of bancassurance (sold through banks) and
                             microinsurance with a variety of intermediaries and innovative distribution
                             channels, and the general increase in volumes of information held electronically
                             (and possibly involving third-party service providers), the risks of breaches of
                             confidentiality and misuse of personal information increase.

                             Further commentary:
                             In addition to the level of security and protection of customer data provided by
                             insurers, there is also the question of whether insurers share their data with other
                             entities (e.g., banks) for various purposes such as marketing. There are no formal
                             requirements regarding this topic, but the general attitude reported to the mission
                             was that insurers only disclose information, as required by law, to the relevant
                             authorities.
Recommendations D.1-1. SECP and the insurance industry (potentially via the IAP) collaboratively
                develop guidelines (or stronger requirements) regarding minimum acceptable levels
                of privacy, confidentiality, data integrity, and data protection for insurance
                consumers and policyholders. This would include both processes internal to
                insurers and the sharing of data between entities. Once established, SECP would
                monitor the application of such guidelines by insurers, and take steps to ensure that
                breaches were properly addressed. SECP may be able to draw on work done in
                areas other than insurance, and work done by the State Bank of Pakistan in this
                regard.

                             D.1-2. Given that privacy and the protection of personal information is a wider

35
     Data Protection Laws of the World, DLA Piper, March 2012.



                                                                 111
                    issuer than insurance and financial services, consideration should be given to
                    reaching out to other interested parties and drawing on their experience with regard
                    to privacy and personal data protection.
SECTON E
                    DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS

Good Practice E.1   Internal Dispute Settlement
                    a. Insurers should provide an internal avenue for claim and dispute
                       resolution to policyholders.
                    b. Insurers should designate employees to handle retail policyholder
                       complaints.
                    c. Insurers should inform their customers of the internal procedures on
                       dispute resolution.
                    d. The regulator or supervisor should investigate whether insurers comply
                       with their internal procedures regarding consumer protection.
Description         a. The insurance law and rules do not directly require insurers to have an internal
                       disputes settlement process. Section 83 of the Insurance Ordinance would
                       appear to provide SECP with the power to prescribe requirements in this area if
                       it wishes to (to date, this power has not been exercised). It is reported that most
                       insurers have put in place some form of internal dispute resolution system (all
                       the life, nonlife, and takaful insurers interviewed asserted they had a system in
                       place). The quality and robustness of these systems is not clear, and there is
                       some concern that smaller or less reputable insurers may provide limited
                       support for internal dispute resolution. The IAP Code of Conduct makes no
                       reference to dispute resolution processes (internal or external).

                        SECP intends to include requirements with regard to complaint handling for
                        microinsurance products in the microinsurance regulations and guidelines
                        currently being developed (Section F2). SECP Consultation Paper covers both
                        life and nonlife insurance. This raises the possibility of establishing a more
                        consistent approach to the development of strengthened internal complaint-
                        handling processes for all types of insurance.

                    b. As above, such designated employees are not required by insurance law or
                       rules. Also, as above, it is reported most insurers have designated employees to
                       redress complaints, although that may not be their sole focus. The quality and
                       robustness of these systems is not clear, and there is some concern that smaller
                       or less reputable insurers may provide limited support for internal dispute
                       resolution.

                    c. SECP Circular No. 18 of 2011 requires all insurers to display on their websites
                       “The information relating to claim/grievance handling mechanism/procedure in
                       detail” no later than January 15, 2012.
                    d. SECP does not investigate whether insurers comply with their internal
                       complaints procedures.
Pakistan                                                                               Insurance Sector


                    Overall there is wide, if not universal, agreement on a need for internal dispute
                    resolution processes to be strengthened and insurance users, particularly retail
                    insurance users, made more aware of them and their rights.


Recommendations E.1-1. SECP should consider formalizing minimum requirements for internal
                dispute resolution processes for all insurers and insurance products, preferably in
                collaboration with the industry, and then monitors the effectiveness of insurers’
                internal dispute resolution processes.
                E.1-2. SECP should finalize and implement the microinsurance rules that allow for
                internal dispute resolution mechanisms by insurers for microinsurance products.
                E.1-3. SECP should collect and analyze data from all industry participants
                regarding the numbers, causes, and resolution of internal disputes. Such matters are
                related to the market conduct of insurers and so it appears that Section 83 of the
                Insurance Ordinance provides SECP with the power to do this.
Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                    a. A system should be in place that allows consumers to seek affordable and
                       efficient third-party recourse, which could be an ombudsman or tribunal,
                       in the event the complaint with the insurer cannot be resolved to the
                       consumer’s satisfaction in accordance with internal procedures.
                    b. The role of an ombudsman or equivalent institution vis-à-vis consumer
                       disputes should be made known to the public.
                    c. The ombudsman or equivalent institution should be impartial and act
                       independently from the appointing authority and the industry.
                    d. The decisions of the ombudsman or equivalent institution should be
                       binding on the insurers. The mechanisms to ensure the enforcement of
                       these decisions should be established and publicized.
Description         a. The Insurance Ordinance specifies three types of external dispute resolution
                       process:
                       (i) Small Disputes Resolution Committees (Section 117). SECP Circular No.
                            4 of 2007 purports to establish a Small Disputes Resolution Committee.
                            This committee has never met. It is intended that the committee
                            adjudicate on a restricted set of types of life and nonlife policies, deal with
                            claims less than a specified ceiling, and have its decisions be binding on
                            all parties. Although the concept may be useful, the implementation has
                            failed.
                       (ii) Federally Constituted Insurance Tribunals (Part XV). These tribunals
                            have the powers of civil courts, and decisions may be appealed only to the
                            high court. SECP Circular No. 15 of 2006 announced that in October
                            2006, the federal government established four provincially limited
                            (Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and Balauchistan) insurance
                            tribunals by conferring the powers of an insurance tribunal on specified
                            district and sessions judges. Claim amounts more than PRs 100,000 may
                            be appealed to the relevant provincial high court.
                            The linkage between these provincial courts and SECP for insurance
                            matters is not strong and should be improved so that the provincial courts
                            have access to the appropriate level of current insurance expertise when



                                                 113
                                     making their decisions.
                               (iii) A Federal Insurance Ombudsman (Part XVI). The insurance ombudsman
                                     may investigate allegations of misadministration (Section 127(2)) by
                                     insurers. The office of the insurance ombudsman was established in May
                                     2006. Decisions of the insurance ombudsman may be appealed to SECP
                                     who will make a final decision. Complainants also retain the right to file a
                                     suit against insurers if their complaints are rejected by the insurance
                                     ombudsman. The insurance ombudsman may also pass matters on to
                                     SECP for further investigation.
                                     Information about the insurance ombudsman is not available at the time of
                                     the writing of this report. 36 It has been reported that a relatively small
                                     number of complaints have been investigated by the Insurance
                                     Ombudsman, on the order of 50–100 in recent years. This is a surprisingly
                                     low number and is considered to be mostly attributable to lack of
                                     awareness or access as opposed to lack of valid complaints.
                                     Costs of the insurance ombudsman are met though a levy on the insurance
                                     industry collected by SECP.

                               There is also a federal ombudsman (distinct from the insurance ombudsman).
                               Both State Life Insurance Corporation (SLIC) and Postal Life Insurance use
                               this office for external dispute resolution, and both indicated they were
                               unaware of the insurance ombudsman. With PLI being outside the effective
                               ambit of SECP, this is possibly understandable, but the SLIC has been
                               informed of the insurance ombudsman through SECP circulars. The use of the
                               federal ombudsman for insurance matters should be discontinued.
                               Finally, complaints may be made against insurers directly through the legal
                               system. However, it is generally accepted that the legal system in Pakistan is
                               very slow and costly, and so may be impractical for many to use in practice.

                          b. The consensus is that none of the external dispute resolution processes are well
                             known to the public and hence their effectiveness is limited. It is generally
                             accepted that there is a need to raise the awareness among insurance users,
                             particularly retail insurance users, of the possibility of using either the
                             insurance tribunals or the insurance ombudsman for external complaints
                             resolution. It is also accepted that both these routes can be slow.

                          c. The insurance tribunals are, effectively, courts of law and so should be
                             expected to operate with the level of independence and impartiality expected of
                             courts of law.
                             The insurance ombudsman, according to SECP website, “is an autonomous
                             national dispute resolution body which independently and impartially resolves
                             insurance disputes between insurance policyholders and participating
                             companies, absolutely free of cost.”


36
   The current insurance ombudsman’s website is reported to be http://www.fio.gov.pk, but it has been suspended since October
2012. The mission was not able to meet with the insurance ombudsman while in Pak istan. Consequently annual Insurance
Ombudsman Reports and other information were not av ailable to the mission.
Pakistan                                                                              Insurance Sector



                    d. Decisions by the insurance ombudsman (or SECP if an insurer appeals there)
                       are binding on the insurer and if not implemented leave the insurer liable to a
                       fine or penalty from SECP. Decisions made by the insurance tribunals follow
                       the prescribed legal processes for enforcement.

                    The argument that there is not a problem with external dispute resolution systems
                    because there are currently not many complaints made through them is rejected,
                    particularly in the retail insurance consumer context. A system that is difficult to
                    use or inaccessible, for whatever reason, will automatically generate low usage.
                    That does not imply there is not a problem, merely that the system is difficult to
                    use.
                    See also the comments re microinsurance in Section E.1.

                    In summary, the external dispute resolution processes for insurance in Pakistan may
                    appear quite good on paper but are not effective in practice for a variety of reasons.
                    The issues to address include lack of access, awareness, and poor functioning, so
                    consequently the implementation, access, and awareness need to be improved for
                    them to be effective for retail insurance consumers.


Recommendations E.2-1. The Small Disputes Resolution Committee(s) need to be either made widely
                known, functional, and effective (including having appropriate personnel on them,
                which is not currently the case) or abandoned.
                E.2-2. The insurance tribunals, being effectively courts, need to be both brought
                into closer liaison with SECP and made genuinely accessible to retail insurance
                consumers to be effective for retail insurance consumers.
                E.2-3. Effective means for external dispute resolution for microinsurance
                policyholders need to be developed. Although the court system may be available
                theoretically, it is not in practice.
                E.2-4. The office of the insurance ombudsman needs to become more widely
                known, more accessible, and more cost-effective. It is currently not as effective as
                it should be for retail insurance consumers.
                E.2-5. The SLIC and PLI (assuming they are brought under the effective
                supervision of SECP) should use the insurance ombudsman and not the federal
                ombudsman.



                    GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY
SECTION F
Good Practice F.1   Guarantee Schemes and Insolvency
                    a. With the exception of schemes covering mandatory insurance (and
                       possibly long-term insurance), insolvency guarantee schemes are not to be
                       encouraged for insurance because of the opaque nature of the industry and
                       the scope for moral hazard. Strong governance and prudential supervision
                       are better alternatives.
                    b. Nominal defendant arrangements should be in place for mandatory


                                                 115
                  insurances such as third-party motor vehicle insurance to cover situations
                  where there is no insured guilty party.
              c. Assets covering life insurance mathematical reserves and investment
                  contract policy liabilities should be segregated or at the very least
                  earmarked, and long-term policyholders should have preferential access to
                  such assets in the event of a winding-up.
Description   a. Insolvency guarantee scheme
                 There is no insolvency guarantee scheme in place for either life or nonlife
                 insurers. The SLIC, being a government-owned insurer, report they have a
                 government guarantee and consider insolvency concerns to not be applicable.
                 Similarly, the PLI report they have a government guarantee.

              b. Nominal defendant for mandatory insurances
                 The key mandatory insurance cover is third-party motor vehicle insurance
                 (discussed above). The legislation governing this is Chapter XIII of the Motor
                 Vehicles Act 1939 (when this act was repealed, this chapter was not, hence its
                 name as the Saved Chapter). There is no mention of either a nominal defendant
                 or a guarantee fund to address issues that might arise due to insurer bankruptcy,
                 the guilty driver/vehicle not being able to be identified, or the guilty driver not
                 being insured.

              c. Life insurance—segregation of assets, and policyholder preferential access in
                 case of wind-up
                 Life insurers are required to establish statutory funds (Part III of the Insurance
                 Ordinance). This clearly segregates assets between different types of insurance,
                 establishes a separate shareholder fund, specifies criteria for the referral of all
                 assets, liabilities, and expenses to statutory funds or the shareholder fund, and
                 provides SECP with the power to prescribe rules. The Insurance Ordinance
                 specifies (Sections 26 and 27) certain duties for the appointed actuary and
                 SECP has the power to prescribe further duties (which it has done through the
                 Securities and Exchange Commission [Insurance] Rules, 2002, most recently
                 updated in a notification dated January 9, 2012). These duties include the
                 requirement to provide directors of life insurers with written advice regarding
                 any distribution of capital in a statutory fund (Insurance Ordinance, Section
                 21(3)) and, more generally, providing an annual Financial Condition Report to
                 the boards of insurers (with a confidential copy provided to SECP). The
                 statutory fund approach coupled with the use of an appointed actuary regime
                 provides a strong process for the protection of policyholder interests. There are
                 no comparable requirements of nonlife insurers.


                  In the event of the windup of an insurer, life or nonlife (Part XVIII of the
                  Insurance Ordinance), the court is required to be satisfied that a windup order is
                  in the interests of the policyholders. SECP has a number of powers that it can
                  exercise, including application for directions from the court and obtaining
                  information. With regard to life insurers, additional requirements apply to the
                  application of statutory fund assets with the first priority being application in
                  accordance with Section 405 of the Companies Ordinance, 1984, and the
Pakistan                                                                       Insurance Sector


               second priority being the discharge of policy liabilities referable to the statutory
               fund. This provides some further policyholder protection in the event of
               windup of a life insurer.

           Further commentary:
           There are other aspects of the supervision and management of insurers, in addition
           to the segregation of assets (via statutory funds for life insurers in Pakistan) that
           contribute, possible indirectly, to the protections of consumers and their interests.
           Several are noted here:

           (i) Review of products—new or changing
               For life insurance a “file and use” approach is applied by SECP (following
               Section 13 of the Insurance Ordinance) with regard to new products and
               changes to existing products. Under this approach, specific approval to offer
               new products is not required, but SECP retains the right (for a period of 30
               days after full submissions) to direct a life insurer to make changes in the
               particulars and materials submitted.
               This is a valuable consumer protection process as it can be employed to
               prevent (in SECP’s opinion) inappropriate policy conditions being applied,
               inappropriate marketing materials being used, and inadequate (or overly
               adequate), premiums being charged, among other things.
               No such requirements apply to nonlife insurers. There is a view that a
               significant issue facing the nonlife insurance sector in Pakistan is that there is a
               lot of price cutting and this affects the profitability (and potentially, the
               ongoing solvency) of the industry. The sale of unprofitable policies is not in
               the longer-term interests of consumers.
               However, Section 12(4) of the Insurance Ordinance specifies: “The insurer or
               applicant shall not be regarded as conducting its business in a sound and
               prudent manner if it fails to conduct its business with due regard to the interests
               of policyholder and potential policy-holders.”
               SECP intends to include requirements with regard to submission of product
               details for microinsurance products in the microinsurance regulations and
               guidelines currently being developed (Section I2). SECP Consultation Paper
               covers both life and nonlife insurance.           This raises the possibility of
               establishing a more consistent approach to the development of products for all
               types of insurance. Also, because health insurance can be offered by both life
               and nonlife companies, care needs to be taken to avoid introducing regulatory
               arbitrage into the health insurance market (microinsurance or not).

           (ii) Role of appointed actuary
                Life insurers are required to appoint an appointed actuary (Insurance
                Ordinance Sections 26 and 27). Duties of the appointed actuary include
                certifying that the terms and conditions of policies issued by the life insurer are
                “sound and workable” and certifying the premium rates for new products and
                any changes in premium rates. These duties are clearly in the interests of
                consumers.
                As noted earlier, there are no comparable appointed actuary requirements for


                                         117
                                 non-life insurers. Section 50(7) of the Insurance Ordinance permits SECP to
                                 prescribe actuarial investigations with respect to classes or subclasses of non-
                                 life insurance of an insurer or insurers generally.


Recommendations F.1-1. If a fault-based approach is retained with mandatory third-party motor
                vehicle insurance then the role of the “nominal defendant” should be properly
                implemented. However, see the prior wider discussion regarding this mandated
                class of insurance.
                F.1-2. SECP should complete its intention of applying a “file and use” approach to
                microinsurance products.
                F.1-3. SECP should consider applying a “file and use” approach to nonlife
                insurance products.
                F.1-4. SECP should consider introducing the appointed actuary and Financial
                Condition Report concepts for nonlife insurers, particularly with regard to matters
                like premiums that directly affect consumers.



                           CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT
SECTION G
Good Practice G.1 Broadly Based Financial Capability Program
                  a. A broadly based program of financial education and information should
                     be developed to increase the financial capability of the population.
                  b. A range of organizations—including government, state agencies, and
                     nongovernmental organizations—should be involved in developing and
                     implementing the financial capability program.
                  c. The government should appoint an institution such as the central bank or
                     a financial regulator to lead and coordinate the development and
                     implementation of the national financial capability program.


Description                The development of national financial capability program is an issue that is wider
                           and deeper than the insurance sector. The current Nationwide Financial Literacy
                           Programme 37 is noted. This program focuses on budget and money management.
                           However, there needs to be recognition that the insurance sector has some distinct
                           characteristics that must be considered in the development of broader financial
                           capability programs. These include:

                           (i) Mandated insurances
                               Leaving aside the question of how effectively such coverage has been
                               implemented, by virtue of being mandated, such coverage places a higher level
                               of obligation on the government, supervisors, and providers to make the
                               performance and delivery of such products effective, efficient, and cost-

37 The Nationwide Financial Literacy Programme was launched by the State Bank of Pak istan (SBP) in January 2012 under the
Asian Dev elopment Bank Improv ing Access to Financial Serv ices Fund. The pilot phase has concluded and is being ev aluated prior a
rollout on a large scale.
Pakistan                                                                              Insurance Sector


                       effective.

                   (ii) Risk-management nature of protection insurance
                        Insurance purchased for protection purposes (as distinct from investment
                        purposes) should not be assessed on a simple “was my premium recovered”
                        basis. The purpose of protection insurance is, in principle, to harness the power
                        of participating in a group so that when an event that is “catastrophic” to an
                        individual occurs, the resources of the group can be used to redress that loss
                        (which is not “catastrophic” for the group). Protection insurance is a risk-
                        management tool, not an investment tool. This can be quite an abstract concept
                        to convey.

                   (iii) Long-term nature of some insurances
                         Some insurance covers, including traditional covers, are long-term contracts
                         and need a long-term perspective. A key feature of such products is that often
                         when the end of the contract is reached, if the objectives have not been
                         achieved, there is no option to start again in some way. This applies to both the
                         protections and investment aspects of insurance contracts. Also, in many cases
                         where insurance contracts have an annual duration, this does not imply the risk
                         they are covering has only an annual duration.

                   A recurring theme in discussions was the need to raise awareness of the role of
                   insurance for consumers. There was also broad agreement that such awareness
                   raising would best be addressed at an industry level or higher as part of a broader
                   financial awareness and literacy program.
                   a. In principle all insurers agreed with this. Little or no work in this direction has
                        been undertaken by the insurance sector to date. A number of insurers, life
                        insurers in particular, noted the potential for industry support for an program to
                        raise awareness of insurance issues.
                   b. There is also general support for a broad-based initiative to develop financial
                        education and awareness. It is understood that SECP is participating in the
                        development of some such broader initiatives.
                   c. The development of a national financial capability program is an issue that
                        extends beyond the insurance sector. However, as noted above, some particular
                        aspects of insurance need to be recognized.


Recommendation     G.1-1. SECP should continue to participate in the development of financial
                   capability–building initiatives, recognizing the particular needs of insurance, and
                   seek active involvement and support from the insurance industry.


Good Practice G.2 Unbiased Information for Consumers
                  a. Consumers, especially the most vulnerable, should have access to sufficient
                     resources to enable them to understand financial products and services
                     available to them.
                  b. Financial regulators should provide, via the Internet and printed



                                                119
                                publications, independent information on the key features, benefits, and
                                risks—and, where practicable, the costs—of the main types of financial
                                products and services.
                             c. Nongovernmental organizations should be encouraged to provide
                                consumer awareness programs to the public regarding financial products
                                and services.
Description                  The implied presumptions of literacy and the educational capacity to understand
                             matters relating to insurance in the above item need to be recognized. The overall
                             literacy rate in Pakistan is estimated to be just under 60 percent, with a wide
                             disparity between males and females (approximately 70 percent and 45 percent,
                             respectively) and also a wide disparity between urban and rural populations
                             (approximately 75 percent and 50 percent, respectively).
                             a. SECP intends to include requirements with regard to disclosure in the
                                  microinsurance regulations and guidelines currently being developed (Section
                                  F1). SECP Consultation Paper covers both life and non-life insurance. This
                                  raises the possibility of establishing a more consistent approach to developing
                                  products for all types of insurance. Where consumers may be more vulnerable,
                                  there is a heightened responsibility for intermediaries and their insurers they
                                  represent to ensure that they are not taken advantage of.
                             b. Some basic information is available via the Internet with regard to generic
                                  insurance products for retail consumers. 38 There appears to be little other
                                  independent information available to consumers, in particular regarding costs
                                  and comparative premium rates.
                             c. Nongovernmental organizations do little or no work to develop consumer
                                  awareness with regard to retail insurance. This could pose problems in the
                                  microinsurance market.
                                  There appears to be little media or other independent commentator interest in
                                  insurance matters to support the development of consumer awareness.
Recommendations G.2-1. SECP should follow through on its intention to develop appropriate
                disclosure requirements for all microinsurance products.
                G.2-2. SECP and industry should collaboratively seek means for retail insurance
                consumers to access independent and unbiased information regarding insurance
                products.
Good Practice G.3 Measuring the Impact of Financial Capability Initiatives
                  a. Policymakers, industry, and advocates should understand the financial
                     capability of various market segments, particularly those most vulnerable
                     to abuse.
                  b. The financial capability of consumers should be measured through a
                     broad-based household survey that is repeated periodically.
                             c. The effectiveness of key financial capability initiatives should be evaluated.


Description                  In principle, such initiatives are supported by the insurance industry, especially life
                             insurers who have more contact with retail insurance consumers. From a pragmatic

38
     See the SECP website and their publication “How Insurance Works for You,” December 2010.
Pakistan                                                                         Insurance Sector


                 point of view such initiatives should be established at a higher level than the
                 insurance industry and be part of a broader program to improve financial awareness
                 and literacy of the population overall.

                 a. In practice, no specific initiatives have been taken by SECP or the insurance
                    industry to measure the financial capability of market segments.
                 b. Such broadly based householder surveys, in particular relating to insurance,
                    have not yet been conducted in Pakistan.
                 c. This, given the prior comments, remains to be assessed.


Recommendation   G.3-1. As part of a broader program to develop and measure the changes in
                 financial literacy, SECP and the insurance industry should be encouraged to support
                 financial capability development initiatives. This should include regular surveys to
                 assess financial literacy and assess the impact of initiatives to improve financial
                 literacy.




                                             121
   4. Securities Sector: Good Practices


SECTION A           INVESTOR PROTECTION INSTITUTIONS

Good Practice A.1   Consumer Protection Regime
                    The law should provide for clear rules on investor protection in the area of
                    securities markets products and services, and there should be adequate
                    institutional arrangements for implementation and enforcement of investor
                    protection rules.
                        a. There should be specific legal provisions in the law, which create an
                            effective regime for the protection of investors in securities.
                        b. There should be a governmental agency responsible for data
                            collection and analysis (including complaints, disputes, and inquiries)
                            and for the oversight and enforcement of investor protection laws
                            and regulations.
Description         The Securities & Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) has a strong
                    mandate to protect the rights and interests of investors in the securities sector.
                    SECP Act, 1997, provides a strong mandate for SECP to “strive to maintain
                    confidence of investors in the securities markets by ensuring adequate protector
                    for such investors.”

                    SECP has also issued the Broker and Agents Registration Rules, 2001, which
                    requires brokers who fail to resolve an investor’s complaint to be liable for
                    suspension and ineligible for registration or licensing by SECP. An open-end
                    fund (CIS) is created as a trust under the Trusts Act, 1882, and the fund is
                    required to be registered with SECP under the NBFC Rules, 2003, with a
                    custodian that meets the eligibility criteria spelled out by SECP. The Mutual
                    Fund Association of Pakistan’s (MUFAP’s) Code of Conduct introduces
                    minimum requirements for the distributors of mutual funds, including fit and
                    proper criteria to ensure that only those with sufficient level of knowledge and
                    expertise can be registered.

                    SECP has issued Circular No. 35 of 2009 for brokers and Circular No. 34 of 2009
                    for CIS distributors requiring all brokers, asset managers, and distributors of
                    mutual fund products to have certified a minimum of 20 percent of personnel, or
                    two persons, who deal with clients. Under Circular No. 34, all mutual fund
                    distributors are required to be registered with MUFAP and be certified; the
                    MUFAP code requires certification as well. MUFAP has also proposed a Code
                    of Ethics and Standards of Professional Conduct for asset management
                    companies, but is still awaiting SECP’s final approval as required under the Non-
                    Banking Finance Companies Rules, 2003.

                    Investor protection is widely recognized under the securities laws and the rules
                    made pursuant to them. SECP has extensive powers in regard to the registration
                    and regulation of stock exchanges, regulation of issuers, prohibition against
                    market abuse such as insider trading and market manipulation, as well as
                    enforcement powers for breaches against the laws and regulations. The stock
Pakistan                                                                                                   Financial Education


                             exchange’s internal operations are based on its regulation of trading and
                             membership. These regulations provide for arbitration for the handling of
                             disputes related to activity on the exchange.

                             SECP Act v ests SECP with an explicit mandate to resolv e complaints between securities brok ers and
                             their clients. SECP receiv es complaints from inv estors and directs them to the different operations
                             within SECP according to the subject matter. SECP publishes statistics on the nature and number of
                             complaints and their status in its annual reports, but no dedicated centralized unit monitors and
                             analy zes these complaints to ensure effectiv eness. Howev er, after the World Bank mission, SECP has
                             established a centralized unit to monitor complaints.


                             SECP collects and publishes statistics on the numbers of consumer complaints filed with SECP, the
                             exchanges, and the brok er. A fter the mission, a centralized unit handled complaints to SECP; before
                             that, complaints from inv estors were monitored by the Brok er Registration & Inv estor Complaints
                             Wing of the Securities Mark et Div ision. Its 2011 Annual Report prov ides broad trends in ty pes of
                             complaints and final resolutions. Howev er, statistics are not sufficiently detailed to assist the analy sis
                             of the k ey issues and common trends. For example, based on the statistics 39 on the number and
                             nature of complaints SECP receiv ed by y ear-end 2011, out of 11 categories of complaints receiv ed,
                             the one with the largest number of complaints is categorized as “Miscellaneous.” This does not
                             prov ide clarity on the nature of complaints for monitoring purposes.


                             The relevant self-regulatory organizations (SROs) have adopted their own regime
                             for investor protection and maintain data on investor complaints for resolution in
                             a timely manner. SECP also takes part in resolving investor complaints
                             independently in case there is any delay by the SROs. Further, SECP has powers
                             to suspend the registration of or impose a fine on a broker who fails to settle an
                             investor complaint that has been adjudicated by an SRO, its committee, or SECP
                             itself. SECP, based on analysis of inspection reports and of the nature of
                             complaints received against the registered brokers, suggests amendments and
                             makes new regulations for market oversight and enforcement.

                             Data regarding initial public offerings (IPOs), debts issue of securities, and their
                             redemption status are maintained by SECP and is available on SECP’s website.


Recommendations              SECP can further strengthen its own transparency and accountability regarding
                             treatment of consumer complaints. This is because both disputes and inquiries
                             provide valuable early warning signals to both the intermediaries’ management
                             and the supervisor regarding possible future problems.

                             A central location should be established to collect, record, redirect, and publish statistics on
                             complaints related to capital mark et serv ices. SECP informed the mission that it is in the process of
                             establishing a centralized department to handle complaints, and on December 19, 2012 (after the
                             mission), SECP announced a central serv ice for complaints.


                             The central service within SECP should receive and respond to all securities
                             markets’ complaints (even though the central service should pass them on to the
                             financial institution or relevant departments within SECP for them to make
                             necessary inquiries and investigations if necessary. Following the mission
                             (December 19, 2012) SECP announced the launch of a service desk to act as just
                             such a central point to handle complaints and inquiries.


39
  These statistics appear to be prov ided by the Enforcement Department of the SECP, because no centralized database on
complaints is maintained.



                                                                123
                    SECP should develop a clients’ charter to ensure effective and efficient
                    complaint-handling processes within SECP.

                    The central service within SECP should publish aggregate statistics on the
                    number and nature of complaints received each month (or for the year) and what
                    happened to the complaints - whether they resulted in a resolution by the market
                    intermediary, and of those complaints that went into dispute resolution - the
                    number resolved in favor of the investors and the number in favor of the market
                    intermediary.



Good Practice A.2   Code of Conduct for Securities Intermediaries (SIs) and Collective Investment
                    Undertakings (CIUs).
                        a. Securities Intermediaries and CIUs should have a voluntary code of
                            conduct.
                        b. Securities Intermediaries and CIUs should publicize the code of
                           conduct to the general public through appropriate means.
                        c. Securities Intermediaries and CIUs should comply with the code and
                           an appropriate mechanism should be in place to provide incentives to
                           comply with the code.
Description         Brokers are registered with SECP under Brokers and Agents Registration Rules,
                    2001 (BARR 2001), which mandate that all registered brokers shall comply with
                    the code of conduct as prescribed in Third Schedule to the BARR 2001. Further
                    relevant stock exchanges have also laid down their own code of conduct through
                    the general regulations under which all brokers and their employees are required
                    to abide by the same. The existing Code of Conduct for Brokers provides for the
                    following:

                        •   General: integrity, exercise of due skill and care, manipulation,
                            compliance with statutory requirements
                        •   Duty to the Investor: execution of orders, issue of contract note, breach of
                            trust, business and commission, business of defaulting clients, fairness to
                            clients, investment advice, broker competence
                        •   Broker vis-à-vis other Brokers: conduct of dealings, protection of clients’
                            interest, transactions with brokers, publicity, inducement of clients, false
                            or misleading returns
                        •   Brokers vis-à-vis Commission and Stock Exchange: general conduct,
                            failure to give information


                    The Code of Conduct for Debt Securities Trustees is covered under Schedule II of
                    the Debt Securities Trustees Regulations, 2012.

                    The Mutual Funds Association of Pakistan “MUFAP” has drafted a Code of
                    Ethics           and             Standards            of           Professional
                    Conduct for Asset Managers that provides for business conduct standards of asset
                    managers andis still awaiting SECP’s approval at mission date. SECP, through a
Pakistan                                                                      Financial Education


                  September 2011 SRO, amended the Non-Banking and Notified Entities
                  Regulations, 2008, which introduced the MUFAP registration requirements for
                  distributors and the need for the distributors to abide by the Code of Qualification
                  and Conduct for Registered Service Providers that came into effect in July 2012.
                  Through the code of conduct, the MUFAP has introduced entry minimum
                  requirements, including fit and proper criteria.


                  In order to revamp the existing code of conduct, SECP is in the process of
                  implementing new code of conduct for stockbrokers in light of International
                  Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) principles and international
                  best standards that broadly cover the following sections:

                      •   Act honestly, fairly, and with integrity
                      •   Due skill, care, and diligence
                      •   Adequate resources and procedures
                      •   Information from clients
                      •   Information to clients
                      •   Conflicts of interest
                      •   Compliance
                      •   Client assets
                      •   Dealing with other brokers
                      •   Investor grievances


                  In Pakistan, the brokers’ code of conduct is prescribed as a subsidiary legislation
                  by SECP rather than by the stock exchange. Over the years, the stock exchanges
                  have adopted some aspects of business conduct standards in their general
                  regulations and instructions to their members. With the recent demutualization of
                  stock exchanges, there is a need to rationalize the business conduct standards in
                  the regulatory framework in the form of the codes of conduct. This is because
                  regulation comes with a cost and it would be more important that industry
                  participants are actively involved in developing and promoting high conduct
                  standards than for such standards to be “legislated.” What are critical are the
                  legal consequences that would flow with breaches of business conduct rules by
                  financial service providers. The MUFAP, as a relatively new SRO, has taken the
                  initiative to propose a Codes of Ethics of Professional Conduct for Asset
                  Managers (still not approved by SECP at mission date) as well as for distributors
                  of mutual funds (approved by SECP).

                  However, none of the codes of conduct is well known to investors, even to the
                  members of each association.

Recommendations   The codes of conduct should be placed in brokers’ branches and intermediaries’
                  retail offices and websites. The value of a code of conduct is its widespread
                  distribution so that consumers know that, in principle, financial institutions have
                  agreed to provide minimum levels of service and to respond to complaints and
                  disputes. Consumers should be advised upfront that if an intermediary fails to
                  comply with the code of conduct, a complaint can be submitted to the institution,
                  the professional association, and SECP.


                                             125
                    There should be a strong mechanism to investigate code of conduct breaches,
                    including the possibility that these breaches be publicized and that SECP use
                    these breaches as early warning signals.

                    Industry codes of conduct should be developed for each segment of the financial
                    sector, or one could be prepared for use across the securities sector. Codes should
                    be as similar as possible across segments, ideally based on basic common rules
                    for all segments, with specifics added for individual segments, to make sure
                    conditions are equal for financial products that have similar features but are
                    legally different (such as mutual funds and structured and leveraged products).

                    A policy of “comply or explain” could be useful to strengthen the enforcement of
                    codes of conduct that go beyond regulatory requirements. Under this policy, the
                    financial institution is assumed to comply with the code of conduct, otherwise the
                    financial institution would have to explain reasons for noncompliance.
                    Noncompliance and non-explanation would be considered misleading business
                    practices and be subject to sanctions. The same policy could be applied to
                    standard contract provisions; the need to deviate from a standard contract
                    provision would have to be explained.

Good Practice A.3   Other Institutional Arrangements
                        a. The judicial system should provide an efficient and trusted venue for
                           the enforcement of laws and regulations on investor protection.
                        b. The media should play an active role in promoting investor
                           protection.
                        c. The private sector, including voluntary investor protection
                           organizations, industry associations, and, where permitted, self-
                           regulatory organizations, should play an active role in promoting
                           investor protection.


Description         The judicial system as one of the venues for investors to bring complaints against
                    a securities intermediary is expensive and time consuming and does not appear to
                    be useful for small complaints by retail investors. Pakistan has a three-tiered
                    judicial system. There is one high court in each province, and one in the federal
                    capital, Islamabad. These are the appellate courts for all civil and criminal cases
                    in each respective province. District courts exist in every district of each
                    province, and have civil and criminal jurisdictions. District and sessions judges
                    have executive and judicial power over all the districts under their jurisdiction.
                    The sessions court is a trial court for various offenses and the appellate court for
                    summary conviction offenses and low-value civil suits. The high court of each
                    province has appellate jurisdiction over the lower courts. The supreme
                    court has exclusive jurisdiction over disputes between and among provincial
                    governments, and appellate jurisdiction over high court decisions.

                    The media’s role on investor protection issues is limited by the information that is
                    provided to them.
Pakistan                                                                      Financial Education



                    Registered SROs and industry associations play a role in promoting fair and
                    transparent trading and safeguarding investors’ interests and assets in their
                    respective capacities. The SROs have dedicated staff for dealing with investor
                    protection issues. The Financial Markets Association of Pakistan, formed in
                    1997, is a noncommercial, nonprofit, self-financed, professional association of
                    dealers of financial instruments. The members of the association are drawn from
                    dealing room staff of all nationalized banks, foreign banks, private sector banks,
                    NBFCs, and foreign exchange/money market interbank brokerages houses. The
                    Financial Markets Association of Pakistan (FMAP) has about 285 members, who
                    annually elect the governing body. The FMAP has recently been granted SRO
                    status with a mandate from the State Bank of Pakistan, and will work toward
                    achieving      the     tasks    elaborated     in   the    Mission      Statement.
                    FMAP is affiliated with "Association Combsite Internationale - Paris", like other
                    similar national associations across the world. FMAP is also recognized as Self-
                    Regulatory Organization (SRO).

                    There is hardly any consumer organization that focuses on financial products or
                    services .

Recommendations     The media and industry associations should be encouraged to promote awareness
                    of consumer protection.

                    SECP should encourage involvement of consumer organizations by engaging
                    with them on policy formulation.

                    In view of the weak capacity of the courts, the establishment of a financial
                    ombudsman for the disputes between investors and securities intermediaries
                    would be critical because it would provide a speedy, efficient, and cost-effective
                    avenue for dispute resolution.

                    And, as noted in the section on banking in this diagnostic, it would be helpful to
                    further strengthen the system of consumer advocacy organizations, including
                    non-profit credit counseling centers.


                    SECP should consider consultation with consumer advocacy organizations on a
                    regular basis in the preparatory work on legislation affecting consumers of
                    financial services in the securities sector.
Good Practice A.4   Licensing
                        a. All legal entities or physical persons that, for the purpose of
                           investment or speculation, solicit funds from the public should be
                           obliged to obtain a license from the supervisory agency.
                        b. The securities supervisory agency should have broad powers to
                           investigate fraudulent schemes.




                                              127
Description
                  The securities laws require that all persons who solicit funds from the public need
                  to be authorized by SECP. Hence, an issuer that intends to raise funds from the
                  general public is required to get approval from SECP under Section 57 or 62 of
                  the Companies Ordinance, 1984. If a prospectus includes any untrue statement,
                  every person who signed or authorized the issue of the prospectus is punishable
                  with imprisonment for a term that may extend to two years, or with a fine that
                  may extend to PRs 10,000, or both (Section 60 of the Companies Ordinance,
                  1984). In addition, any person who, either by knowingly or recklessly making
                  any statement, promise, or forecast that is false, deceptive, or misleading, or by
                  any dishonest concealment of material facts, induces or attempts to induce
                  another person to enter into, or to offer to enter into
                  (i) any agreement for, or with a view to, acquiring, disposing of, subscribing for,
                        or underwriting shares or debentures; or
                  (ii) any agreement the purpose or pretended purpose of which is to secure a profit
                       to any of the parties from the yield of shares or debentures, or by reference to
                       fluctuations in the value of shares or debentures;
                   is punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term that may extend
                  to three years, or with fine that may extend to PRs 20,000, or with both.
                  Moreover, any misstatement in the prospectus will attract penal action as
                  mentioned in Sections 59 and 60 of the Companies Ordinance, 1984.

                  Agents and branch managers of the brokers are required to be registered with
                  SECP under the BARR 2001; educational qualifications and experience are also
                  prescribed therein. They are also bound to seek permission from the relevant
                  stock exchanges.

                  However, the law does not stipulate fit and proper criteria for the registration of
                  securities and commodity futures brokers that are corporate entities. Currently,
                  under the BARR 2001 and the relevant rules for commodity brokers, fit and
                  proper criteria are specified in relation to the registration of individual agents of
                  such brokers. Even though SECP has mitigated this gap by requiring directors
                  and the chief executive of a broker to meet minimum eligible criteria, it is
                  nonetheless insufficient. The above aspects of fit and proper will be covered
                  under new Broker Rules being developed by SECP.

                  Third-party investment advisors are required to be registered with the
                  commission under the Investment Companies and Investment Advisers Rules,
                  1971.


Recommendations   The brokers’ and agents’ rules for both securities and commodities brokers
                  should be amended to, among other things, incorporate a fit and proper criteria
                  and requirement for high capital standards for brokers that are corporate entities.
                  This should reduce risks to investors of loss caused by negligent or illegal
                  behavior or inadequate capital of the brokers. In addition, it will be critical to
                  introduce an advanced risk-based supervision system for identifying the brokers
                  that are at highest risk for noncompliance and misconduct.
Pakistan                                                                         Financial Education



SECTION B           DISCLOSURE AND SALES PRACTICES

Good Practice B.1   General Practices
                    There should be disclosure principles that cover an investor’s relationship
                    with a person buying or selling securities, or offering to do so, in all three
                    stages of such relationship: pre-sale, point of sale, and post-sale.
                        a. The information available and provided to an investor should inform
                            the investor of:
                               (i) the choice of accounts, products, and services;
                               (ii) the characteristics of each type of account, product, or
                                     service; and
                               (iii) the risks and consequences of purchasing each type of
                                     account, product, or service.
                        b. A securities intermediary or CIU should be legally responsible for all
                            statements made in marketing and sales materials related to its
                            products.
                        c. A natural person acting as the representative of a securities
                            intermediary or CIU should disclose to an investor whether he is
                            licensed to act as such a representative and by whom he is licensed.
Description         Under the Brokers’ Code of Conduct that is prescribed by SECP and the directive
                    issued in February 2008 (and therefore part of the regulatory measures
                    implemented by SECP), there are broad disclosure principles that cover an
                    investor’s relationship with a person buying or selling securities, or offering to do
                    so, in all three stages of such relationship. For example, at the time of opening of
                    an account, the general disclosure is made to an investor regarding inherent risks
                    associated with investment and trading in the capital market. Similarly, pursuant
                    to the Non-Banking Finance Companies and Notified Entities Regulations, 2008,
                    SECP has imposed broad responsibilities on the asset managers and trustees of
                    the CIS.

                    In respect of trading in leverage markets, brokers are obligated to ensure that all
                    risks involved in the relevant transactions are fully disclosed and they have
                    obtained a written confirmation from clients that they have understood and have
                    the ability to bear the risks in such transactions.

                    In cases of IPOs, all material information as mentioned in the second schedule to
                    the Companies Ordinance, 1984, are required to be disclosed in the prospectus for
                    potential investors. The information includes financial information, information
                    about the issuer and its project, information about all risk factors, and memoranda
                    and articles of association of the issuer. Under Section 59 of the Companies
                    Ordinance, in cases of any loss or damage to every person who subscribes for or
                    purchases any share or debentures on the faith of the prospectus, the following
                    persons of the concerned company shall be liable to pay compensation to them:

                        •   every person who is a director of the company at the time of the issue of
                            the prospectus;


                                               129
                        •   every person who has authorized himself to be named and is named in the
                            prospectus either as a director, or as having agreed to become a director,
                            either immediately or after an interval of time;
                        •   every person who is a promoter of the company; and
                        •   every person who has given consent to the issue of the prospectus under
                            Section 55 or Subsection (5) of Section 57.

                    Representatives of brokers who operate through a branch office of the broker are
                    required to disclose that they are registered with SECP as agents under the BARR
                    2001.

                    Brokers, CIUs, and asset managers are fully responsible and liable for all the
                    dealings and acts of agents and employees in accordance with the Rules &
                    Regulations of the Exchange; Securities and Exchange Ordinance, 1969;
                    Securities and Exchange Rules, 1971; and Brokers and Agents Registration
                    Rules, 2001.

Recommendations     There is certainly a need to modernize the securities law and regulations on
                    principles relating to an investor’s relationship with a person buying or selling
                    securities, or offering to do so, in all three stages of such relationship: pre-sale,
                    point of sale, and post-sale. The current provisions—which are scattered—do not
                    clarify which part of the sales product cycle the principles on fair dealing and
                    disclosure relate to. Hence, the securities law (or relevant subsidiary legislation)
                    should be amended to provide greater guidance on what is meant by unreliable
                    and misleading advertisement by securities intermediaries. For example, there are
                    no detailed regulations on permissible advertising practices in the securities
                    sector, other than the general requirement not to make misleading statements. The
                    result of the lack of specific guidance is that compliance with the
                    abovementioned rules would inevitably depend on an individual broker/dealer’s
                    own interpretation of the general requirements that may not address fully the
                    three stages of the investors’ relationship with the broker.


                    In addition, more specific guidance can be provided by SECP in the form of
                    policy explanatory notes to the industry on what may constitute legitimate
                    advertising by securities intermediaries and what is meant by the “unreliable and
                    misleading” advertisement rule under the securities laws.


Good Practice B.2   Terms and Conditions
                    Before commencing a relationship with an investor, a securities intermediary
                    or CIU should provide the investor with a copy of its general terms and
                    conditions, and any terms and conditions that apply to the particular
                    account.
                    Insofar as possible, the terms and conditions should always be in a font size
                    and spacing that facilitates easy reading.
                    The terms and conditions should disclose:
                       a. details of the general charges;
                       b. the complaints procedure;
Pakistan                                                                     Financial Education


                     c. information about any compensation scheme that the securities
                          intermediary or CIU is a member of, and an outline of the action and
                          remedies which the investor may take in the event of default by the
                          securities intermediary or CIU;
                     d.   the methods of computing interest rates paid or charged;
                     e.   any relevant non-interest charges or fees related to the product;
                     f.   any service charges;
                     g.   any restrictions on account transfers; and
                     h.   the procedures for closing an account.


Description       Under the General Regulations of the Stock Exchange, a member broker firm is
                  required to adopt standard terms and conditions at the time of opening of an
                  account with such broker. The broker provides to the client a copy of the
                  Standardized Account Opening Form (SAOF), which includes minimum terms
                  and conditions that are equally binding on the broker and its client. The terms
                  and conditions are annexed to the SAOF and are available to the client at any
                  point in time. Further, these terms and conditions are also available for access
                  along with the account opening form on the websites of the stock exchanges and
                  some brokers. The SAOF discloses the details of
                      • The issuer of the product
                      • General and specific fees and charges
                      • Interest rate paid or charged
                      • Method of calculation of interest charges
                      • Commissions
                      • Significant tax implications
                      • Any cooling-off period
                      • Complaints procedures
                      • Compensation/dispute resolution scheme and steps to activate
                      • Restrictions on account transfer
                      • Restrictions on withdrawals or realizing an investment
                      • Procedure for closing an account/withdrawals/realizing an investment

                  On the websites of some brokers, the special terms and conditions are provided in
                  English and Urdu, but there is no requirement for plain English.
Recommendations   At its heart, consumer protection is needed to address imbalances of power,
                  information, and resources between consumers and financial institutions, which
                  place consumers at a disadvantage. Securities intermediaries/CIS are very
                  familiar with the terms and conditions of their financial services, but retail
                  consumers may find it difficult or costly to obtain sufficient information on their
                  financial purchases, or to assess complex financial services even when relevant
                  information is disclosed.

                  The overarching aim of any program to strengthen consumer protection is to
                  redress the imbalances of power, information, and resources, by giving
                  individuals clear and complete information that would allow them to make
                  informed decisions, and by prohibiting financial institutions from engaging in
                  unfair or deceptive practices.


                                             131
                    SECP should make sure that the public clearly understands the disclosed standard
                    terms and conditions and knows how to use it to make informed decisions. In
                    spite of contracts that appear to be easy to understand, a common complaint is
                    that consumers did not understand the terms and conditions of the financial
                    service contracts they signed.
                    Consumer testing of the standard terms and conditions may be helpful.


Good Practice B.3   Professional Competence
                    Regulators should establish and administer minimum competency
                    requirements for the sales staff of securities intermediaries and CIUs, and
                    collaborate with industry associations where appropriate.
Description
                    Not all securities and futures brokers who deal with potential and actual
                    customers are required by law to be properly trained and certified. However,
                    SECP has issued Circular No. 35 of 2009 requiring brokers to ensure that at least
                    20 percent of the number of staff, or a minimum of two employees, who deal with
                    clients are certified by examinations administered by the Institute of Capital
                    Markets (ICM). Hence, at least two or 20 percent (whichever is higher) of the
                    sales agents and professionals of SIs providing investment advice to clients are
                    mandated to obtain certification from the ICM and new professional entrants are
                    required to attain the relevant certification within one year from the date of
                    employment with the SI.

                    To date, no brokers have fully complied with this requirement (The compliance
                    data is for the circular dated June 30, 2011).

                    Sales personnel and traders of brokers should be formally trained through a
                    certified system and licensed to ensure only those who possess professional
                    expertise and competence deal with clients, so that clients make informed
                    investment decisions. This is particularly important in a demutualized
                    environment where a wider range of products would be distributed to investors.

                    The requirement of ongoing staff training on investor protection obligations is not
                    prescribed in the regulatory framework; however, brokers normally arrange
                    training for their staff depending on their internal training requirements.

Recommendations     A standard industry-wide examination for determining the competency of
                    individual personnel in the brokerage industry should be required.

                    Nonetheless, in view of the widespread non-compliance by brokers in respect of
                    this requirement, SECP may wish to consider a “tiered” approach towards
                    accreditation, where different levels of certification are required for products of
                    varying degrees of complexity. For example, a three-tiered level of training for
                    officers of securities intermediaries/CIU distributors would only involve internal
                    training by the securities intermediary/ CIU for those who sell only simple
Pakistan                                                                        Financial Education


                    services. However, for those personnel who sell complex financial services to
                    retail clients, they should be required to attend training provided by the relevant
                    professional association, with a curriculum approved by the ICM (or similarly
                    qualified body) and SECP.

                    The industry-wide certification should also include training on a code of ethical
                    standards, including issues of conflicts of interest.

Good Practice B.4   Know Your Customer (KYC)
                    Before providing a product or service to an investor, a securities
                    intermediary or CIU should obtain, record and retain sufficient information
                    to enable it to form a professional view of the investor’s background,
                    financial condition, investment experience and attitude toward risk in order
                    to enable it to provide a recommendation, product or service appropriate to
                    that investor.
Description         Pursuant to the know your customer/customer due diligence (KYC/CDD)
                    guidelines approved by SECP, brokers are required to obtain and document
                    sufficient information on the purpose and intended nature of the account to be
                    opened or maintained with them and develop a profile of the client based on
                    results of client identification and the risk assessment. Information regarding the
                    intended investment plan of the client must also be obtained to the extent possible
                    and should be documented.

                    Further, SECP directive dated February 7, 2003, made it mandatory for the
                    brokers to assess their clients’ age, financial situation, investment objective, and
                    investment experience while making any recommendation for buying or selling
                    any security to their clients.

                    In addition to this, a centralized KYC registration organization has been
                    established for securities market investors, verifying KYC information provided
                    by the applicants, and maintaining a KYC database of all clients. The risk
                    profiling of the customer, documenting investment knowledge, and determining
                    the suitability of a particular transaction with specific reference to an investor’s
                    unique characteristics will assist in ensuring that the advice being provided
                    adheres to professional standards.

                    Under a Karachi Stock Exchange notice dated March 16, 2012, in regard to
                    Guidelines for the brokers for developing effective Know Your Customer (KYC)
                    and Customer Due Diligence (CDD) policies and procedures, detailed
                    requirements are imposed on brokers to develop KYC/CDD policies in line with
                    international best practices and recommendations from relevant bodies such as
                    the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). The KYC/CDD policy, at minimum,
                    must provide for the following:
                        • Customer identification
                        • Customer risk assessment
                        • Circumstances where enhanced due diligence is required
                        • Ongoing due diligence



                                               133
                       •    Circumstances where simplified due diligence can be adopted
                       •    Compliance function
                       •    Data retention
                       •    Training and employee screening


                    Brokers should obtain and document sufficient information on the purpose and
                    intended nature of the account to be opened or maintained with them and develop
                    a profile of the customer based on results of customer identification and the risk
                    assessment. Information regarding the intended investment plan of the customer
                    must also be obtained to the extent possible and should be documented. Brokers
                    must obtain sufficient information to determine the expected source of funding
                    for the account, particularly whether the client shall be receiving or remitting
                    funds in foreign currency The brokers shall ensure the physical presence of the
                    customer at the time the account is opened.

                    In cases of offshore clients or clients in cities where the broker does not have a
                    branch, the broker must apply appropriate procedures, such as verification by a
                    reliable third party or confirmation from previous broker of the clients. When
                    obtaining confirmation from the third parties in different jurisdictions, the
                    brokerage house must consider whether that jurisdiction is following the FATF
                    recommendations.

Recommendation      No recommendation.

Good Practice B.5   Suitability
                    A securities intermediary or CIU should ensure that, taking into account the
                    facts disclosed by the investor and other relevant facts about that investor of
                    which it is aware, any recommendation, product or service offered to the
                    investor is suitable to that investor.
Description         The February 7, 2003, directive that SECP issued to brokers on conduct of
                    business states, “A broker shall not recommend to an investor the purchase or
                    sale of a security that is unsuitable given the investor’s age, financial situation,
                    investment objective and investment experience. Without limitation, investment
                    in a particular type of security may be considered unsuitable or the amount or
                    frequency of transactions may be excessive and therefore unsuitable for a given
                    investor.”

                    Section 42A of the General Obligations of Members/Brokers of the Karachi
                    Stock Exchange in relation to leveraged markets provides that, “in addition to
                    any obligation of a broker/member under the applicable laws, agreements or as
                    specified in the Standardized Account Opening Form, the Broker shall ensure the
                    following:
                         • No transaction is executed by the broker on behalf of a client in the
                            leveraged market unless an appropriate agreement has been executed
                            between the broker and such client.

                        •   All risks involved in the relevant transactions have been fully disclosed
Pakistan                                                                        Financial Education


                          and the broker has obtained a written confirmation from its clients that
                          they have understood and have the ability to bear the risks in such
                          transactions.

                      •   The various financing options available to a client.

                      •   The creditworthiness of clients is evaluated through a proper credit risk
                          assessment methodology and credit limits are assigned to each client
                          beyond which the client shall not be allowed to take a position in the
                          leveraged market.”

                  However, the abovementioned requirements are not accompanied by a civil
                  liability established by law on the brokers and other intermediaries for breach of
                  such a “suitability rule.” There is no civil liability in the law to empower
                  investors to claim damages from the brokers should investors suffer loss as a
                  result of brokers’ failure to meet their duty to ensure suitability of investments for
                  their clients consistent with their risk profiles. This, therefore, does not facilitate
                  private sector enforcement against the brokers, as is done in other markets.

                  Different investors, due to factors such as age, health, investment goals, and risk
                  appetites, will have different suitability for different types of financial
                  instruments. Determining which investments are appropriate for the investor
                  requires full and clear disclosure of the characteristics of the investment and
                  expert advice as to the benefits and risks. The situation is aggravated by the lack
                  of training on the part of the staff offering the financial instruments, and the fact
                  that market-based financial instruments with high risk (such as margin trading
                  facilities) are offered to investors who may not have the requisite level of
                  sophistication and investment experience.

                  The MUFAP’s various business conduct codes provide for fiduciary
                  responsibility and due diligence, but stop short of requiring CIUs to take
                  responsibility to assess the risk profile of their clients and the suitability of
                  particular investments for their clients when matched against their risk appetite
                  and level of their customers’ competence and knowledge on investments.

                  One of the most important vehicles for consumer protection in the securities
                  market is the requirement that a broker or collective investment undertaking
                  advise a client as to the suitability of an investment for the client. This can be
                  done only if the broker knows the financial situation and investment goals of the
                  client.

                  There is also no requirement for a Key Facts Statement to be provided to a
                  customer by brokers and CIUs. Key Facts Statements should be developed for all
                  basic retail securities services and products and should lay out the key terms and
                  conditions, including fees and charges, for all types of retail financial services.

Recommendations   Special training should be established for those intermediaries who deal with
                  retail customers. As a starting point, regulations (or legislation) should introduce
                  the concept of those who work with the public and sell financial services to
                  consumers. Then the financial supervisory agencies and professional associations


                                              135
                    should collaborate to set competency requirements for staff of financial
                    institutions who work with retail customers.

                    The securities law should be amended to establish a civil liability as a basis for
                    civil claims against intermediaries who fail to assess the suitability of investments
                    for investors. This would empower investors to claim in a court of law damages
                    they may suffer as a result of breaches of the suitability rule by such
                    intermediaries.

                    The codes of conduct for brokers and CIU and other investment advisors should
                    be amended to make clear this requirement that a broker or CIU or investment
                    advisor advise a client on the suitability of an investment for the client. In
                    addition, the industry codes of conduct should provide for Key Facts Statements
                    for all basic retail securities services and products in consultation with SECP.
                    Such a Key Fact Statement should lay out the key terms and conditions, including
                    fees and charges, for all types of retail financial services.


Good Practice B.6   Sales Practices
                    Legislation and regulations should contain clear rules on improper sales
                    practices in the solicitation, sale and purchase of securities. Thus, securities
                    intermediaries, CIUs and their sales representatives should:
                        a. Not use high-pressure sales tactics;
                        b. Not engage in misrepresentations and half-truths as to products
                            being sold;
                        c. Fully disclose the risks of investing in a financial product being sold;
                        d. Not discount or disparage warnings or cautionary statements in
                            written sales literature;
                        e. Not exclude or restrict, or seek to exclude or restrict, any legal
                            liability or duty of care to an investor, except where permitted by
                            applicable legislation.
                    Legislation and regulations should provide sanctions for improper sales
                    practices.
Description         The regulatory framework does not contain clear and comprehensive rules for
                    disclosure and sales practices. SECP’s Directive dated 7 February 2003 on
                    conduct of business by brokers only specifies minimum standards of market
                    conduct for brokers. It does not provide in greater detail clear rules on improper
                    sales practices in the solicitation, sale, and purchase of securities.

                    For the brokerage industry, this is particularly relevant in the context of margin
                    trading where investors trade on a leveraged basis and may not understand the
                    full extent of the risks involved. Before making any purchases, consumers should
                    receive easy-to-understand information about financial services. Once a service
                    has been bought, consumers should receive clear information about any changes
                    to terms and conditions—and be able to withdraw without penalty to the
                    consumer where the changes are not satisfactory.
Pakistan                                                                      Financial Education


                  Section 3.5 of the MUFAP Code of Ethics of Professional Conduct has explicit
                  provisions on professional selling practices: “Members shall not use any
                  unethical means to sell, market or induce any investor to buy their products and
                  schemes. Members shall not make any exaggerated statement regarding
                  performance of any product or scheme. Members shall endeavor to ensure that at
                  all times:
                           • Investors are provided with true and adequate information without
                              any misleading or exaggerated claims to investors about their
                              capability to render certain services or their achievements in regard
                              to services rendered to other clients;
                           • Investors are made aware of attendant risks in members’ schemes
                              before any investment decision is made by the investors;
                           • Copies of prospectus, memoranda and related literature is made
                              available to investors on request;
                           • Adequate steps are taken for fair allotment of mutual fund units and
                              refund of application moneys without delay and within the
                              prescribed limits.”

                  Robust disclosure and sales practices would require that providers and
                  distributors of investment products consider the impact of their action (or
                  inaction) on the customer in various stages of the product lifecycle, or the various
                  stages of provision of the service. Depending on the precise nature of a firm’s
                  business, this could mean addressing the fair treatment of customers at the
                  following stages: design and governance; identifying target markets; marketing
                  and promotion; sales and advice processes; after-sales information; and service
                  and complaint handling.

                  When providing information to customers, a firm should pay regard to its target
                  market, including its likely level of financial capability; should take account of
                  what information the customer needs to understand the product or service, its
                  purpose and the risks, and communicate information in a way that is clear, fair,
                  and not misleading; and should have in place systems and controls to manage
                  effectively the risks posed by providing information to customers. In the area of
                  post-sale responsibility, a firm should (i) in supplying information directly to the
                  customer, ensure that the information is communicated in a way that is clear, fair,
                  and not misleading; (ii) periodically review products whose performance may
                  vary materially, to check whether the product is continuing to meet the general
                  needs of the target audience that it was designed for, or whether the product’s
                  performance will be significantly different from what the provider originally
                  expected and communicated to the distributor or customer; and (iii) act fairly and
                  promptly when handling claims or when paying out on a product that has been
                  surrendered or reached maturity. In doing this, the provider should meet any
                  reasonable customer expectations that it may have created with regard to the
                  outcomes or how the process would be handled.

Recommendations   SECP should ensure that useful comparative information is available for
                  consumers regarding costs of transactions in securities markets and investment
                  products. The industry association (in this case, the MUFAP and relevant
                  exchanges) should publish information (or require that their intermediaries
                  publish data) to allow easy comparisons of fees, charges, and commissions


                                             137
                    charged for that service. Publication of the different costs by each institution
                    would allow consumers to conduct accurate cost comparisons. The result would
                    be informed consumers and an increasingly competitive securities sector.

                    SECP should require market intermediaries who distribute investment products
                    including margin trading facilities and mutual funds to provide their customers
                    with a Key Facts Statement (KFS). The KFS would disclose in simple language
                    the costs, returns, and risks relating to the type of investment product that is
                    marketed to the customer.

                    A KFS for all standard retail financial products would help consumers understand
                    material conditions of their contracts. For financial products, consumers need a
                    short description written in plain language that is comparable across products
                    provided by different institutions. For example, for a consumer credit, the KFS
                    should provide a summary in a page or two of all key terms and conditions. This
                    would include (i) all fees—particularly prepayment and overdue penalty fees—
                    and any other charges that could potentially be incurred; (ii) any required deposits
                    or advance payments; and (iii) the contact information for submission of
                    inquiries, complaints, and disputes. In particular, the Key Facts Statement should
                    indicate the name of the department (with telephone and fax numbers and e-mail
                    address) where inquiries, complaints, and disputes can be submitted to the
                    intermediary. Hence, an easily similarly readable and comprehensible Key Facts
                    Statement should appear at the front of all proposal and policy documents. The
                    Key Facts Statements would not replace the contract for legal purposes.

                    It is therefore recommended that the standard formats for Key Facts Statements
                    be developed by the SROs. SECP should also review and comment on the
                    formats (e.g., to ensure that they provide material information that would not
                    mislead consumers) but the preparation of the formats would best be done by the
                    respective SROs.

                    Cooling-off periods should be set for complex structured products. Cooling-off
                    periods are an effective method of protecting consumers from high-pressure sales
                    tactics and giving them an opportunity to study their investments and make a final
                    decision. During this period, the service provider is not permitted to change the
                    terms of the agreement without the approval of the customer. Cooling-off periods
                    are also important for any service that has a large savings component.

Good Practice B.7   Advertising and Sales Materials
                        a. All marketing and sales materials should be in plain language and
                            understandable by the average investor.
                        b. Securities intermediaries, CIUs and their sales representatives
                            should ensure their advertising and sales materials and procedures
                            do not mislead the customers.
                         c. Securities intermediaries and CIUs should disclose in all advertising,
                            including print, television and radio, the fact that they are regulated
                            and by whom.
Description         In the code of conduct on the duty of brokers to investors, a broker is required not
                    to encourage sales or purchases of securities with the sole object of generating
Pakistan                                                               Financial Education


           brokerage or commission. A broker shall not furnish false or misleading
           quotations or give any false or misleading advice or information to a client
           with a view of inducing the client to do business in particular securities and
           enabling the broker to earn a commission thereby.

           Pursuant to the February 7, 2003, directive to brokers on conduct of business,
           SECP requires a broker to not misrepresent material facts concerning an
           investment. Examples of information that may be considered material and that
           should be accurately presented to an investor include the risks of investing in a
           particular security, the charges or fees involved, the company’s financial
           information, or any other material information.

           Section 3.6 of the MUFAP Code of Ethics of Professional Conduct has explicit
           provisions on advertisements and promotional materials. In addition to rules
           relating to advertising and promotional materials contained in the regulations,
           “Members when advertising or promoting their mutual funds should not be
           deceptive, ambiguous or make false or misleading statements. The principle of
           honesty and greatest accuracy must underlie all promotional statements. A
           promotional statement should be clearly distinguishable as a statement issued
           with the intent of promoting the investment, service or firm to which it relates.
           Published information in advertisements and promotional materials must be
           substantiated.

           “To avoid misleading advertisements and promotional materials on comparative
           performance of mutual funds, comparative performance data, which has been
           awarded or issued by a reputable agency or person approved or accredited by
           MUFAP may be published in an advertisement. The performance data used must
           be current and should only be used in advertisements if awarded or issued within
           the last twelve calendar months. The publication of performance data must be in
           accordance with criteria prescribed in the advertising and promotional materials
           contained in the Regulations. Personal opinions shall be clearly identified as
           such.”

           In addition, the MUFAP has prepared a draft Code on Advertising &
           Communications Standards for the Mutual Funds Industry of Pakistan and was
           awaiting SECP’s approval at mission date. The draft code contains detailed
           standards on honesty in advertising and presentation of promotional materials;
           language and graphics in regard to issues relating to pricing, guarantees,
           comparison of performance, and use of comparative indices, fees, and
           commissions; and rates of return, among other things.

           Section 60 of the Companies Ordinance creates a criminal liability for
           misstatements in prospectuses. Where a prospectus includes any untrue
           statement, every person who signed or authorized the issue of the prospectus shall
           be punishable with imprisonment for a term up to two years, or a fine up to PRs
           10,000, or with both, unless he proves either that the statement was immaterial or
           that he had reasonable ground to believe, and did up to the time of the issue of the
           prospectus believe, that the statement was true.




                                      139
Recommendations     Clear laws and regulations—and effective enforcement mechanisms—are needed
                    to ensure meaningful disclosure of consumer financial products. In spite of
                    contracts that appear to be easy to understand, a common complaint is that
                    consumers did not understand the terms and conditions of the financial service
                    contracts they signed. For all regulations regarding consumer disclosure, SECP
                    should make sure that the public clearly understands the disclosed information
                    and knows how to use it to make informed decisions.

                    Consumer testing of proposed disclosure rules or formats would be helpful.

                    Supervision of advertising in the securities market should also be strengthened by
                    SECP. However, responsibility for the implementation and enforcement of
                    advertising and marketing rules for the securities market should be supervised not
                    just by SECP but also by SROs such as the exchanges and the MUFAP.


SECTION C           CUSTOMER ACCOUNT HANDLING AND MAINTENANCE

Good Practice C.1   Segregation of Funds
                    Funds of investors should be segregated from the funds of all other market
                    participants.
Description         There are no specific provisions in the securities laws that mandate the
                    segregation of funds of customers from market participants. SECP’s Directive to
                    Brokers on Conduct of Business dated February 7, 2003, contains the indirect
                    requirement for “a broker not to remove funds or securities from an investor’s
                    account without the investor’s prior authorization.”
                    Pursuant to the Non-Banking Finance Companies and Notified Entities
                    Regulations, 2008, Section 57, requires a trustee of an open-end scheme or
                    closed-end scheme to take under its control all the property of the scheme and
                    hold it in trust for the unit or certificate holders in accordance with the rules,
                    regulations, and provisions of the constitutive documents, and the cash and
                    registerable assets shall be registered in the name of, or to the order of, the
                    trustee.

                    The General Regulations of the Karachi Stock Exchanges require that the brokers
                    shall ensure that the assets belonging to their clients are kept separated from the
                    assets of the broker. Clause 41 of the regulations provide that
                    (i) The brokers shall ensure that the assets belonging to their clients are kept
                    separated from the assets of the broker. For this purpose, the broker shall
                    maintain

                            (a) A separate bank account that will include all the fund deposits of their
                            clients along with a record of clients’ balances.

                            (b) Separate subaccounts under his participant account in the Central
                            Depository System (CDS) for each of his clients to maintain the custody
                            of margins deposited by the clients in the form of securities and securities
                            bought for clients.
                            (c) A collateral account under his participant account in the CDS for all
Pakistan                                                                       Financial Education


                            clients.
                    (ii) Except as permitted above, the clients’ funds and securities shall not be used
                    by the broker for any purpose other than as authorized by the client in writing in
                    the manner and procedure prescribed by the Exchange and/or Central Depository
                    Company.

                    In order to ensure this, the broker is required to maintain a separate bank account
                    and subaccount for each client with the designated banks and central depository
                    company of Pakistan, respectively.

Recommendation      The securities laws should be amended to provide clear statutory requirements
                    that brokers must ensure that funds of their customers are segregated from their
                    own funds. The Exchange General Regulations can continue to function to
                    complement such a statutory requirement.

Good Practice C.2   Contract Note
                    Investors should receive a detailed contract note from a securities
                    intermediary or CIU confirming and containing the characteristics of each
                    trade executed with them, or on their behalf. The contract note should
                    disclose the commission received by the securities intermediary, CIU and
                    their sales representatives (expressed as total expenses as a percentage of
                    total assets purchased).
Description         Pursuant to Rule 4(4) of the Securities and Exchange Rules, 1971, a member
                    executing an order of a customer shall, within 24 hours of the execution of the
                    order, transmit to the customer a confirmation that shall include the information,
                    including the date the order is executed; name and number of the securities;
                    nature of transaction (spot, ready, or forward and also whether bought or sold);
                    price; commission, if the member is acting as a broker; and whether the order is
                    executed for the member’s own account or from the market. There is also the
                    requirement that the trade confirmation statement should disclose the brokerage
                    commission or any other charges in connection with the brokerage services
                    rendered.

                    The abovementioned provision is mirrored in Section 42 of the Karachi Stock
                    Exchange’s General Regulations as follows:
                    “Whenever an order of any client has been executed by a Broker, confirmation of
                    such execution shall be transmitted to the said client by the Broker within 24
                    hours of the execution of such transaction through any previously agreed mode of
                    communication as specified in the Standardized Account Opening Form. The
                    confirmation order shall precisely include the following specific information:

                            a) Date on which order is executed;
                            b) Name and number of securities;
                            c) Nature of transaction (SPOT, Ready, Future, Leveraged Market, Debt
                            Market and also whether bought or sold);
                            d) Price;
                            e) Commission rate;


                                               141
                            f) Whether the order is executed for the member’s own account or from
                            the market. {Rule 4(4) of Securities & Exchange Rules, 1971)”.

                    Although there are clear requirements for the issuance of a contract note,
                    there does not appear to be a standardized format or at least standardized terms
                    for contract note.

Recommendation      A useful step would be for the SROs (stock exchanges and professional
                    associations such as MUFAP) to develop standardized contracts—or at least
                    standard provisions of contracts. Standardized contracts could be developed by
                    such an SRO, which would recommend the contracts for use by the financial
                    institutions that are members of the associations. The standardized contract
                    should include all the key terms and conditions of the financial product or
                    service. For individuals, standardized contracts would be an effective measure for
                    consumer protection.
Good Practice C.3   Statements
                    An investor should receive periodic, streamlined statements for each account
                    with a securities intermediary or CIU, providing the complete details of
                    account activity in an easy-to-read format.
                        a. Timely delivery of periodic securities and CIU statements pertaining
                           to the accounts should be made.
                        b. Investors should have a means to dispute the accuracy of the
                           transactions recorded in the statement within a stipulated period.
                        c. When an investor signs up for paperless statements, such statements
                           should also be in an easy-to-read and readily understandable format.
Description         Pursuant to the special terms and conditions at account opening, the customer
                    who is an account holder has a right to obtain from the broker a copy of his or her
                    ledger statement under official seal and signature of the broker or his authorized
                    representative on a periodic basis on the customer’s written request.

                    For commodities futures contracts, the customer of the broker will be provided a
                    detailed report containing the matched and unmatched trades before the end of
                    the expiration date of the futures contract.


                    In addition to the above, the broker is responsible for sending to each client, on a
                    quarterly basis, a holding balance statement showing the number of every book-
                    entry security entered in the account of that client. Further, the CDC may directly
                    send holding balance statements to randomly selected subaccount holders from
                    time to time.

                    The aforementioned statement must be sent on a monthly or quarterly frequency,
                    depending on clients’ choice.

                    In case of any discrepancy in the ledger statement, the account holder shall
Pakistan                                                                       Financial Education


                    inform the broker within one day of receipt of the ledger statement to remove the
                    discrepancy. As an investment account service provided by the Central
                    Depository Company, account balances and activity reports are available to the
                    account holder around-the-clock through CDC access.

                    Electronic statements are generally legible because they conform with the format
                    prescribed for contract notes as mentioned in C.2 above.

                    Under the Non-Banking Finance Companies and Notified Entities Regulations,
                    2008, an asset management company is obliged to—within one month of the
                    close of first and third quarters and within two months of the close of second
                    quarter of the year of account of the open-end scheme or closed-end scheme—
                    prepare and transmit to the unit or certificate holders, the trustee, the
                    commission, and stock exchanges, on which the units or certificates of the
                    scheme are listed
                            (i) balance sheet as at the end of that quarter;

                            (ii) income statement;
                            (iii) cash flow statement;

                            (iv) statement of movement in unit holders’ or certificate holders’ fund or
                            net assets or reserves; and

                            (v) statement showing the securities owned at the beginning of the
                            relevant period, securities purchased or sold during such period, and the
                            securities held at the end of such period together with the value (at
                            carrying and at market) and the percentage in relation to its own net
                            assets and the issued capital of the person whose securities are owned for
                            that quarter.


Recommendation      More specific regulations as to the procedure for contesting the accuracy of
                    statements should be placed in the regulatory framework for the securities
                    industry, as well as provisions for paperless statements.

                    Currently, brokers and their customers can agree to exchange information
                    electronically, (inter alia through electronic statements) in the special terms and
                    conditions in the account opening forms. The content of electronic statements
                    should include the same information as paper statements.


Good Practice C.4   Prompt Payment and Transfer of Funds
                    When an investor requests the payment of funds in his or her account, or the
                    transfer of funds and assets to another securities intermediary or CIU, the
                    payment or transfer should be made promptly.
Description         Under the stock exchanges’ General Regulations, payment and transfer requests
                    of customers of brokers have to be responded to within 24 hours. The broker is
                    responsible to ensure delivery of CDC-eligible securities in the account holder’s



                                               143
                    CDC account subject to full payment by the account holder. The broker shall also
                    be responsible for the payment of any credit cash balance available in the account
                    of the account holder, preferably in form of A/c Payee cross cheque only within
                    one business day of the account holder’s request.

                    No such provisions appear to be applicable for CIUs.

                    Based on the above and the special terms and conditions in relation to all account
                    opening forms with brokers, although the broker is required to credit the cash
                    balance account of the client within 24 hours, there is no such requirement either
                    in the rules or code of conduct for CIUs. Hence, there can be further
                    strengthening of this requirement in the interest of protecting investors, because
                    this has proven to be a problem in other jurisdictions where it is common practice
                    for broker/dealers and management companies to benefit from the “float”—
                    investing customer assets and receiving income during the delay in paying the
                    customer.
Recommendation      There should be clear provisions in the law or the code of conduct of the SRO
                    that provides for standard terms and conditions between such entities and their
                    clients in requiring asset managers and CIUs to immediately pay the customers
                    any cash balances in their accounts and proceeds from sales when the payment is
                    received.

Good Practice C.5   Investor Records
                    A securities intermediary or CIU should maintain up-to-date investor
                    records containing at least the following:
                        a. A copy of all documents required for investor identification and
                            profile;
                        b. The investor’s contact details;
                        c. All contract notices and periodic statements provided to the
                            investor;
                        d. Details of advice, products and services provided to the investor;
                        e. Details of all information provided to the investor in relation to the
                            advice, products and services provided to the investor;
                        f. All correspondence with the investor;
                        g. All documents or applications completed or signed by the investor;
                        h. Copies of all original documents submitted by the investor in
                            support of an application for the provision of advice, products or
                            services;
                        i. All other information concerning the investor which the securities
                            intermediary or CIU is required to keep by law; and
                        j. All other information which the securities intermediary or CIU
                            obtains regarding the investor.
                    Details of individual transactions should be retained for a reasonable
                    number of years after the date of the transaction. All other records required
                    under a. to j. above should be retained for a reasonable number of years
Pakistan                                                                     Financial Education


              from the date the relationship with the investor ends. Investor records
              should be complete and readily accessible.
Description   Rule 8 of the Securities and Exchange Rules, 1971, requires that every member
              shall prepare and maintain the following in a manner that will disclose a true,
              accurate, and up-to-date position of his business, namely:

                  (i) journal (or other comparable record), cash book, and any other books of
                        original entry, forming the basis of entries into any ledger; the books of
                        original entry that contain a daily record of all orders for purchase or sale
                        of securities, all receipts and deliveries of securities, and all other debits
                        and credits;
                  (ii) ledgers (or other comparable records) reflecting asset, liability, reserve,
                        capital, income, and expense accounts;
                  (iii) ledgers (or other comparable records) reflecting securities in transfer,
                        securities borrowed, securities loaned, and securities bought or sold, for
                        which the delivery is delayed;
                  (iv) record of all balances of all ledger accounts in the form of trial balances
                        to be prepared at least once every six months of every year of account;
                  (v) record of transactions with the banks; and
                  (vi) contact books showing details of all contracts entered into by a member
                        with other members of the exchange or counterfoils or duplicates of
                        memos of confirmation issued to such other members.

              Brokers are required to maintain duplicates or counterfoils of memos of
              confirmation issued to customers. In addition, they have to maintain books of
              accounts and other documents for a period of not less than five years. Every
              broker is required under the law to maintain investors’ records at all times and
              open subaccounts of an investor only on the basis of a subaccount opening form
              duly signed by or on behalf of such investor. Moreover, a broker must also keep
              in record all types of communications/correspondences exchanged whether in
              writing or recorded telephonically/electronically and placed on automated trading
              systems of the exchange in compliance with the relevant rules and regulations.

              Under the Non-Banking Finance Companies and Notified Entities Regulations,
              2008, an asset manager is responsible -

              a. for maintaining proper accounts and records of the open-end scheme or closed-
              end scheme that will enable a complete and accurate view to be formed of

                      (i) the assets and liabilities of the open end scheme or closed end
                      scheme;

                      (ii) the income and expenditure of the open end scheme or
                      Closed End Scheme;
                      (iii) all transactions for the account of the Open End Scheme or Closed
                      End Scheme;
                      (iv) amounts received by the Open End Scheme or Closed End Scheme
                      in respect of issues of units;



                                          145
        (v) pay out by the open end scheme on redemption of units and by way
        of distributions by the closed end scheme or open end
        scheme; and

        (vi) pay out at the termination of the scheme;
(e) maintain the books of accounts and other records of the Open End Scheme
and Closed End Scheme for a period of not less than 10 years;
(f) within four months of closing of the accounting period of the Open End
Scheme and Closed End Scheme, transmit to the unit or certificate holders, the
trustee, the Commission, and stock exchanges, on which the units or
certificates of the scheme are listed, the annual report as per the requirements set
out in Schedule V, including

        (i) copy of the balance sheet and income statement;
        (ii) cash flow statement;
        (iii) statement of movement in unit holders’ or certificate holders’ fund or
        net assets or reserves; and
        (iv) the auditor’s report of the Open End Scheme or Closed End Scheme;

(g) within one month of the close of first and third quarters and within two
months of the close of second quarter of the year of account of the Open End
Scheme or Closed End Scheme, prepare and transmit to the unit or
certificate holders, the trustee, the Commission, and stock exchanges, on which
the units or certificates of the scheme are listed
        (i) balance sheet as at the end of that quarter;
        (ii) income statement;

        (iii) cash flow statement;

        (iv) statement of movement in unit holders’ or certificate holders’ fund or
        net assets or reserves; and
        (v) statement showing the securities owned at the beginning of the
        relevant period, securities purchased or sold during such period, and the
        securities held at the end of such period together with the value (at
        carrying and at market) and the percentage in relation to its own net
        assets and the issued capital of person whose securities are owned for that
        quarter, whether audited or otherwise and.ensure ,where it delegates the
        function of distribution, the written contract with the distributors clearly
        states the terms and conditions for avoidance of frauds and sales based
        upon misleading information;



(h) be obliged to process payment instrument immediately on receipt of
application; and
Pakistan                                                                            Financial Education


                       (i) be obliged to provide such information and record to the trustee as may be
                       necessary for the trustee to discharge obligations under these Regulations.


Recommendation         No recommendation.

C.6. Fair Treatment A. General
of Investors        1. Integrity - A broker shall maintain high standards of integrity, promptitude and
                    fairness in the conduct of all his business.
                    2. .Exercise of due skill and care - A broker shall act with due skill, care and
                    diligence in the conduct of all his business.
                    3. Manipulation - A broker shall not indulge in manipulative, fraudulent or
                    deceptive transactions or schemes or spread rumors with a view to distorting
                    market equilibrium or making personal gains.
                    4. Malpractices - A broker shall not create false market either singly or in concert
                    with others or indulge in any act detrimental to the investors' interest or which
                    leads to interference with the fair and smooth functioning of the market. A broker
                    shall not involve himself in excessive speculative business in the market beyond
                    reasonable levels not commensurate with his financial soundness.
                    5. Compliance with statutory requirements - A broker shall abide by all the
                    provisions of the act and the rules, regulations issued by the commission and the
                    stock exchange from time to time as may be applicable to him.

                       B. Duty to the Investor
                       1. Execution of orders - A broker, in his dealings with the clients and the general
                       investing public, shall faithfully execute the orders for buying and selling of
                       securities at the best available market price and not refuse to. Deal With a small
                       investor merely on the ground of the volume of business involved. A broker shall
                       promptly inform his client about the execution or non-execution of an order, and
                       make prompt payment in respect of securities sold and arrange for prompt
                       delivery of securities purchased by clients.

                       2. Issue of contract note - (1) A broker shall not refuse to promptly issue to his
                       clients purchase or sale notes for all the transactions entered into by hi with his
                       clients.(2) A broker shall not refuse to promptly issue to his clients scrip wise lit
                       purchase or sale notes:
                       Provided that an agent shall only split the contract notes client-wise and scrip
                       wise originally -issued to him by the affiliated broker into different
                       denominations; and (3) an agent shall not match the purchase and sale orders of
                       his clients and each such order must invariably be routed through a I: broker of
                       the stock exchange with whom he is affiliated.

                       3. Breach of trust - A broker shall not disclose or discuss with any other person or
                       make improper use of the details of personal investments and other information
                       of a confidential nature of a client which he comes to know his business


                                                  147
relationship.

4. Business and commission - (1) A broker shall no~ encourage sales or
purchases of securities with the sole object of generating brokerage or
commission.(2) A Broker shall not furnish false or misleading quotations or give
any false or misleading advice or information to a client with a view of inducing
him to do business in particular securities and enabling himself to earn brokerage
or commission thereby.

5. Business of defaulting clients - A broker shall not deal or transact business
knowingly, directly .or indirectly or execute.an order for. its client who has failed
to carry out his commitments in relation to securities With another broker.

6. Fairness to clients - A broker, when dealing with a client, shall disclose
whether he is acting as a principal or as an agent and shall ensure at the same time
that no conflict of interest arises between him and the client. In the event of a
conflict of interest, he shall inform the client accordingly and shall not seek to
gain a direct or indirect personal advantage from: the situation and shall not
consider client’s interest inferior to his own.

7. Investment advice.- A broker shall not make a recommendation to any client
who might be expected to rely thereon to acquire, dispose of, retain any securities
unless he has reasonable grounds for believing that the recommendation is
suitable for such a client upon the basis of the facts, if disclosed by such a client
as to his own security holdings, financial situation and objectives of such
investment. The broker should seek such information from clients, wherever he
feels it is appropriate to do so.

8. Competence of broker - A broker should have adequately trained staff and
arrangements to render fair, prompt and competent services to his clients.

Pursuant to the brokers’ code of conduct under the Third Schedule, brokers are
required to maintain high standards of integrity, promptness, and fairness in the
conduct of all their business. They are to treat their clients honestly and fairly,
and act with due skill, care, and diligence in the conduct of all business. A broker
is required to give best execution to his customers and disclose all conflicts of
interest to its clients. A broker shall not disclose or discuss with any other person
or make improper use of the details of personal investments and other client
information of a confidential nature he comes to know in his business
relationship. A broker shall not furnish false or misleading quotations or give
any false or misleading advice or information to a client with a view of inducing
the client to do business in particular securities and enabling the broker to earn a
commission A broker shall not deal or transact business knowingly, directly, or
indirectly, or execute an order for a client who has failed to carry out his
commitments in relation to securities with another broker.
Pakistan                                                                         Financial Education



                    Under Section 67 of the Non-Banking Finance Companies and Notified Entities
                    Regulations, 2008, an investment advisor shall inform the commission before
                    commencement of business and in managing discretionary portfolio and
                    nondiscretionary portfolio of a client, that it shall among other things exercise due
                    diligence, care, and prudence to achieve the investment objective.

Recommendation      The provisions relating to fair treatment of customers of securities intermediaries
                    should be reflected in the securities law (Acts of Parliament). Currently, legal
                    provisions for fair treatment of investors are not consolidated, and it is not
                    apparent reading the main securities laws that such provisions are included until
                    one reads the rules and schedules. SECP has submitted legislative changes to
                    parliament and it would be useful if such legal provisions are presented in the
                    main body of the law itself rather than in subsidiary legislation. The principle of
                    fair dealing and treatment of customers by securities intermediaries is universal
                    and is unlikely to change over time. The benefit of having such provisions in the
                    main body of the law is the clarity and strength it provides on the standard of
                    professional care and conduct expected of securities intermediaries and CIUs.

SECTION D           PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION

Good Practice D.1   Confidentiality and Security of Customers’ Information
                    Investors of a securities intermediary or CIU have a right to expect that their
                    financial activities will have privacy from unwarranted private and
                    governmental scrutiny. The law should require that securities intermediaries
                    and CIUs take sufficient steps to protect the confidentiality and security of a
                    customer’s information against any anticipated threats or hazards to the
                    security or integrity of such information, and against unauthorized access to,
                    or use of, customer information.
Description         There are no proper constitutional or statutory provisions on privacy issues in
                    Pakistan. Currently, various laws empower federal agencies such as the National
                    Accountability Bureau (NAB), National Clearing Corporation of Pakistan
                    Limited (NCCPL), Federal Investigation Agency (FIA), and other federal
                    agencies to seek information directly from securities intermediaries, CIUs, and
                    the Central Depository Company, information relating to their customers for the
                    purpose of the investigations of such agencies. In Pakistan, consumers are not
                    aware of their rights to privacy.

                    Subject to the above, pursuant to SECP Code of Conduct for Brokers, a broker
                    owes the investor the duty not to disclose or discuss with any other person or
                    make improper use of the details of personal investments and other client
                    information of a confidential nature that he comes to know in his business
                    relationship. Further, in cases of online trading, the brokers has to ensure
                    application of encryption technology, firewalls, and other security measures to
                    prevent intrusions by unauthorized persons.

                    The Code of Ethics of Professional Conduct for asset management companies
                    (AMCs) issued by MUFAP requires AMCs to ensure that their officers do not



                                               149
                    disclose any personal or financial information relating to the investors or clients
                    except where such disclosure has been expressly authorized in writing by such
                    investors or clients or where such disclosure is required to be made to any
                    relevant authority pursuant to any relevant law or legal process.

Recommendation      An information campaign would help consumers learn about their legal rights on
                    protection of personal data. The authorities might wish to consider preparation of
                    an extensive nationwide information campaign, designed to inform consumers
                    about their rights to keep private their personal data.
Good Practice D.2   Sharing Customer’s Information
                    Securities intermediaries and CIUs should:
                       a. Inform an investor of third-party dealings in which they should
                            share information regarding the investor’s account, such as legal
                            inquiries by a credit bureau, unless the law provides otherwise;
                       b. Explain how they use and share an investor’s personal information;
                       c. Allow an investor to stop or "opt out" of certain information
                            sharing, such as selling or sharing account or personal information
                            to outside companies that are not affiliated with them, for the
                            purpose of telemarketing or direct mail marketing, and inform the
                            investor of this option.
Description         The laws allow various institutions such as SECP, relevant stock exchanges,
                    NCC, FIA, NAB, and other authorized federal agencies that can solicit client
                    information to aid in carrying out investigation by these institutions.

                    Pursuant to various contractual documents, investors are informed that
                    information relating to their accounts can be shared with the authorized federal
                    institutions as provided in the law only for the purpose of investigation.

                    Contractually, an investor has the right to insist on privacy of information of his
                    account and bar intermediaries from sharing information with third parties except
                    in relation to the provision of information to the institutions that are authorized to
                    receive such information for official use. Nonetheless, it would appear that not
                    many investors are aware of their right to stop or “opt out” of certain information
                    sharing, such as selling or sharing account or personal information to outside
                    companies that are not affiliated with the SIs/asset manager, for the purpose of
                    telemarketing or direct mail marketing.


Recommendations     The securities law should be strengthened to clearly set out the obligation of the
                    securities intermediary and asset manager to provide investors with information
                    on sharing of information and any “opt-out” provisions in the interest of
                    protecting clients’ privacy except for those institutions that are authorized by law
                    to require information on investors’ accounts.

                    SECP should monitor that intermediaries make known this right of the investor in
                    clear and explicit terms.
Pakistan                                                                          Financial Education



Good Practice D.3   Permitted Disclosures
                        a. The law should state specific procedures and exceptions concerning
                           the release of customer financial records to government authorities.
                        b. The law should provide for penalties for breach of investor
                           confidentiality.
Description         Section 21 of the Central Depository Act (CDA) spells out the permitted
                    categories of disclosures and exceptions
                            (a) which an account holder or a subaccount holder has authorized in
                            writing to disclose;
                            (b) in a case where an account holder or a subaccount holder is declared
                            bankrupt, or, if the account holder or subaccount holder is a company or
                            corporate body and is being or has been wound up within or outside
                            Pakistan;
                            (c) in the case of any litigation or other legal proceedings;
                            (d) to any person duly authorized by a competent court, the Authority or
                            the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) to investigate into any offense under
                            any law for the time being in force;
                            (e) for the purpose of enabling or assisting the Authority to exercise any
                            power conferred on it by this Ordinance or by any other law for the time
                            being in force;
                            (f) for the purpose of enabling or assisting SBP to exercise any power
                            conferred on it by any other law for the time being in force;
                            (g) for the purpose of enabling or assisting a stock exchange or clearing
                            house of a stock exchange to discharge its functions;
                            (h) for the purpose of enabling or assisting auditors of a central
                            depository or participant to discharge their functions; or
                            (i) to the Authority if the disclosure is required in the interest of investors
                            or in the public interest.

                    Section 22 of the CDA provides for stringent regulation on access to computer
                    systems containing investor account information.

                    Section 28 of the CDA makes it an offense for breaches of the abovementioned
                    provisions. Any person who contravenes these provisions could be fined up to
                    PRs 500,000.


Recommendation      No recommendation.


SECTION E           DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS

Good Practice E.1   Internal Dispute Settlement
                        a. An internal avenue for claim and dispute resolution practices within
                           a securities intermediary or CIU should be required by the securities
                           supervisory agency.
                        b. Securities intermediaries and CIUs should provide designated


                                                151
                         employees available to investors for inquiries and complaints.
                      c. Securities intermediaries and CIUs should inform their investors of
                         the internal procedures on dispute resolution.
                      d. The securities supervisory agency should provide oversight on
                         whether securities intermediaries and CIUs comply with their
                         internal procedures on investor protection rules.
Description       SECP requires all securities intermediaries to have internal complaint-handling
                  procedures for their clients and its onsite inspection examines their effectiveness.
                  Nonetheless, it is not clear if the onsite inspection is effective, especially in the
                  absence of a centralized database of the complaints that are filed with SECP and
                  the securities intermediaries (even though after the mission, a centralized unit
                  within SECP would be consolidating the information relating to the complaints
                  made against SIs/CIUs).

                  There is also concern over the quality of these internal complaint-handling
                  systems and the resources that are allocated by SIs/CIUs (particularly those that
                  are smaller) to support for internal dispute resolution.

                  Although the stock exchanges have information on their websites regarding how
                  to complain against member companies of such exchanges, there are no explicit
                  requirements in the exchanges’ member rules that require their members to have
                  minimum requirements on internal complaint-handling procedures.

                  Similarly, Article 3.1.2 of the MUFAP Code of Conduct of Ethics and
                  Professional Conduct for Asset Management Companies provides that a
                  “Member shall establish and maintain written policies and procedures for the
                  effective control and conduct of its business and the activities of their officers to
                  ensure compliance with the Act, the Code and all other relevant laws” and Article
                  5 provides that “Adherence to the Code is mandatory for all Members and their
                  officers and its provisions will be strictly enforced by MUFAP.” The bylaws
                  relating to “The Procedure for Disciplinary Proceedings” have also been drafted
                  by the MUFAP, which will be enforced where necessary. In order to maintain
                  high standards of professional conduct, members or their officers who have
                  breached provisions of the code shall be subject to the appropriate disciplinary
                  proceedings. Nonetheless, there are no explicit provisions in the code that spell
                  out clearly minimum written requirements for internal dispute resolution
                  processes for members.


Recommendations   SECP should assess the quality of the internal complaint-handling procedures and
                  processes for all SIs/CIUs and develop structured processes within its operations
                  to assess the effectiveness of internal complaint-handling operations of the
                  SIs/CIUs.
                  For example, SECP should specifically require that SIs/CIUs provide information
                  to their clients on how to seek a remedy, including redress, for problems arising
                  out of interactions with the securities intermediaries on their websites, and the
                  intermediaries should also be required to prepare an annual report of compliance
                  with their dispute resolution policy to SECP.
Pakistan                                                                       Financial Education


                    Various SROs, such as the exchanges and MUFAP, would need to review their
                    codes of conduct to ensure that minimum standards and processes on internal
                    complaint-handling be required of their members and develop mechanisms to
                    monitor their effectiveness.


Good Practice E.2   Formal Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
                    There should be an independent dispute resolution system for resolving
                    disputes that investors have with their securities intermediaries and CIUs.
                        a. A system should be in place to allow investors to seek third-party
                           recourse, such as an ombudsman or arbitration court, in the event
                           the complaint with their securities intermediary or CIU is not
                           resolved to their satisfaction in accordance with internal procedure,
                           and it should be made known to the public.
                        b. The independent dispute resolution system should be impartial and
                           independent from the appointing authority and the industry.
                        c. The decisions of the independent dispute resolution system should be
                           binding upon the securities intermediaries and CIUs. The
                           mechanisms to ensure the enforcement of these decisions should be
                           established and publicized.
Description         There is no ombudsman system in Pakistan for handling securities complaints,
                    unlike the insurance sector. The securities laws and rules and industry codes do
                    not provide for alternative dispute resolution systems or an ombudsman for
                    market participants (other than those relating to trades executed on the stock
                    exchanges, which may go to arbitration).

                    The stock exchange’s internal operations are based on its regulations of trading
                    and membership. These regulations provide for arbitration for the handling of
                    disputes related to transactions effected on the exchange. The “arbitration”
                    process stipulated under these regulations is more akin to mediation involving
                    representatives of brokers and the exchange, and is not necessarily done under the
                    Arbitration Act. In the event that a broker and its customer is not able to resolve
                    their dispute amicably, then either party may refer the dispute to the arbitration
                    proceedings of the stock exchange, and the decision of the arbitration would be
                    binding on both parties. This arbitration process has been found to be largely
                    effective.

                    The Karachi Center of Alternative Dispute Resolution has been operational since
                    February 2007 and has recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding with
                    SECP, among others, to provide input in developing effective alternative dispute
                    resolution systems in the review of stock exchange regulations. Nonetheless, it
                    would appear that to date, the primary arbitration system for the securities market
                    is part of the stock exchanges’ framework in relation to trades on its market. As a
                    result, it does not cover all types of complaints, such as a complaint by a
                    customer against CIU.

                    Disputes/complaint cases can be filed with the arbitration committee of the
                    relevant stock exchange where it concerns a securities intermediary, or with


                                               153
                    SECP and handled under arbitration procedures laid down by the relevant stock
                    exchange. Inquiries are conducted through independent auditors or firms on the
                    approved panel of auditors. Investors are informed about the modes available for
                    dispute resolution.

                    An aggrieved party may also approach SECP for resolution of a complaint. SECP
                    has powers to suspend the registration of, or impose a fine on, a broker who fails
                    to settle an investor complaint where such complaint has been adjudicated by an
                    SRO or its committee or by SECP itself.

Recommendations     An out-of-court mechanism such as an ombudsman can take a more flexible
                    approach than the courts for small claims by retail investors. For example, an
                    ombudsman can decide a case not just on the basis of legal rules but also issues of
                    equity and fairness as well as industry-accepted codes of conduct. The
                    ombudsmen should be designed based on principles of transparency, due process,
                    independence, legality, and effectiveness.

                    In view of the fact that the ombudsman structure is already in place for the
                    banking and insurance sectors, it is sensible to extend such an alternative dispute
                    resolution mechanism to retail investors. Even though the arbitration proceedings
                    that are implemented through the stock exchange (primarily the Karachi Stock
                    Exchange) have been found to be largely effective, it nonetheless is not as
                    speedy, low-cost, and efficient as an ombudsman for retail investors. A low-cost
                    Ombudsman for resolution of disputes for retail customers should be considered
                    for the securities sector. The arbitration system should still be maintained for
                    larger disputes.

                    Hence, it is recommended that an inexpensive means for retail investors to obtain
                    redress for small claims should be created by the establishment of an ombudsman
                    for the securities industry. SECP may need to consider the design parameters for
                    such an ombudsman, such as the threshold of claims and whether such an
                    ombudsman should be consolidated with the insurance ombudsman. To ensure a
                    high level of accountability and transparency, the ombudsman should be obliged
                    to publish an annual report describing decisions taken by the ombudsman so that
                    consumers can identify the nature of the disputes referred to the ombudsman and
                    assess the results of the ombudsman’s actions.


SECTION F           GUARANTEE SCHEMES AND INSOLVENCY

Good Practice F.1   Investor Protection
                        a. There should be clear provisions in the law to ensure that the
                           regulatory authority can take prompt corrective action on a timely
                           basis in the event of distress at a securities intermediary or CIU.
                        b. The law on the investors guarantee fund, if there is one, should be
                           clear on the funds and financial instruments that are covered under
                           the law.
Pakistan                                                                   Financial Education


                  c. There should be an effective mechanism in place for the pay-out of
                     funds and transfer of financial instruments by the guarantee fund or
                     insolvency trustee in a timely manner.
                  d. The legal provisions on the insolvency of securities intermediaries
                     and CIUs should provide for expeditious, cost-effective and equitable
                     provisions to enable the timely payment of funds and transfer of
                     financial instruments to investors by the insolvency trustee of a
                     securities intermediary or CIU.
Description
              SECP possesses powers to issue directions and orders to intermediaries to take
              prompt corrective action in the event of distress of a stockbroking firm.

              Two types of guarantee funds are currently maintained:

                  •   Investor Protection Fund
                  •   Clearing House Protection Fund

              The Investor Protection Fund is established under the respective regulations of
              the stock exchanges as part of the overall legal and institutional infrastructure of
              the securities markets. All stock brokerage firms licensed by SECP are obligated
              to be members of the Investor Protection Fund.

              The NCCPL has formed the Clearing and Settlement Fund with an appropriation
              of PRs 100 million as an initial contribution. The above funds are used to meet
              members’ settlement obligations and other outstanding dues to the stock
              exchange(s), other members, investors, and so forth in the event of a member’s
              default or expulsion.

              In February 2012, the investor protection fund was raised from PRs 20 million to
              PRs 75 million per broker at the Karachi Stock Exchange to offer greater comfort
              to investors. This amount of PRs 75 million may still be considered insufficient,
              and the Karachi Stock Exchange has been working towards boosting its funds.

              In the event of default of a member, in addition to any surplus after distribution of
              losses, as per the Members’ Default and Procedure for Recovery of Losses
              Regulations of the Exchange, an amount up to PRs 10 million shall be set aside
              out of the Investor Protection Fund to satisfy the claims of the investors against
              the defaulting member. In cases of eligible claims of investors determined against
              the defaulting member exceed the amount available for settlement, such claims
              shall be satisfied on a pro-rata basis.

              In addition to the above, a new fund called the settlement guarantee fund is also
              being envisaged by the Karachi Stock Exchange to be constituted consequent to
              the clearing company assuming the role of the central clearing counterparty.

              Regulations of stock exchanges prescribe utilization of a defaulting broker’s
              assets and then the guarantee fund if the broker’s assets are insufficient to fulfill
              its obligations.



                                         155
                    No such investor protection fund is available for the mutual fund industry.


Recommendations     With the demutualization of the stock exchanges, and the proposed enhancement
                    of risk management infrastructure in the setting up of a central counterparty to
                    guarantee the settlement of trades, there is a need to review the legal
                    underpinning of the settlement guarantee fund. The objectives of the review
                    would be to ensure that the counterparty role of the clearing house is not
                    undermined by the application of insolvency law and that the integrity of its risk
                    management infrastructure is protected by law. To do this, the authorities would
                    need to review the Companies Ordinance, the Insolvency law, and Securities law
                    to ensure these legal risks are addressed.


                    In the long term, careful considerations may be given to have an investor
                    protection fund for the mutual fund industry.


SECTION G           CONSUMER EMPOWERMENT

Good Practice G.1   Broadly based Financial Capability Program
                    A broadly based program of financial education and information should be
                    developed to increase the financial capability of the population.
                        a. A range of organizations –including the government, state agencies
                           and non-governmental organizations– should be involved in
                           developing and implementing the financial capability program.
                        b. The government should appoint a ministry (e.g. the Ministry of
                           Finance), the central bank or a financial regulator to lead and
                           coordinate the development and implementation of the national
                           financial capability program.

Description         SECP has developed a nationwide capital markets investor education program in
                    collaboration with the three stock exchanges, the mercantile exchange, Central
                    Depository Company, National Clearing Company (NCC), and the Mutual Funds
                    Association of Pakistan. All stakeholders have come together to run a single
                    nationwide program under the brand of the Institute of Capital Markets. The
                    program was launched in July 2012.

                    The investor education plan lays out all mechanisms for cooperation between the
                    stakeholders. Furthermore, a memorandum of understanding between SECP,
                    stock exchanges, and ICM is in the process of being signed that clearly lays out
                    roles and responsibilities of each party. All three stock exchanges have been
                    allotted different geographical areas across Pakistan where they are responsible
                    for conducting seminars, and assistance across all areas is provided by the
                    remaining stakeholders.

                    Capital market institutions assist SECP in undertaking the capital markets
                    investor education program. The content for the program is discussed and shared
                    with all stakeholders, but the approval of the content remains with SECP. In
Pakistan                                                                       Financial Education


                    addition, the South Asian Federation of Exchanges also runs a financial literacy
                    program in Pakistan. Industry associations such as the MUFAP, Institute of
                    Chartered Accountants of Pakistan, Institute of Cost and Management
                    Accountants, and the Institute of Chartered Financial Analysts all assist SECP in
                    operating the capital markets investor education program. For example, the
                    Karachi Stock Exchange has on its website an “investor center” where guidance
                    is given to new and experienced investors on various aspects of investing and the
                    types of instruments available on its markets. Similarly, the MUFAP website
                    provides investor education by making available an informative and interactive
                    website that disseminates information about mutual funds such as net asset
                    values, risk level, historical performance, and performance with benchmarks.

Recommendations     While SECP is the lead agency for developing the national strategy for investor
                    education for the securities and insurance sectors, there needs to be effective
                    coordination of financial capability initiatives between SBP and SECP in order to
                    ensure the effectiveness of these initiatives.


                    In addition, it may be helpful to further strengthen the system of consumer
                    advocacy organizations. A system of consumer nongovernmental organizations is
                    needed to serve low-income as well as heavily indebted households.
                    Consideration should be given to the role of nonprofit financial advisors (such as
                    the credit counseling center in Malaysia), which can help indebted people sort out
                    their debts and provide them with necessary counseling. These organizations
                    should also be encouraged to keep records of the cases they receive, conduct
                    trend analysis of these data, and propose changes in legislation where appropriate.


                    SECP should consider consultation with consumer advocacy organizations on a
                    regular basis in the preparatory work on legislation affecting consumers of
                    financial services in the securities sector.
Good Practice G.2   Using a Range of Initiatives and Channels, including the Mass Media
                        a. A range of initiatives should be undertaken to improve people's
                           financial capability.
                        b. This should include encouraging the mass media to provide financial
                           education, information, and guidance.
Description         The implementation of SECP’s Nationwide Investor Education and Awareness
                    Program should include the following:

                        a. SECP Investors’ Education Website: Develop a dedicated investor
                            website initially in English and later in Urdu.
                       b.   Awareness Seminars: Conduct awareness seminars in collaboration with
                            SROs, associations, media, and universities.
                       c.   Investor Protection Services: Ensure investor protection through
                            implementation of SECP Public Disclosure Policy, linkage with the
                            IOSCO Investor Alerts Portal, and launch of SECP Service Desk Facility.
                       d.   Educational Material: Create and distribute educational material on
                            various market products and services; create material in different
                            languages spoken across Pakistan.


                                               157
                       e.   Media Campaign: Educate investors through the use of electronic and
                            print media as well as social media, and advertise the seminars being
                            conducted in order to reach its target audience.

                    At this point, the mass media does not provide financial education to the public;
                    however, individual companies and institutions do use the media as a tool to
                    disseminate information such as the publication of the financial results of a listed
                    company.
Recommendation      The authorities and market participants should consciously work with the mass
                    media to provide financial education, information, and guidance to investors.
Good Practice G.3   Unbiased Information for Investors
                        c. Financial regulators should provide, via the Internet and printed
                           publications, independent information on the key features, benefits,
                           and risks—and, where practicable, the costs—of the main types of
                           financial products and services.
                        d. Nongovernmental organizations should be encouraged to provide
                           investor awareness programs to the public regarding financial
                           products and services.
Description         The dissemination of financial education by SECP is done through a variety of
                    mediums including the mass as well as through written publications. In the years
                    following the stock market crisis in 2008, SECP has been particularly aggressive
                    and committed to promoting investors’ awareness and education.

                    SECP has been maintaining on its website a detailed investor guide that includes
                    an overview of the capital market institutions of Pakistan, elementary information
                    about financial securities, and their associated costs, benefits, and other details.
                    The above investor guide contains information relating to roles and
                    responsibilities of the investors.
                    SECP has also published a variety of brochures relating to the protection of rights
                    of consumers in the different sectors of the financial system. In the Investors’
                    Awareness Brochure, the areas that are addressed relate to the following:
                        • With whom to trade
                        • Opening account with the broker and dealings with the broker
                        • Receipt of trade information and right of investor to periodical statement
                            of their securities accounts
                        • Payment of margins
                        • Lodging of complaints

                    There are also frequently asked questions (FAQs) for lodging complaints with
                    SECP. The FAQs address the types of complaints that an investor may lodge
                    against a stock exchange member and the circumstances of filing complaints with
                    SECP. The FAQs also explain the processes to be expected in the handling of the
                    complaints and the arbitration mechanism instituted by the stock exchange.

                    The stock exchanges and MUFAP also maintain on their websites information for
                    investors. For example, the Karachi Stock Exchange maintains on its website an
Pakistan                                                                       Financial Education


                    “investor center” that provides a guide to investors on areas such as “market and
                    its workings,” “risk management,” and ‘investment instruments,” among other
                    things. It also provides information to first-time investors and experienced
                    investors. The MUFAP website provides investors in mutual funds basic
                    information on tax implications and fees as well as how to develop an investment
                    plan. It also provides NAV returns performance reports that compare the different
                    funds provided by its members and the funds’ payouts.

                    During the mission, SECP also has shared with the mission team a detailed
                    “Investor Education and Awareness Program,” in which it stated that it would
                    partner with key capital market stakeholders, such as the various stock exchanges,
                    the NCCPL, MUFAP, and CDC to undertake investor education programs across
                    the nation. Key elements of the program such as educational materials and
                    seminars will all be branded under the Institute of Capital Markets, with SECP
                    acting as the overall implementing agency of the program.
Recommendation      Consumer organizations should be strongly encouraged and supported by the
                    government and SECP to deliver financial education awareness programs
                    throughout Pakistan.


Good Practice G.4   Measuring the Impact of Financial Capability Initiatives
                        a. The financial capability of consumers should be measured through a
                            broad-based survey that is repeated from time to time.
                        b. The effectiveness of key financial capability initiatives should be
                            evaluated.
Description         No survey is undertaken to measure the financial capability of consumers in
                    Pakistan as they pertain to the capital markets, nor is there any assessment of the
                    effectiveness of the many financial capability initiatives undertaken by SECP,
                    MUFAP, and the Karachi Stock Exchange.
                    Although the investor education program launched by SECP seems
                    comprehensive, it would appear that it was primarily based on SECP and other
                    relevant stakeholders’ perceptions of the key issues in investor education. The
                    preferred approach would be to gauge the issues firsthand by organizing focus
                    groups or existing investor survey data.


Recommendation      A baseline survey assessment should be conducted to better identify the segments
                    of the population that require particular attention, measuring the effectiveness of
                    financial education and determining education needs for the securities sector.




                                               159
