87763 v1
                                           Islamic Republic of Pakistan

                                              Diagnostic Review of
                                            Consum er Protection and
                                               Financial Literacy




                                                           Volume I
                                    Key Findings and Recommendations


                                                           March 2014




THE WO RLD BANK
Financial Inclusion Practice, Micro and SME Finance
Financial and Private Sector Development Vice-Presidency
Washington, DC
 This Diagnostic Review is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
 Development/The World Bank. T he findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not
 necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / International Development Association or
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of
The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                                                Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy i


Acknowledgments

A World Bank mission visited Pakistan from December 4 to 14, 2012, to prepare a Diagnostic Review of
Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (CPFL). 1 This Diagnostic Review was prepared by a team led by
Ann Rennie (Advisor/Consultant) from the World Bank’s South Asia Finance and Private Sector Group. The
team comprised Sau Ngan Wong (Senior Counsel), Denise Dias (Microfinance Consultant), Andrej Popovic
(Financial Sector Specialist), Jules Gribble (Insurance Consultant), Sarwat Aftab (Senior Private Sector
Development Specialist), and Sarmad Ahmed Shaikh (Analyst). The team was supported by Ehtesham-ul-Haq,
Program Assistant.

The team expresses its deep appreciation to the Pakistani authorities for their cooperation during the preparation
of the review. Detailed comments on the draft report were provided by Alexander Pankov, Uzma Khalil, and
Johanna Jaeger. Doug Pearce (Acting Manager, Financial Inclusion and Consumer Protection Service Line)
provided overall guidance and comments. The project team would like to thank all those who so generously
contributed to the final report.

The review was co-financed by the USAID Trust Fund on “Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy.”




1
  The CPFL Review is part of the World Bank Program on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, which seeks to identify key m easures in
strengthening financial consumer protection to help build consumer trust in the financial sector—and exp and the con fidence o f households to wisely use
financial servi ces. CPFL Reviews against Good Practices have been conduct ed by the World Bank in both middle- and low-income countries. These include
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malawi, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Romania, the Russian Federation, the Slovak Republic, South Africa, Tajikistan, and Ukraine.
 ii      Contents


                                                       Islamic Republic of Pakistan

                                        Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and
                                                      Financial Literacy

                                       Volume I – Key Findings and Recommendations

                                                                      Contents


Acknowledgments .............................................................................................................................. i
Acronyms........................................................................................................................................... iii
I. Executive Summary...................................................................................................................... 1
  Key Preliminary Recommendations ...................................................................................................... 3
II.     Country Context ....................................................................................................................... 4
III. The Legal, Institutional, and Regulatory Framework for Consumer Protection in Pakistan ............ 5
   Key Findings ...................................................................................................................................... 5
     Recommendations ............................................................................................................................. 8
IV.    Consumer Disclosure ................................................................................................................. 9
  Key Findings ...................................................................................................................................... 9
     Recommendations ........................................................................................................................... 10
V.     Business Practices ....................................................................................................................... 11
     Key Findings .................................................................................................................................... 11
     Recommendations ........................................................................................................................... 12
VI.    Dispute Resolution Mechanisms ............................................................................................... 14
  Key Findings .................................................................................................................................... 14
     Recommendations ........................................................................................................................... 15
VII. Financial Education................................................................................................................. 20
  Recommendations ........................................................................................................................... 22
Annex I .............................................................................................................................................. i4
Annex II............................................................................................................................................. i8
                    Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy iii


                       Acronyms


ATM     Automated teller machine

BCO     Banking Companies Ordinance

BMP     Banking Ombudsman Pakistan

CCP     Competition Commission of Pakistan

CPD     Consumer Protection Department

CPFL    Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy

DFI     Development Finance Institutions

DFID    Department for International Development

GoP     Government of Pakistan

IAP     Insurance Association of Pakistan

ICM     Institute of Capital Markets

IEAP    Investor Education and Awareness Program

IO      Insurance Ombudsman

ISE     Islamabad Stock Exchange

KFS     Key Facts Statements

KSE     Karachi Stock Exchange

LSE     Lahore Stock Exchange

MFB     Microfinance banks

MFI     Microfinance institutions

MoF     Ministry of Finance

MOU     Memorandum of Understanding

MUFAP   Mutual Funds Association of Pakistan

NBFI    Non-bank financial institutions


NFLP    Nationwide Financial Literacy Program
iv   Acronyms


          OBM     Office of the Banking Mohtasib

          PBA     Pakistan Banks’ Association

          PII     Pakistan Insurance Institute

          PMN     Pakistan Microfinance Network

          PPAF    Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund

          PRCF    Prudential Regulations for Consumer Financing

          PRMFB   Prudential Regulations for Microfinance Banks

          PSIA    Profit sharing investment account

          SBP     State Bank of Pakistan

          SECP    Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan

          SME     Small and medium enterprise

          SRO     Self-regulatory organization
                                                                 Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 1


                                Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy in Pakistan
                                                     Volume I


I.         Executive Summary

1.     The Diagnostic Review for Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (CPFL) provides a detailed
assessment of the institutional, legal, and regulatory framework in four segments of the financial sector:
banking, microfinance, securities, and insurance. The review took place in response to a request for World
Bank technical assistance in the field of financial consumer protection made by Pakistan’s Ministry of Finance
(MoF), the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP), and the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP).

2.       The Review consists of two volumes. Volume I summarizes the key findings and recommendations of
the Review and Volume II presents a detailed assessment of each financial segment compared against the Good
Practices for Financial Consumer Protection. 2 The key findings and recommendations in Volume I cover five
areas: (i) The Institutional, Legal, and Regulatory Framework for Consumer Protection; (ii) Disclosure; (iii)
Business Practices; (iv) Dispute Resolution Mechanisms; and (v) Financial Education. Priority recommendations
are outlined in table 1; a more detailed list of recommendations is included in annex I.

3.      Pakistan’s financial regulators have taken important steps to strengthen consumer protection and
financial education in recent years. SBP, using its broad powers to protect the public interest and the interest of
depositors, has issued regulations and directives to banks covering key aspects of consumer protection, including
disclosure, business conduct, and dispute resolution. It has also laid out an ambitious agenda for further
strengthening consumer protection in its “10-Year Strategy for the Banking Sector Reforms,” which is well
aligned with international good practices. SECP has a strong statutory mandate to protect investor and consumer
rights and interests in the insurance and securities sectors, but needs to step up its supervisory and enforcement
capacity to deal with noncompliance and malpractices in both market segments.

4.      The institutional framework for financial consumer protection in Pakistan is fragmented, and has
important gaps and overlaps. The two principal financial regulators, SBP and SECP, have primary
responsibility for regulating and supervising both prudential matters and market conduct in their respective
market segments. Non-deposit-taking microfinance institutions (MFIs) are unregulated, leaving many clients
vulnerable from a consumer protection standpoint. A number of other players, however, have a role in ensuring
financial consumer protection, including the Competition Commission of Pakistan (CCP), industry associations,
ombudsmen, and provincial consumer protection councils. There is a need to establish an effective coordination
mechanism among regulators and key stakeholders, to define strategic priorities and clarify roles and
responsibilities.




2
  The Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection were developed by the World Bank in 2006 and launched globally in 2010. They provide a set of
good practices using international benchmarks, such as the principles released by the Basel Committee, IOSCO, and IAIS, as well as the OECD
recommendations for financial education and awaren ess on pensions, insurance, and credit products. The Good Practices incorporate provisions of
directives, laws, regulations, and codes of business practices from the European Union, United States, Australia, Canada, France, Ireland, Malaysia, Mexico,
New Zealand, Peru, and South Africa. The Good Practices are used in assessing a country’s financi al consumer protection regime. Consumer Protection and
Financial Literacy R eviews ag ainst Good Practices have b een conducted by the World Bank in both middle- and low-incom e countries. These include
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malawi, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Romania, the Russian Federation, the Slovak Republic, South Africa, Tajikistan, Ukraine, and Zambia.
 2    Executive Summary


5.      Although financial regulators have strengthened disclosure requirements, terms and pricing often
remain nontransparent in practice. The lack of standardized, comparable pricing information on financial
products impedes competition in the financial sector and no doubt contributes to the relatively high costs of
financial products and services in Pakistan.


6.       There is a need to establish and monitor appropriate industry Codes of Conduct across the
financial sector, and to require appropriate training and certification of market intermediaries. Most
industry segments do not have Codes of Conduct in place to commit financial institutions to fairness,
transparency, and ethical conduct. Such codes should be established by relevant industry associations in
cooperation with regulators, and compliance with the codes should be monitored. There is also a need to ensure
that market intermediaries who deal with clients, such as insurance agents and securities brokers, are properly
trained and certified.

7.       Effective and speedy alternative dispute resolution mechanisms are particularly important in
Pakistan, where courts cannot be relied on to provide timely, affordable, and predictable redress to
consumers. Generally sound grievance and redress mechanisms exist for bank customers, but their effectiveness
could be enhanced by increasing awareness of the process and streamlining procedures. Awareness of the
insurance ombudsman is low, and there is no equivalent in place for resolving disputes for retail customers in the
securities market or for microfinance clients. These gaps should be addressed, either by the financial sector itself
or through the establishment of a common financial ombudsman. Finally, comprehensive complaints data should
be collected, analyzed, and published, with a view to identifying major issues and informing CPFL policy.

8.       SBP and SECP have recognized the importance of financial education and have initiated programs
to address gaps. SBP, in partnership with the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund (PPAF) and Pakistan
Microfinance Network (PMN), has developed a Nationwide Financial Literacy Program (NFLP) aimed at low-
income people. SECP is implementing a comprehensive investor education program and is currently drafting
recommendations for insurance education and awareness campaigns. As a next step, the authorities may wish to
consider developing an integrated financial education strategy based on a national financial capability survey,
ensuring close coordination among all relevant stakeholders, and securing high-level government support, which
is critical for these initiatives to succeed.
                                                                  Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 3


Key Preliminary Recommendations


A list of key recommendations is found below: 3


                                                                                             Responsible
Recommendations                                                                                                              Term 4        Priority
                                                                                             Organization
Establish an effective coordination mechanism for financial                                  SBP, SECP, CCP,                     ST           High
consumer protection among regulators and key stakeholders.                                   industry
Define joint priorities and clarify roles and responsibilities.                              associations,
Clarify supervisory roles and responsibilities for each step of the                          ombudsmen,
effective delivery of financial products, and in instances where                             provincial consumer
multiple regulators are involved (e.g., bancassurance), determine                            protection councils,
which regulator has the lead role.                                                           etc.
Strengthen SECP’s risk-based supervisory and enforcement                                     SECP                                LT           High
capacity to deal with noncompliance and malpractices in the
insurance and securities sectors. Require minimum qualifications
and certification of brokers and agents, and apply fit and proper
criteria on corporate brokerage firms.
Strengthen disclosure by requiring (i) standardized                                          SBP, SECP, PMN,                    MT            High
methodologies to calculate and disclose total costs or returns; (ii)                         PPAF, PBA,
minimum contents of terms and conditions; (iii) Key Facts                                    MUFAP, IAP
Statements (KFS); and (iv) cooling-off periods for relevant
products.
Assess and implement suitable and pragmatic institutional                                    PMN, PPAF, SBP,                   S/MT           High
arrangements to address existing gaps in nonbank microfinance                                SECP
consumer protection, and extend basic minimum standards to
MFIs.
Strengthen dispute resolution mechanisms by (i) setting minimum                              SECP, KSE, ISE,                    MT            High
standards for internal complaints handling at all financial                                  LSE, MUFAP,
institutions; (ii) establishing effective, speedy, and low-cost                              PBA, PMN, PPAF
alternative dispute resolution mechanisms for securities,
insurance, and MFIs and MFBs, or consider a single financial
ombudsman; (iii) centralizing, analyzing, and publishing data on
consumer complaints in all sectors to use in formulating CP
policies; and (iv) increasing consumer awareness of redress
mechanisms.
Develop an integrated financial education strategy, based on a                               SBP, SECP,                         MT             High
Financial Capability Survey.                                                                 industry
                                                                                             associations,
                                                                                             Ministry of
                                                                                             Education


More detailed recommendations are included in the body of this report and in annex I.

3
  In bold, suggested institution to assume a lead role.
4
  ST, short term, indicates action can be undertaken in zero to six months. MT, medium term, indicates six months to one year. LT, long term, indicates more
than one year.
    4      Country Context


II.          Country Context

9.      CPFL is key to increasing responsible access to financial services in Pakistan. Pakistan’s financial
system is overwhelmingly dominated by banks, which hold approximately 74 percent of financial system assets, a
level that has remained fairly constant over the past decade. National savings—a government-sponsored retail
savings scheme—represents 17 percent of system assets, while insurance and other non-bank financial institutions
hold less than 10 percent of system assets. The rapid growth in household lending in Pakistan over the past decade
has been accompanied by an increase in the number of households that have taken on risks and obligations that
they do not fully understand—at times a result of unfair or deceptive practices. Strong financial consumer
protection can empower the public to demand improved transparency and efficiency in the financial sector by
ensuring that households, individuals, and firms have access to clear and transparent information about costs,
risks, and rewards of financial products. Financial literacy gives consumers the tools needed to make prudent
financial decisions, and to understand recourse options if disputes arise. Together, consumer protection and
financial literacy build public confidence in financial institutions, thus encouraging savings and long-term
financial investments that promote financial deepening.

10.       The level of financial exclusion in Pakistan is high. According to the 2008 FinScope survey 56 percent
of the adult population was financially excluded and used neither formal nor informal financial products. Further,
71 percent of respondents thought that they could easily live their life without a bank account, and only 56 percent
of the adult population saved; only 3 percent of these were formal savers. Only 2 percent of people had a formal
insurance policy, and just 3 percent understood what was meant by mobile banking and mobile phone banking.
According to the World Bank’s Global Financial Inclusion Database, 5 as of 2011 only 10 percent of the
population age 15 and older had an account at a formal financial institution, compared with the South Asian
regional average of 33 percent. In this same population, only 2 percent had obtained a loan from a financial
institution in the previous year, while 23 percent obtained such loan from informal sources (family or friends),
compared with South Asia regional averages of 9 percent and 23 percent, respectively. Finally, basic literacy—
which is relevant because some awareness techniques may require reading skills—remains at a low 54.9 percent
of the population. Such dire statistics amplify the need to reach potential consumers with structured and targeted
programs to increase their understanding of financial services.

11.      CPFL can also play an important role in ensuring prudent growth of credit markets. While access
to financial services has been expanding, credit growth and portfolio quality have been volatile. Bank penetration
and deposit mobilization have been growing rapidly, but bank lending to the private sector has stagnated
following a period of rapid growth. A rapid rise in lending to previously underserved markets (notably small and
medium enterprises and consumers) in the early 2000s was followed by a sharp deterioration in portfolio quality,
because both banks and consumers had limited experience in these markets, and consumer protection, financial
literacy, and credit information were poor. Consumer lending, which had been negligible before the late 1990s,
was the fastest-growing segment of the credit market from the late 1990s through 2008, when it reached 18
percent of total lending. The rapid rise in NPLs led to a sharp reversal in this trend, with some banks withdrawing
entirely from this market. From December 2008 to September 2012, the share of consumer lending dropped from
18 percent to just 6 percent.


12.    Several laudable initiatives are under way to promote both greater financial inclusion and
improved financial education. Financial education is an important step in increasing inclusion and
responsible access to financial services. The authorities have recognized that ongoing financial inclusion
programs need to be accompanied by enhanced efforts to improve financial literacy, because they are targeted at

5
    http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/financial_inclusion.
                                                                 Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 5


individuals and firms who have little experience in dealing with financial service providers. The landscape for
financial services is also undergoing some significant changes, with the introduction of new products and
services—such as mobile banking, crop and health insurance, and microinsurance—which also leads to an
increased need for financial education. SBP is undertaking a pilot financial literacy program, with the ultimate
objective of rolling it out nationally. The results and recommendations of this diagnostic may assist regulators and
the government in formulating appropriate policies to strengthen consumer protection and financial literacy in
Pakistan.



III.         The Legal, Institutional, and Regulatory Framework for Consumer Protection in Pakistan

Key Findings

13.      The institutional framework for financial consumer protection in Pakistan is fragmented, and has
important gaps and overlaps. Although the MoF is in charge of overall financial sector policy and development
issues, it does not deal directly with financial consumer protection matters. There are two main financial
supervisory agencies in Pakistan: SBP, which regulates commercial banks, development finance institutions
(DFIs), microfinance banks (MFBs), and exchange companies; and SECP, which regulates and supervises the
other sectors of the financial system, including the securities and insurance markets. In addition, the CCP, an
independent quasi-regulatory, quasi-judicial body has a mandate to, among other things, protect consumers from
anti-competitive practices and deceptive marketing practices. The CCP has investigated and has imposed
penalties on financial service providers in matters that pertain to financial consumer protection, such as alleged
price fixing of specified interest rates or ATM fees. There are two independent, statutory ombudsmen to resolve
disputes between consumers and financial institutions, the Office of the Banking Mohtasib (OBM) and the
insurance ombudsman (IO). The three stock exchanges have a frontline role in regulating certain activities of the
exchanges, including matters that directly affect individual investors, and they require that disputes involving
their members be arbitrated under their regulations.


14.      The legal framework does not provide clear consumer protection rules over financial products and
services. Pakistan’s constitution refers to a Federal Legislative List, which governs the division of legislative
powers between the federal government and provinces. All matters that do not appear on the federal list are
devolved to the provinces. Banking and financial services are on the federal list, whereas consumer protection is
deemed to be a provincial matter. All provinces except Sindh have provincial consumer protection acts 6 that cover
both goods and services. However, with the exception of the province of Punjab, these laws are not yet fully
operational. Punjab has established consumer protection councils and courts under their consumer protection act,
and reports that it has dealt with some 700 cases involving financial services. Under Pakistan’s legal system,
specialized laws are deemed to have precedence over general laws, so most observers believe that federal laws
governing banking and other financial services that include protection of the public and investors would take
precedence over the more general provincial consumer protection laws. SECP has a strong statutory mandate to
protect investor/consumer rights and interests, and the draft Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan
(Regulation and Enforcement) Bill currently before parliament is set to further strengthen its powers and
enforcement. SBP implements its consumer protection function pursuant to its general powers to protect the
public interest and the interest of depositors.



6
    See, for example, the Punjab Consumer Protection Act 2005.
    6   The Legal, Institutional, and Regulatory Framework for Consumer Protection in Pakistan


15.      SBP has primary responsibility for consumer protection issues in commercial banks, DFIs, MFBs,
and exchange companies. It derives its powers principally from the SBP Act, 1956; the Banking Companies
Ordinance (BCO), 1962; and the MFB Ordinance. None of these laws gives SBP an explicit consumer protection
mandate, but they do provide broad powers to SBP to, among other things, develop rules, regulations, and
directions, when it is satisfied that it is “(a) in the public interest; or (b) to prevent the affairs of any banking
company being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of the depositors or in a manner prejudicial to
the interests of the banking company; or (c) to secure the proper management of any banking company generally.”
Financial institutions regulated under these laws are legally bound to comply with such directions. SBP’s powers
and the binding nature of its directions on regulated entities have been demonstrated in practice and upheld by the
Supreme Court. SBP has used these powers extensively to issue secondary legislation, including rules,
regulations, and other directives on consumer protection matters in recent years. It has established a Consumer
Protection Department (CPD), to deal primarily with consumer disputes, 7 while SBP’s Inspection Department
verifies compliance with consumer protection rules, regulations, and other directives during annual onsite
inspections. SBP has the authority to impose sanctions, including fines, on banks that fail to comply with
consumer protection directives.

16.      SBP has issued fairly comprehensive regulations and directives to strengthen consumer protection
in recent years. It has enacted Prudential Regulations for Consumer Financing (updated June 2011), which
regulate a number of important issues pertaining to market conduct and consumer protection, and has issued
numerous relevant circulars. These cover the key areas arising from consumer financing, including disclosure
standards, business conduct, underwriting standards, complaints, cooling-off periods, sale of third-party products,
fair debt collection, pricing, and loan documentation. SBP has also laid out an ambitious agenda for strengthening
consumer protection in its “10-Year Strategy for the Banking Sector Reforms.” The recommendations outlined in
this report are generally well aligned with SBP’s own vision and strategy for enhancing financial consumer
protection.


17.      The legal and institutional arrangements for consumer protection in microfinance are highly
fragmented. Microfinance service providers adopt a variety of legal forms under various federal and provincial
laws. Only MFBs are regulated by a statutory body with enforcement powers (SBP), while non-deposit-taking
microfinance institutions are left unregulated. There is limited coordination among agencies, resulting in
regulatory gaps, a vacuum in redress mechanisms, even a lack of official statistics about the total number of MFIs,
and little awareness of consumer protection in the industry. There have been discussions about bringing regulation
of MFIs under SECP, but it is not clear that this would be the best solution, given SECP’s limited resources and
expertise in the area, and the fact that many of the largest MFIs are transforming into MFBs, which will bring
them under the scope of SBP.

18.     The fragmented legal environment, particularly as it pertains to consumer protection, does not
provide a sound basis for the microfinance industry’s long-term sustainability. It also puts at risk the
progress achieved so far under what is considered one of the world’s more progressive regulatory environments
for microfinance. There is evidence of poor practices, including ineffective redress mechanisms, discriminatory
lending policies against women, poor client monitoring and underwriting procedures allowing loans to be passed
on to people other than the borrower, inadequate price disclosure, and abusive loan collection. The experiences of
other countries have highlighted the risks of postponing serious measures on consumer protection until grievances
reach the media and invite political interference. The current laws leave MFIs, which cater to the majority of
microfinance borrowers, largely uncovered from a consumer protection standpoint.


7
 The Federal Ombudsmen Institutional Reforms Act, 2013, which was promulgated subsequent to the CPFL mission, may have implications for CPD. Some
concerns raised by CPD in this regard are highlighted in box 1.
                                                  Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 7


19.       Overall, the regulatory framework for consumer protection in MFBs is clear, but more detailed
regulations would be desirable . None of the requirements in the MFB Ordinance or the Prudential Regulations
for Microfinance Banks (PRMFB) are detailed enough to ensure consistency of practices across MFBs. The
PRMFB do not set standards for matters such as systems that handle MFB complaints (although it seems that in
practice SBP requires MFBs to at least have means to address consumer complaints), disclosure formats to
facilitate price comparison, and prohibition of unfair, deceptive, discriminatory practices.


20.     The legal and regulatory frameworks for branchless banking are relatively robust for consumer
risks, but again MFI clients remain unprotected. There have been instances of agent fraud and abuse (e.g.,
overcharging of fees) and other problems with electronic and agent transactions, but the industry is in its infancy,
and the lack of information on consumer complaints makes it difficult to assess the performance of branchless
banking at the consumer level. As branchless banking takes off in Pakistan, it is important to monitor consumer
issues. Only banks and MFBs can operate branchless banking platforms and agent networks, but MFIs use their
services without having to follow any consumer protection standard such as data privacy.

21.      Depositor protection is ambiguous in Pakistan. Under the Banks (Nationalization) Act of 1974, all
bank deposits are protected by government. This provision was introduced when the banks were nationalized, and
is no longer appropriate in a system that is largely privately owned. It is also not clear that the government of
Pakistan would be in a position to honor this guarantee in a timely and orderly manner if one or more large banks
failed. A draft law establishing an explicit deposit protection scheme to provide protection to small depositors was
drafted some time ago, but has not been submitted to parliament.

22.      SECP has a strong legal mandate to protect the rights and interests of investors in the securities
sector. The Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan Act (SECP Act), 1997, vests SECPSECP with an
explicit mandate to resolve complaints between securities brokers and their clients. In addition, the act provides a
strong mandate for SECP to “strive to maintain confidence of investors in the securities markets by ensuring
adequate protection for such investors” in the performance of its functions pursuant to SECP Act. SECP has also
issued the Broker and Agents Registration Rules, 2001, which requires brokers who fail to resolve an investor’s
complaint to be liable for suspension and ineligible for registration/licensing by SECP. SECP receives complaints
from investors and directs them to the different operations within SECP according to the subject matter, and has
recently established a centralized unit to monitor complaints. It also publishes statistics on the nature and number
of complaints and their status in its annual reports, though the statistics are insufficiently detailed to assist in the
identification and analysis of key trends and issues.

23.     However, the legal framework does not adequately provide SECP with a range of options to ensure
effective enforcement, which is integral to strengthening investor protection. For example, the current legal
framework does not allow SECP to take action to freeze the assets of, or enjoin violations of the law by,
unlicensed entities, even though SECP may request SBP do so on its behalf. In addition, its enforcement options
today are limited to issuing prohibitory orders, issuing directives, and imposing fines. SECP does not have power
to seek damages on behalf of investors and compensate them in the event of abusive market conduct or other
forms of misconduct in business dealings. Two primary pieces of legislation submitted by SECP to the
government of Pakistan—the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (Regulation and Enforcement)
Bill and the Securities Bill—have provisions that would substantially increase its supervisory and enforcement
powers.


24.     Similarly, the 2000 Insurance Ordinance provides an explicit mandate for SECP to protect
insurance policyholders, but further efforts are required to effectively fulfill this mandate. This is the
primary statute governing the insurance industry, and the preamble states: “To regulate the business of the
insurance industry to ensure the protection of the interests of insurance policy holders and to promote sound
 8    The Legal, Institutional, and Regulatory Framework for Consumer Protection in Pakistan


development of the insurance industry.” However, although SECP has considerable statutory powers to regulate
and supervise insurers and intermediaries, it has not always used these powers effectively to supervise and enforce
adequate consumer protection standards in the industry. To date, SECP has focused its regulatory and supervisory
efforts more on prudential supervision than consumer protection. Recent initiatives to promote microinsurance
have heightened the importance of consumer protection in the insurance industry. There is also a need to clarify
the roles and responsibilities of the federal government (Ministry of Commerce) and SECP with respect to
subsidiary legislation.


25.     In Pakistan, where demutualized stock exchanges are profit-oriented, it is critical for the self-
regulatory organization (SRO) system to be sound, with a strong oversight framework to be implemented
by SECP. This should be underpinned by explicit provisions in the law or rules. Hence, the front-line
responsibility of the demutualized exchanges would need to be strengthened on a risk-based basis and a new
framework established for SECP’s oversight over listed exchanges. The Securities and Exchange Commission of
Pakistan (Regulation and Enforcement) Bill and the Securities Bill have specific provisions relating to registration
and regulation of SROs but the laws are pending approval by the parliament.



Recommendations


26.      Because of the fragmented nature of financial consumer protection, a mechanism is needed to
provide for effective coordination among all relevant stakeholders. Consideration could be given to the
establishment of a Financial Consumer Protection Task Force, comprising SBP, SECP, CCP, ombudsmen,
industry associations, provincial Consumer Protection Councils, as well as interested consumer associations to
introduce a more strategic perspective on financial consumer protection, and define issues and propose solutions,
including proposed legal and regulatory changes. One agency should be given the mandate to lead and coordinate
this effort. It would be particularly important for the principal financial regulators, SBP and SECP, to coordinate
more closely given ownership linkages among banks and nonbanks and the fact that banks often serve as a
distribution channel for insurance and asset management products. Working groups could be formed with other
stakeholders to work on specific aspects of CPFL.

27.       The legal framework for financial consumer protection would benefit from greater strength and
clarity, along with consistent enforcement of existing provisions. There are several ways to create greater
clarity in the legal framework for CPFL. One would be to introduce a Financial Consumer Protection Act at the
federal level, which would cover a range of issues, including transparency, confidentiality, availability of
statements, data protection, account servicing, protection against unfair contracts and lending practices, and so
forth. A new Consumer Protection Act was in fact proposed in SBP’s 10-Year Strategy Paper. Another option
would be to introduce a new Banking Act or amendment to the BCO, 1962, and the Microfinance Bank
Ordinance to give SBP an explicit consumer protection mandate. In practice, however, passing major new
financial legislation in Pakistan has proven to be a very difficult and protracted process, and SBP has effectively
used its broad powers to introduce and enforce consumer protection measures through secondary legislation and
directives. In addition to the legal mandate, it is important that the regulators have adequate capacity to enforce
and monitor their expanded CPFL mandate. To this end, it is recommended that SBP and SECP undertake
institutional self-assessments to identify any gaps.


28.     SBP may also wish to consider better delineating the internal roles and responsibilities of various
departments in CPFL. The CPD receives consumer complaints from clients of both scheduled banks and
microfinance banks, which it may handle directly or pass on to the OBM or Department of Agricultural Credit
                                                  Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 9


and Microfinance at SBP, which also handle consumer complaints from scheduled banks and microfinance banks,
respectively. It would appear that there is overlap and a lack of clarity in the responsibility for handling consumer
complaints within SBP, and that the role of the CPD is not clearly defined. One option would be to give the CPD
a broader research and policy role in CPFL in all market segments that fall under SBP’s jurisdiction.

29.     A pragmatic strategy to address the legal and regulatory gaps for MFIs needs to be designed and
implemented. This could include a range of non-regulatory actions that could be implemented by the PMN and
PPAF, with strong support from SBP. MFIs should continue to be encouraged to register with SECP under
Section 42 of the Companies Ordinance, and SECP should publish a central register of all microfinance providers
in operation in Pakistan, with their main characteristics. Consumer protection risks in branchless banking should
be addressed by setting and monitoring compliance, with standards similar to those applicable to MFBs.

30.      The regulators should put in place appropriate consumer protection regulations and supervision
processes to deal with new and emerging distribution channels. For example, branchless banking and
insurance regulations may need to be amended to ensure that disclosure, fair treatment, and recourse standards
apply when third parties or electronic devices are used for service delivery. The regulators may also wish to
carefully review complaint reports to identify any industry-wide problems in branchless banking or other new
distribution channels.

31.      There is a need to clarify the position on depositor protection through appropriate legislation. The
proposal outlined in SBP’s “10-Year Strategy Paper” for creating a deposit protection scheme would appear to be
an appropriate solution for Pakistan. A deposit insurance system should limit the scope for discretionary
decisions, promote public confidence, help contain the costs of resolving failed banks, and provide for an orderly
process for dealing with bank failures. The law should specify how the system is to be funded on a sustainable
basis, as well as its obligations to depositors, and must be part of a well-constructed financial system safety net. It
would need to be supported by a high level of public awareness about its existence, benefits, and limitations.

32.     There is a need to strengthen SECP’s risk-based supervisory and enforcement capacity to deal with
noncompliance and malpractices in the insurance and securities sectors. In addition, brokers and agents
should be required to hold minimum qualifications and should be certified, and corporate brokerage firms should
be subject to fit and proper criteria. The new Broker Rules being developed by SECP cover these aspects. SECP
should exercise its powers to undertake a more comprehensive program of onsite inspections of both private and
state-owned insurers, including microinsurance providers.



IV.     Consumer Disclosure

Key Findings


33.      Both SBP and SECP have issued directives to financial institutions to enhance transparency and
disclosure of their terms and conditions, but in practice the terms and pricing often remain
nontransparent. The lack of standardized, comparable pricing information on financial products impedes
competition in the sector and no doubt contributes to the relatively high banking spreads and fees in Pakistan.
Currently financial institutions do not provide a standardized summary statement, such as a Key Facts Statement
(KFS), that would allow consumers to compare offers from different providers. The KFS could also constitute an
efficient way to inform consumers about their basic rights, credit reporting systems, and grievance procedures.
Moreover, although current prudential regulations prescribe that banks, MFBs, securities intermediaries, and
others clearly and transparently show all costs, there is no standard format or methodology of calculation of all-in
10      Consumer Disclosure


costs or returns. In practice, the quality of the information provided to consumers appears to vary widely across
the industry, and there is limited analysis, at the industry level, of disclosure practices and how well they work.

34.     Inadequate disclosure by insurance companies has contributed to their poor reputation among the
public and has hindered development of the market. The Insurance Ordinance requires the insurer or an
insurance intermediary to use plain language when drafting policy documentation, but there are no standard
templates to provide clear information to policyholders.

35.     Islamic banking products also require enhanced disclosure requirements . A 2009 survey by
Hawkamah indicated that disclosure and transparency for Islamic products for retail investors need substantial
strengthening.


36.     The poor operation of Pakistan’s postal service makes it difficult and costly to deliver regular
statements to customers. Good practice requires monthly statements for all bank customers, for example, but in
Pakistan banks are required to send statements only every six months. This periodicity is inadequate, but banks
indicated they have to use costly private courier services to deliver statements, and the cost of more frequent
delivery would be prohibitive, particularly for small clients. As elsewhere, banks in Pakistan are shifting to
technology (Internet and e-mail) to deliver statements wherever possible, but not all customers have access to
these channels. Some banks notify customers of transactions and balances by text messages through cell phones.


Recommendations


37.      SBP and SECP should require financial institutions to provide Key Facts Statements for all basic
consumer finance products, 8 should regulate the minimum content of terms and conditions, and should
require that they be written in easily understood language. Banks should further be required to disclose a
standardized effective mark-up to use in all advertising, marketing, and sales materials. 9 In insurance, SECP
should introduce common templates to provide clear, understandable, timely, and standardized information to
policyholders. Industry associations should consider undertaking consumer testing of KFSs before they are
introduced to ensure that they are well understood. The availability of information in Urdu as well as other local
languages should be encouraged, and customer surveys should be undertaken to test consumer understanding of
the disclosure formats. In cooperation with industry associations, the regulators should consider how best to
provide more frequent information to consumers through alternative channels, given the unreliability of the postal
service. More frequent statements could be made available to customers, free of charge, at branches or ATMs, for
example. Supervisory capacity should be strengthened to enhance enforcement of the improved disclosure rules,
including by microfinance providers.

38.     Consideration should be given to establishing a website for comparing prices of standard financial
products, with complementary dissemination mechanisms for those without Internet access. The sponsor of
such a website would need to be considered trustworthy by the public. The website could also include easy-to-use
financial tools, to compare similar products or to plan for expenditures. National price comparison websites have
increased competition and reduced consumer prices on financial products and services in a number of markets

8
 There are several relevant examples of key facts statements that SBP may wish to review, such as the U.K. Financial Services Authority’s (initial disclosure
documents applicable to housing credit products; the European Union’s Standard European Consumer Credit Information form; the U.S. Truth in Lending
Act’s “ Schumer Box” for credit cards; Peru’s “ HojaResumen” (Summary Sheet); South Africa’s Pre-Agreement Statement & Quotation for Small Credit
Agreements; and Ghana’s Pre-Agreement Truth in Lending Disclosure Statement.
9
 For example, Peru’s Regulation of Transparency requires banks to disclose the “ TCEA,” or annual effective cost rate, which is expressed as an interest rate,
but includes all costs associated with a consumer credit.
                                                 Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 11


around the world. If professional or consumer associations do not establish such websites, the regulators
(SBP/SECP or CCP) may wish to take the lead on this.

39.     In relation to Islamic products, such as savings mobilized under the Muḍârabah principle and
profit sharing investment accounts (PSIAs), SBP may wish to enhance transparency and accountability by
requiring that (i) banks should publish and explain their approach to Shariah compliance, and the banks’
governance structure for ensuring Shariah compliance; and (ii) the profit and loss sharing accounts and PSIA
terms and conditions should be transparent, concise, and written to be easily understood by the typical investor.
Information that should be disclosed includes (i) the rights and liabilities of both parties, notably with respect to
circumstances where losses are to be borne by the investor, and the investor’s contractual rights with regard to
early withdrawal or redemption; and (ii) the bank’s responsibility to disclose accurate, relevant, and timely
information to the investor on the investment of the PSIA, including its performance, investment policies, and
valuation.


V.       Business Practices

Key Findings


40.      Not all segments of the financial sector have principles-based Codes of Conduct that bind financial
service providers to established standards of service and quality. SBP has encouraged the Pakistan Bankers
Association to adopt a business code of ethics to be used a basis for committing all banks to fairness, disclosure,
and proper ethical standards, but this has not happened. The Insurance Association of Pakistan has a code of
conduct applicable to its members, who cater to both individual and corporate customers. In the microfinance
sector, PMN has developed a code of conduct that applies to its members and has recently begun to assess
compliance; however, membership in PMN is voluntary, and there is no enforcement mechanism to ensure
compliance. PPAF has also imposed the same code on its partner organizations, but again this applies to a
restricted universe of microfinance providers. In the securities sector, the Mutual Fund Association of Pakistan
(MUFAP) has drafted a code of ethics, but it is still awaiting SECP approval. There is no code of conduct for
asset management companies. In Pakistan, the brokers’ code of conduct is prescribed as subsidiary legislation,
rather than by the stock exchanges, and SECP is currently developing new Broker Rules. None of the existing
codes in the securities sector is well known to investors or, in some cases, even to members of the industry
associations.

41.      There are comprehensive guidelines and directives on lending practices and debt collection for
banks and MFBs (but not for MFIs); but there is no systematic monitoring of these practices from a
consumer protection perspective. There are reports of abusive collection practices involving harassment,
particularly, though not exclusively, in the microfinance sector. There are also weaknesses in the assessment of
the client’s profile and his or her business activity. Both MFIs and MFBs lend to women based on their
creditworthiness, but the loan is often used by male family members, despite a provision in the MFB Ordinance
that sets penalties for borrowers who use loans for any purpose other than that for which the loan is granted. This
practice places women in a vulnerable position.

42.      It is good practice to require financial institutions to provide consumers a reasonable cooling-off
period when committing to a long-term financial product or service. This protects consumers from high-
pressure sales practices, and gives them time to consider alternative products or seek independent advice. It is
particularly important in a market, such as Pakistan, where the terms of services and products cannot be compared
easily. SBP has issued a circular mandating a 14-day cooling-off period for bancassurance products, but this has
not been extended to other relevant long-term products including mortgages, or complex or structured products.
12      Business Practices



43.      Securities and futures brokers who deal with potential and actual customers are not required in the
law to be properly trained and certified. SECP has issued a Circular No. 35 of 2009 requiring brokers to ensure
that at least 20 percent of those who deal with clients are certified by examinations administered by the Institute
of Capital Markets (ICM). To date, no brokers have complied with even this modest requirement. 10 Sales
personnel and traders of stockbroking firms should be formally trained through a certified system and licensed to
ensure that only those who possess professional expertise and competence deal with clients to ensure clients are
informed in their investment decision. This is particularly important in a demutualized environment where a wider
range of products will be distributed to investors. Furthermore, the law does not stipulate fit and proper criteria for
the registration of securities and commodity futures brokers that are corporate entities.

44.      Similarly, insurance agents—the first and at times the only point of contact for policyholders—are
neither licensed nor certified. The Insurance Rules prescribe only very basic requirements: a minimum of 10
years of formal education; a foundation course run by Pakistan Insurance Institute for non-life agents; and, for life
agents, company training. Insurers are responsible for all materials and information provided to policyholders and
potential policyholders by their agents, who are required by law to disclose their status as an agent for an insurer.
Individual insurance agents are the primary distribution channel for insurance, and are typically remunerated
entirely through commission. In 2010, more than 90 percent of life and non-life insurance was sourced though
agents. Although the list of registered insurance brokers and insurance surveyors is available on SECP website,
there is no such information available for agents. 11

45.     There is a long-standing and significant problem with the implementation of compulsory third-
party motor liability insurance. The legislation mandating third-party motor vehicle insurance is separate to the
Insurance Ordinance. When a motor vehicle is registered, or when the road tax is collected, a valid third-party
motor insurance certificate must be presented. This process is established under the “Saved Chapter” (Chapter
VIII) of the otherwise repealed Motor Vehicle Act, 1939. The Saved Chapter, which makes holding third-party
motor insurance mandatory for all private vehicles, permits insurers and cooperative societies established under
provincial legislation to conduct the business of insurance for the purposes of the Saved Chapter. This is in
contravention of the Insurance Ordinance, which specifically requires all insurers to be registered and supervised
by SECP. The sale of mandatory policies by unlicensed and unregulated insurers poses a serious risk to
consumers that must be addressed.


Recommendations


46.    Principles-based Codes of Conduct should be developed for all segments of the financial sector.
They should be developed with strong participation and buy-in from industry associations, and compliance should
be monitored and enforced by regulators or other appropriate self-regulatory bodies that have enforcement
powers. The codes should be widely published and disseminated so that consumers are aware of them.

47.   Demutualized exchanges that have front-line supervisory responsibilities need to enhance their
market conduct regulations (as part of their member regulations) to complement SECP’s prescribed Code of
Conduct.



10
  The compliance data is for the circular dated June 30, 2011.
11
  The law does not require agents to be registered with SECP and only insurers are required to maintain a register of their agents but even the insurance
companies do not have the information on agents readily available at their respective websites.
                                                 Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 13


48.    For financial products that require a long-term commitment (savings, investment, or credit), a
bank should provide the consumer a reasonable cooling-off period (at least three to five days).


49.      SBP should strengthen its regulation and oversight of MFBs’ underwriting, monitoring, and
collection procedures. Examples of prohibited practices should be included in the regulation. PMN and PPAF
should adopt similar standards. A study to identify current practices could be undertaken by SBP, PMN, and
PPAF to inform regulatory reform and supervisory action. Furthermore, customers need to be made more aware
of their rights concerning debt collection practices, foreclosures, and so forth.


50.      There is a particular need to address some widely accepted gender-related practices, such as the
passing on of loans by female borrowers and discriminatory loan application criteria. Gender-specific
practices should be reflected in Codes of Conduct of the providers, as well as the code adopted by PPAF and
PMN. A working group should be formed to look into specific steps to address this problem, such as greater
emphasis on training of loan officers, hiring of more female loan officers, or increased awareness and financial
education. In general, for both consumer protection and risk management purposes, MFBs and MFIs should lend
strictly to the person who controls the loan. This should be scrutinized as part of supervisory inspections of
MFBs, and it appears that SBP has been doing this to some extent.


51.     A standard industry-wide examination for determining the competency of individual salespersons
in the brokerage industry should be required. Nonetheless, in view of brokers’ widespread noncompliance by
brokers with this requirement, SECP may wish to consider a “tiered” approach toward accreditation, where
different levels of certification are required for products of varying degrees of complexity. This should be done in
close collaboration with the Institute of Capital Markets as the accreditation body.

52.     The Brokers’ and Agent’s Rules for both securities and commodities brokers should be amended to
incorporate a fit and proper criteria and requirement for high capital standards for brokers. This should
reduce risks to investors of loss caused by brokers’ negligent or illegal behavior or brokers’ inadequate capital. In
addition, it will be critical to introduce an advanced risk-based supervision system for identifying the brokers at
highest risk for noncompliance and misconduct.


53.     SECP should also supervise the capabilities and activities of insurance agents more vigorously,
either directly or through insurers. After a suitable transition period, all agents should be required to meet
adequate specified SECP requirements, with compliance monitored by SECP through onsite inspections,
policyholder surveys of agent activities and behavior, and other things.


54.     The regulation and supervision of the mandated third-party motor vehicle insurance should be
brought under the effective ambit of SECP. The proposal made by SECP and Insurance Association of
Pakistan (IAP) in 2007/2008 and agreed to by the federal government to address this should be implemented.
14    Dispute Resolution Mechanisms


VI.     Dispute Resolution Mechanisms

Key Findings


55.     There are generally sound grievance and redress mechanisms in place for bank customers, though
their effectiveness could be further enhanced. SBP has required all banks to establish clear dispute resolution
mechanisms and to maintain proper records of such disputes. Details of these procedures must be posted in all
bank branches, and SBP inspects the bank’s records and processes for resolving complaints during annual onsite
inspections. If a client does not obtain resolution of his grievance from his bank within 45 days, he may refer the
matter to the Ombudsman (OBM). Decisions of the OBM may be appealed to the Governor, SBP or ultimately to
the courts by consumers, but are binding on banks. Timelines are specified for resolution. Most disputes that go to
the Ombudsman are settled through an amicable resolution process, but roughly 20 percent are settled at a hearing
held by the OBM. The OBM handled more than 20,000 complaints between its founding in 2005 and 2011;
however, the position of the Ombudsman, which is appointed by the President on recommendation of the
Governor of SBP, was left vacant for approximately eight months which is created a serious backlog at the OBM,
before an appointment was made in March, 2013.

56.     The absence of effective dispute resolution mechanisms is a core weakness in microfinance. There is
no regulatory requirement for either MFIs or MFBs to have an internal customer complaint structure in place.
Microfinance clients have fewer channels to resolve grievances than bank clients, and seem to be generally
unaware of the few channels that do exist. Although MFBs seem to be required by SBP to have procedures, there
are no stipulated standards for handling customer complaints. A few MFIs have also instituted such procedures,
but the quality and sophistication vary widely. MFB clients can file complaints with SBP directly, but have no
access to the banking ombudsman. MFI clients are left with only the courts to resolve their grievances, which is
unacceptable given their lack of resources and unfamiliarity with formal processes. A proposal by the PMN to
implement an in-house structure as a pragmatic (even if short-term) solution to the deficient complaint-handling
practices has not been agreed to by all stakeholders.

57.      The securities laws and rules and industry codes do not provide for alternative dispute resolution
systems for market participants (other than those relating to trades executed on the stock exchanges, which
may go to arbitration). SECP requires all securities intermediaries to have internal complaint-handling
procedures for their clients, and its onsite inspection examines their effectiveness. The Karachi Center of
Alternative Dispute Resolution has been operational since February 2007 and has recently signed a Memorandum
of Understanding (MOU) with SECP, among others, to provide input on developing effective alternative dispute
resolution systems in the review of stock exchange regulations. Nonetheless, it would appear that to date, the
primary arbitration system for the securities market is part of the stock exchanges’ framework in relation to trades
on their market. As a result, it does not cover all types of complaints between a customer and an asset
management company.


58.      The insurance law and rules do not require insurers to have an internal disputes settlement process,
but most insurers have put in place some form of internal dispute resolution system. The quality of these systems
has never been checked, and there is concern that smaller or less reputable insurers may provide limited support
for internal dispute resolution. The IAP Code of Conduct makes no reference to dispute resolution processes,
internal or external. SECP Circular 18 of 2011 requires all insurers to display on their websites “The information
relating to claim/grievance handling mechanism/procedure in detail” no later than January 15, 2012, but internal
dispute resolution processes should be made more effective.
                                                Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 15


59.      The Office of the Insurance Ombudsman was established in May 2006 but is not widely known. An
insurance ombudsman may investigate allegations of misadministration by insurers. Decisions of the insurance
ombudsman may be appealed to SECP, and complainants also retain the right to file suit against insurers. The
insurance ombudsman may also pass matters on to SECP for further investigation. A relatively small number of
complaints have been investigated by the insurance ombudsman. There is also a distinct federal ombudsman,
which is referred to by the two state-owned insurers that deal with consumers, the State Life Insurance
Corporation and Postal Life Insurance, both of which indicated they were unaware of the insurance ombudsman.
The external dispute resolution processes are not well known to the public, and hence their effectiveness is
limited.

Recommendations


60.       Consideration should be given to proactively increasing awareness of the OBM, and streamlining
procedures to make them more user-friendly. Roughly two-thirds of those using the service do not comply
with the formal procedure, and have to be guided through the process by the OBM. Furthermore, a large number
of complaints are directed to the CPD of SBP, which then redirects the complaints to the appropriate financial
institution or the OBM for follow-up. This indicates that consumers are not fully aware of the process. SBP,
OBM, and/or Pakistan Banks’ Association (PBA) should consider conducting a more proactive campaign through
the media and other channels to increase awareness. A new ombudsman needs to be appointed as soon as
possible. Because rulings can be pronounced only by the ombudsman, the current vacancy is creating a serious
backlog. If allowed by law, the authorities should put in place a system to ensure that there will always be an
acting ombudsman in the event of a vacancy in the office, either through delegated powers or the automatic
appointment of an interim ombudsman.

61.     There is a need to centralize, analyze, and publish data on consumer complaints. A wealth of data is
available on consumer complaints, but the data are dispersed among individual financial institutions, SBP, SECP,
the OBM, and provincial councils. For the banking sector, the OBM publishes statistics and analyzes complaints
it receives to determine if any issues require policy attention. The CPD also analyzes data on consumer
complaints it receives and prepares an annual review. Findings are used for internal analysis, and the CPD has
taken several policy initiatives on the basis of conclusions drawn from the findings. This “Annual Review” is not
made public, however, and the data analyzed are not comprehensive. A comprehensive and public analysis of all
financial consumer complaints would allow regulators and financial institutions to better identify and address
recurring problems and areas of weakness in banking practices. This may be an appropriate role for the CPD of
SBP.

62.      SBP, PMN, and PPAF should design and enforce an effective mechanism to handle complaints
from clients of all microfinance providers, regardless of their regulatory status. This should be accompanied
by increased coordination to exchange, analyze, and disseminate complaints information. The potential to use the
PMN as a central redress mechanism should be further explored, as it may be the most practical solution to cover
MFIs (even beyond PMN membership). This may require a change in the PMN’s statutory mandate and would
require a good degree of interagency coordination and a robust governance structure to minimize potential
conflicts of interest. Whatever strategy is chosen, increasing awareness of dispute resolution procedures is crucial
and will require mass media campaigns and support from SBP. Redress mechanisms must be designed to work for
microfinance clients, including those in rural areas with limited access to technologies other than mobile phones.
SBP should also set minimum standards for complaint-handling procedures in MFBs, and review their
effectiveness. It should use complaints data for regulatory and supervisory purposes, and to design financial
literacy and awareness campaigns.

63.     SECP should formalize minimum written requirements for internal dispute resolution processes for
all insurers, preferably in collaboration with the industry, and then monitor their effectiveness. It is also
16      Dispute Resolution Mechanisms


important to increase awareness of the Office of the Insurance Ombudsman. SECP, with industry involvement,
should establish an accessible and effective “one-stop shop” for policyholders and potential policyholders with
disputes. It is further recommended that a low-cost ombudsman resolving disputes for smaller retail customers be
considered in the securities, futures, and microinsurance markets.

                             FEDERAL OMBUDSMEN INSTITUTIONAL REFORMS ACT, 2013 12

          The Federal Ombudsmen Institutional Reforms Act, 2013 (the Act) was enacted on February 12, 2013,
          subsequent to the CPFL Diagnostic Mission. Apart from the Office of Federal Ombudsman (Wafaqi
          Mohtasib), which was set up in Pakistan in 1983, there are 10 other Ombudsman offices established in the
          country: four at federal level13 , five at provincial level14 , and one in Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK).

          It is not absolutely clear how the Act will be applicable to the Banking Ombudsman Pakistan (BMP) and
          the insurance ombudsman (IO). However, the consumer protection department of SBP and Insurance
          Department of SECP have raised concerns that if applicable, certain provisions in the act will have
          negative implications from a consumer protection perspective, and the CPFL diagnostic team shares this
          concern, particularly insofar as the BMP appears to be working well As a sole supervisory authority, SBP
          is responsible for conduct supervision as well as providing financial consumer protection to the customers
          of banks and DFIs. Before promulgation of the act, there was a three-tier redressal mechanism for
          consumers (all banks are required to establish an internal dispute resolution mechanism); any person
          aggrieved by the resolution provided by the banks has the right to lodge a complaint with the BMP; and
          finally, SBP is entrusted with the responsibility to act as an appellate body over the BMP. The act states
          that no court or authority shall have jurisdiction to entertain a matter that falls within the jurisdiction of an
          ombudsman, nor shall any court or authority assume jurisdiction in respect of any matter pending with or
          decided by an ombudsman. Thus it is not clear whether SBP will be able to handle consumer/customer
          complaints or not.

          There is also uncertainty regarding the scope of the BMP, because under the Act an ombudsman has
          jurisdiction over public or autonomous bodies with government shareholding. Does that mean the BMP
          cannot entertain complaints against private banks? No special provisions have been made regarding
          banking companies in the new Act.
          Similarly, if the new Act applies, the authority for adjudication of appeals against orders from the BMP
          would be shifted from the SBP governor to the president of Pakistan, but the law is silent on appeals
          already lodged and adjudicated at SBP. Is the 45-day time frame for disposal of customer complaints
          applicable to banks? Similarly, in case of complaints against insurance companies, the aggrieved party
          can file an appeal with the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan, but this may not be the case
          after the promulgation of the Act.
          Further, the BMP is required to send a report to SBP on or before every March 31, reviewing the
          activities of its office during the preceding year. Now with the promulgation of the Act, there is lack of
          clarity with regard to knowledge sharing regarding complaints trend analysis.




12
   See annex II.
13
   At federal level there is: Office o f Federal Tax Ombudsman, Federal Insurance Ombudsman, Banking Ombudsman, and Federal Ombudsperson for
Protection against Harassment of Women at Workplace.
14
   Provincial Ombudsman at Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and Baluchistan, respectively, and Provincial Ombudsperson Sindh for Protection against
Harassment of Women at Workplace.
                                                                   Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 17


VII.         Financial Education

Key Findings

1.       SBP and SECP have recognized the importance of financial education and commenced with
structured initiatives to address the existing gaps, though no comprehensive financial education strategy is
available yet. Specifically, as outlined in the Pakistan “10-Year Strategy Paper for the Banking Sector
Reforms,”15 SBP has made financial education one of its strategic priorities. It has committed to sponsoring a
long-term campaign to enhance financial literacy in both urban and rural areas, targeting large segments of the
population, with the active participation of the banking industry. To this end, SBP, in collaboration with the PPAF
and other stakeholders, has already commenced a Nationwide Financial Literacy Program. In addition, SECP has
also started to implement a comprehensive Investor Education and Awareness Program primarily focusing on
existing and potential investors. 16


2.       Although the development of the NFLP was not based on a full-fledged financial capability survey,
it was informed by the demand- and supply-side financial literacy gap analysis and it used pilot programs
prior to full implementation. The gap analysis included a very limited demand survey of sample target
population, as well as a survey of the heads of financial institutions and focus group analysis. Given its
importance for development of targeted financial education measures, the suitability of the demand survey
instrument is briefly assessed in box 1. The respondents from the financial sector agreed that the NFLP could be
beneficial for the general population, which could in turn benefit the financial institutions in terms of increased
outreach. Regarding the topics covered, the private sector view was that the financial literacy curriculum should
prioritize budgeting and banking products and services. 17 They also recommended considering making the NFLP
a continuous effort and implementing school-based financial education.


3.      The NFLP is focused on providing financial education to adult populations between the ages of 18
to 60 in both rural and urban areas, with a specific focus on low-income and marginalized communities,
and taking gender equality into consideration. The first phase of the program included the development of the
curriculum and testing of pilot programs that have been delivered to nearly 50,000 people. The next stage includes
independent evaluation of the pilot and, following any required changes, scaling up the program to some 500,000
people. The program covered various basic financial topics, such as budgeting, savings, investments, debt
management, financial products, and branchless banking. The NFLP is overseen by a committee comprising
PMN, PPAF, and PBA, as well as representatives from the education sector, and was managed by Bearing Point
Pakistan (now Mazars Pakistan). Further, the program included three components—curriculum development,
dissemination, and monitoring and evaluation—and it utilized various delivery channels, including TV,
publications, public events, and a website (www.financialeducation.pk). In the future, SBP also plans to expand
the NFLP, with programs geared for schoolchildren. Overall, despite the limitation of the initial demand survey,
the approach that attempted to assess existing gaps and used a pilot program prior to full implementation was
sound, and the initiative is commendable.




15
     http://www.sbp.org.pk/bsd/10yearstrategypaper.pdf.
16
     For details on issues specific to capital markets and insurance sectors see volume II of this report.
17
     That is, debt management, investment and entrepreneurship, branchless banking, and consumer protection.
18      Financial Education


            Box 1: Limitations of the Implemented Demand Survey and Future Assessments
The sampling methodology of the demand survey had significant limitations. The sample covered
only four regions (and seven cities). Further, instead of a probability sampling, some form of quota
sampling was used. Finally, the sample size of 336 people was fairly small. As a result, the collected data
did not allow making any inferences to the overall population or subpopulation (region or the seven
cities),) and was likely biased and not very accurate. 18

The questionnaire covered useful topics, but its extent was also limited. The instrument used has a
strong focus on financial inclusion topics, such as access to or experiences with financial products and
services. It also gathered valuable information on peoples’ attitudes, including their preferences for
receiving financial education and reasons for saving, borrowing, and using specific financial products and
services. These types of questions were particularly useful to obtain a better understanding of the reasons
underlying specific financial decisions. However, the number of questions aimed to measure knowledge,
skills, or behaviors that could be associated with financial capability was rather limited.

Future assessments of financial capability in Pakistan would benefit from questions that cover the
following key financial capability areas. These include (i) basic numeracy skills and understanding of
basic financial concepts (e.g., how inflation affects their savings); (ii) day-to-day money management
(e.g., planning income against expenditure, prioritizing spending on essentials); (iii) planning for future
needs (e.g., making provisions for planned or unexpected expenses, retirement); (iv) ability to choose
among financial products (e.g., checking terms and conditions, shopping around, not borrowing more
than one can afford); and (v) key motivations (e.g., impulsiveness, achievement and time orientation, risk
preferences).

 In this regard, the existing World Bank instrument could be used and tailored to the needs of
Pakistan. The World Bank implemented an extensive qualitative research program, funded by the
Russian Trust Fund of Financial Literacy and Education, to identify the key components of financial
capability that are specifically relevant in low- and middle-income settings. Based on the results of this
empirical research, the World Bank developed a questionnaire that has been extensively tested to ensure
that all questions are well understood and meaningful across income and education levels. To date, the
instrument was used in fifteen countries (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Colombia, Lebanon, Mexico, Mongolia, Nigeria, Romania, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkey, Uruguay, and
West Bank/Gaza) and is currently applied in four additional countries (Malawi, Mozambique, Morocco,
and the Philippines). Because of the extensive development work of the questionnaire, its high relevance
for low- and middle-income environments, and the benefit of being able to make cross-country
comparisons, it is recommended that this instrument be used for any future assessments of financial
capability of Pakistan’s population.


4.       The nationwide capital market investor education program launched by SECP seems
comprehensive, but it appears that it was primarily based on how SECP and other relevant stakeholders
perceived the key issues in investor education. Although the preferred approach would have been to gauge the
issues firsthand by organizing focus groups, an existing investor survey, or some other sort of more structured
diagnostic assessment, this was still an excellent initiative. The program was officially launched in July 2012 in

18
   The World Bank team has just recently been informed that a supplemental survey (with a sample size of 670) had been conducted; however, as no
substantial information about the survey methodology has been made available to the Bank team, it could not be covered in this report.
                                                  Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 19


collaboration with the three Stock Exchanges, the Mercantile Exchange, Central Depository Company, National
Clearing Company, and the MUFAP, and will be implemented under the Institute of Capital Markets. The key
objectives of the program are to empower the investors with knowledge to make better decisions, understand and
manage risks, promote investing, expand outreach, and so forth. The delivery mechanisms include an investor
education website, seminars, educational materials, and the media campaign.

5.       The target groups primarily include university students, general investors (both existing and
potential), and gray investors (close to retirement age). In addition, in early 2013, SECP also plans to include
lower-income individuals (with monthly income under Rs. 30,000) as a separate target group, with the goal of
increasing their financial literacy and financial access. The first three target groups include existing and potential
investors, and therefore represent a natural target market for SECP; however, lower-income individuals are
unlikely to become capital markets investors, and moreover they may already be covered under the NFLP. In this
regard, it may be prudent if SECP maintained a focus on its natural target market, while the lower-income
individuals could be covered under the NFLP. This would exclude any potential overlaps and result in more
efficient use of limited resources.


6.        There are also limited private sector initiatives focusing on financial education, primarily developed
and run by financial institutions and focused on their customers. For example, First Microfinance Bank used
to promote two learning modules focused on budgeting and cash flow management linked to savings programs;
interestingly, the recipients were willing to pay to attend the courses, thus indicating perceived value. In addition,
Kashf Foundation launched a Financial Education Program in 2010, comprising basic financial literacy and
systemized financial education, and has reported training of more than 300,000 clients. In addition to this, the
results from the Banking Heads Survey Analysis, implemented under the NFLP, indicated that although no
institution was catering specifically to the national financial literacy needs, isolated cases of semiformal financial
literacy initiatives did exist. Overall, such private sector initiatives are encouraging and should be used for
delivery of financial education initiatives.


Key Recommendations

7.       A full-fledged Financial Capability Survey should be considered. The existing programs are
encouraging and should continue until improved alternatives are available; however, it would be beneficial to
conduct a nationally representative financial capability survey. This is important to more thoroughly assess
existing gaps, ensure that the proposed programs properly respond to the needs of future beneficiaries, and to
identify key priorities that need to be addressed. Such a survey would also be useful for identifying how financial
inclusion and financial sector policies could be made more effective. For example, it could provide insights on
trust and confidence in financial institutions/regulators and awareness of particular financial services or initiatives.
In this regard, as elaborated in box 1, it is suggested that the authorities consider using the survey questionnaire
developed by the World Bank, which has already been tested and which could benchmark Pakistan against other
countries. Further, a follow-up survey in three to five years should be carried out to measure impact of the
implementation of financial education measures, and programs should be adjusted as necessary. As an alternative,
the planned FinScope update could be expanded to include financial capability questions for this purpose, but this
this would limit the scope for questions and therefore also the value of the questions for SBP and SECP.


An integrated Financial Education Strategy is recommended. The proposed strategy should be based on the
financial capability survey, also considering evaluation and lessons learned from existing public and private
programs, and should include a set of key priorities to be addressed in the implementation stage. Its delivery
20      Financial Education


mechanisms should also use existing successful programs as much as possible. The World Bank’s recent brief 19
on financial education programs and strategies which discusses approaches and available resources in this area
may be useful source of information in this regard. While the proposed strategy should include all programs under
one roof, the implementation of different activities can be delegated to different authorities in line with their
mandates and expertise (SBP, SECP, etc.). This approach would ensure better coordination and outreach as it
would minimize fragmentation. Overall, given its experience with the NFLP and dominant role in financial sector
regulation, it is suggested that SBP takes the lead in coordinating this process, in close consultation with SECP
and in coordination with other relevant stakeholders, and ensuring high-level government support.
8.      Planned school-based financial education initiatives should also be based on tailored diagnostic
work. This may include focus groups and surveys, in order to properly gauge the baseline capability of
schoolchildren. Another option would be to consider adding a booster sample to the financial capability survey
(which otherwise would not provide specific insights to this segment of population) focusing on school-aged
children. The diagnostic work in this area should be conducted in consultation with the Ministry of Education.


9.        The design of new financial education programs should be informed by the impact assessments of
already implemented initiatives, whereas their implementation should rely on pilots before full-scale
rollout, and should include impact evaluation mechanisms from the outset. The World Bank has already
completed a number of evaluation studies 20 of financial capability programs which could be a good source of
information on lessons learned. Further, as a matter of good practice, it is very important to require
implementation of all activities on a small scale first, and only after evaluation of such programs (via surveys,
pilot tests, randomized control trials, etc.) should they be subject to full-scale implementation. This approach
would enhance effectiveness and safeguard resources. The World Bank has also developed an operational
toolkit 21 on methods for evaluating financial capability programs) that could be used to support evaluation of
existing initiatives. Finally, in terms of institutional roles, there could be a role for other stakeholders in addition
to SBP and SECP. For example, the Ministry of Education could be involved regarding the development of
curriculum and piloting of school-based programs, and financial services sector (e.g., professional associations,
banks, microfinance institutions) could contribute to the development and delivery of specific financial education
programs.




19
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/Financial-Education-Programs-and-Strategies.pdf
20
   http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/evaluation-studies-of-programs-to-enhan ce-financi al-capability-in-
low-and-middle-income-countries-summary.pdf
21
   http://www.finlitedu.org/evaluation/wb/
                                                                 Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 21


Annex I
                                                     List of Key Recommendations 22

                                                                                           Responsible              Term
Recommendations                                                                                                        23         Priority
                                                                                           Organization

Institutional Arrangements
Establish an effective coordination mechanism for financial                               SBP, SECP,                  ST            High
consumer protection among regulators and relevant key                                     CCP, PMN,
stakeholders, to form a strategic perspective on this matter in                           PBA, PPAF,
capital markets, insurance, microfinance, and banking. Define                             and other key
joint priorities; clarify roles and responsibilities of each                              stakeholders
stakeholder. Under this mechanism, working groups for each
sector could be created.
Conduct an assessment of and implement the most suitable and                              PMN, PPAF,                S/MT            High
pragmatic institutional setup to address existing institutional                           SBP, SECP
gaps in nonbank microfinance consumer protection, and extend
basic minimum standards to MFIs. This should include
encouraging MFIs to register under Section 42 of the
Companies Ordinance, and creating a central registry of all
microfinance providers, which should be available to the wider
public.
Strengthen risk-based supervision by demutualized exchanges                               SECP, KSE,                  LT          Medium
in regard to their front-line responsibilities and establish                              ISE, LSE
oversight framework for SECP
Clarify the role of the Ministry of Commerce vis-à-vis SECP in                            GOP, SECP                  MT            Medium
insurance. All government-owned insurers should be brought
under SECP.
Strengthen SECP’s risk-based supervisory and enforcement                                  SECP, GOP                   LT             High
capacity to deal with noncompliance and malpractices in the
insurance and securities sectors. Consider bringing under
SECP’s direct regulatory and supervisory ambit insurance
agents and other intermediaries, and the mandated third-party
motor vehicle insurance.
Legal and Regulatory Framework
Affirm SBP’s mandate for consumer protection in banking and                               SBP, GOP                   MT           Medium
microfinance when amending or replacing the BCO and the
MFB Ordinance.
Design and implement a pragmatic solution to address the                                  PMN, PPAF,                  ST            High
fragmentation of the legal framework for nonbank                                          SBP, SECP
microfinance, recognizing and expanding the role of the PMN
and PPAF in implementing standards with strong support from
SBP and SECP.

22
 In bold, suggested institution(s) to assume a lead role.
23
 ST, short term, indicates action can be undertaken in zero to six months. MT, medium term, indicates six months to one year. LT, long term, indicates
more than one year.
22    Annex I


                                                                     Responsible    Term
Recommendations                                                                      23    Priority
                                                                     Organization

Improve the regulatory framework for MFBs with regard to             SBP             ST     High
consumer risks and adapt the supervisory review. Enhance
inter-departmental coordination to improve data collection and
assessment of consumer risks in MFBs.
Enhance the market conduct regulations of demutualized               KSE, ISE,      MT     Medium
exchanges that have front-line supervisory responsibilities (as      LSE, SECP
part of their member regulations) to complement SECP’s
prescribed code of conduct.
Amend SECP Act to vest in SECP a wider range of                      SECP, GOP,     MT     Medium
enforcement tools, and introduce a civil liability on securities     ICM
intermediaries who fail to implement effective KYC
procedures.
Review and amend the insurance regulatory framework, to              SECP, GOP       ST    Medium
update it with present practice and remove anomalies. Introduce
consumer protection provisions, including for microinsurance.
Clarify the position on depositor protection through appropriate     GOP, SBP       MT     Medium
legislation to introduce deposit insurance for small depositors.
Disclosure and Business Practices
If not yet available, financial institutions and industry bodies     SBP, SECP,      ST     High
should design, implement, and widely disseminate (with               PBA, MUFAP,
support from regulatory bodies) principles-based codes of            KSE, ISE,
conduct. Industry bodies in microfinance, banking, insurance,        LSE, PMN,
and securities should devise alternatives to monitor                 PPAF, IAP
implementation and, to the extent allowed by their legal
mandates, regulators should monitor adherence to the codes.
Develop and require the application by all financial institutions,   SBP, SECP,     MT      High
including microfinance banks, of standard methodologies to           PMN, PPAF
disclose total price or cost of consumer financial products.
Introduce similar standards for MFIs.
Require retail consumer contracts to follow standards such as        SBP, SECP,      ST     High
minimum content of terms and conditions, and require financial       PBA, MUFAP,
institutions to provide them in plain language, in Urdu and in       KSE, ISE,
English (and other local languages when needed). For illiterate      LSE, PMN,
clients, require that terms and conditions be read aloud.            PPAF, IAP

Require Key Facts Statements (KFSs) for all basic consumer           SBP, SECP,      ST     High
finance products, including banking, microfinance, insurance,        PMN, PPAF,
and securities. The KFS needs to be adapted to the specific          KSE, ISE,
needs of each sector.                                                LSE, MUFAP,
                                                                     IAP
Require, for all consumer products representing long-term            SBP, SECP,      ST    Medium
commitments or which may be subject to high-pressure sales           PMN, PPAF,
contracts, as well as microfinance loans, a reasonable cooling-      MUFAP, IAP
off period (three to five days minimum), which may need to be
longer for microfinance.
Ensure that useful comparative standardized price and cost           SBP, SECP,     MT     Medium
                                                                 Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 23


                                                                                       Responsible        Term
Recommendations                                                                                            23    Priority
                                                                                       Organization

information is made available to the general public for basic                          KSE, ISE,
consumer financial products in the banking, microfinance,                              LSE, MUFAP,
securities, and insurance sectors.                                                     PMN, PPAF,
                                                                                       IAP
Introduce regulatory definitions of prohibited loan underwriting                       SBP, PPAF,          ST    Medium
and collection practices in microfinance and strengthen                                PMN
assessment of adherence to the standards.
Implement strong sanctions for unauthorized trading and                                SECP, KSE,         MT      High
misrepresentations by brokers of their status and the suitability                      ISE, LSE,
of investments.                                                                        MUFAP
Dispute Resolution Mechanisms
Ensure that there are no gaps in appointments of the banking                           SBP, GOP           S/MT    High
ombudsman so that there is no institutional vacuum in future.
Consider expanding statutory mandate to MFBs. 24
Develop alternative dispute resolution mechanisms with speedy                          SECP, KSE,         MT      High
low-cost procedures for securities, insurance, and MFIs. One                           ISE, LSE,
alternative could be a single financial ombudsman covering all                         MUFAP, PBA,
sectors.                                                                               PMN, PPAF,
                                                                                       consumer
                                                                                       courts
Strengthen SECP’s complaint-handling process, appointing a                             SECP                ST     High
central point of contact for investors. Develop a client charter
and processes to ensure prompt complaint resolution. Move
toward an accessible and effective “one-stop shop” for
complainants.
Set minimum standards for internal complaints handling                                 SBP, SECP,         MT      High
mechanisms, standardized terminology and data collection on                            BMP, PBA,
complaints handled by banks, microfinance providers (MFBs                              PMN, PPAF.
and MFIs), SBP, PPAF, SECP, and respective ombudsman. A
relevant authority or industry body should analyze data and
publish compiled statistics and findings regularly and use
findings to formulate appropriate policies in CPFL.
Financial Education
Implementation of financial education initiatives should include                       SBP, SECP,         MT       High
a phased approach, rely on pilots prior to full-scale rollout, and                     CCP, GOP,
incorporate impact evaluation mechanisms from the outset.                              and all relevant
                                                                                       stakeholders in
                                                                                       each sector.
Consider a full-fledged nationally representative Financial                            SBP, SECP          MT       High
Capability Survey.
Develop an integrated Financial Education Strategy, based on                           SBP, SECP,         MT       High
the implemented Financial Capability Survey.                                           Industry

24
     Depending on applicability of Federal Ombudsmen Institutional Reform Act, 2013.
24    Annex I


                                                                    Responsible    Term
Recommendations                                                                     23    Priority
                                                                    Organization

                                                                    Associations
School-based financial education programs should also be            SBP, SECP,     MT     Medium
based on tailored diagnostic work, such as focus groups or          MoF
surveys; consideration may be given to adding a booster sample
to the proposed financial capability survey.
Make effective efforts to increase awareness by retail clients of   PPAF, PMN,     ST       High
all financial sectors, including microfinance, of redress           SBP, SECP,
mechanisms and how to use them to solve problems with               GOP
service providers.
                                                Diagnostic Review of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy 25


Annex II
                         The Federal Ombudsmen Institutional Reforms Act, 2013

 The following are salient features of the Act, some of which may have significant implications on the scope and
powers of the Banking Ombudsman Pakistan (BMP) and Insurance Ombudsman (IO):

1. Oath before the President: The Act mandates that the BMP and IO take an oath before the President of
   Pakistan, whereas there was no such requirement under the Banking Companies Ordinance (BCO) or the
   Insurance Ordinance.

2. Tenure: The tenure of the Ombudsman under the Act is four years, and the ombudsman will continue to hold
   office until replaced. The tenure of the BMP, under the Banking Companies Ordinance (BCO) is three years
   and under the Insurance Ordinance 2000, the IO is appointed for four years. There is no provision for
   continuity if the no successor is appointed.

3. Acting Ombudsman: The Act provides for appointment of an Acting Ombudsman in a situation where the
   office of Ombudsman is vacant or is unable to perform his functions. There is no such provision in the BCO
   or Insurance Ordinance.

4. Grievance Commissioner: The Act empowers the ombudsmen to appoint a grievance commissioner in an
   agency (owned or controlled by the government) if there are a large number of complaints consistently
   received against that agency.

5. Enhanced Powers of Ombudsmen: Apart from the powers presently exercised, the Act allows ombudsmen the
   power of civil court for grant of temporary injunctions (stay orders) and implementation of recommendations,
   orders, or decisions. Under the BCO, the BMP was dependent on the State Bank of Pakistan for ensuring
   compliance with its orders. The Act also empowers the ombudsman to review its own decision, an option that
   was not available to the BMP and IO. The review of findings, recommendations, orders, or decisions,
   pursuant to a review petition, has to be decided within 45 days.

6. Appellate Power: The Act allows appeal against the order of ombudsmen only before the President of
   Pakistan. The BCO allows appellate power to the Governor of SBP and in the case of insurance, the aggrieved
   party can file an appeal with the commission at SECP.

7. Administrative and Financial Arrangements: The Act allows the remuneration payable to the ombudsman and
   the administrative expenses of the office to be charged to the Federal Consolidated Fund. Whereas under the
   BCO, the OBM secretariat’s cost has to be shared by the scheduled banks proportionately, as determined by
   the State Bank of Pakistan.

8. Bar of Jurisdiction: The Act states that no court or authority shall have jurisdiction to entertain a matter that
   falls within the jurisdiction of an ombudsman nor will any court or authority assume jurisdiction in respect to
   any matter pending with or decided by an Ombudsman. If applicable, this will be contrary to what is
   envisaged under the BCO; under that, the BMP was barred from entertaining any complaint or application
   that had already been disposed of by SBP or any court in Pakistan.
