                                           87924




Caribbean and Central American
        Partnership for
  Catastrophe Risk Insurance

Pooling Risk to Safeguard against Catastrophes
         Generated by Natural Events
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect
the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they
represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
World Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC
20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.



Design: alejandro espinosa/sonideas




The Caribbean and Central American Partnership for Catastrophe Risk Insurance is undertaken with the financial support of the
Government of Canada provided through Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development Canada (DFATD).
           Caribbean and Central
           American Partnership for
           Catastrophe
           Risk Insurance
           Pooling Risk to Safeguard against Catastrophes
                   Generated by Natural Events




May 2014
                                                                                                                                                                                            5


                                                                                                                                                                                            CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                                                                                                            CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                                                                                                            PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                                                                                                            CATASTROPHE RISK
                                                                                                                                                                                            INSURANCE




                                                                                 Contents



Executive Summary ······················································································································································ 7

I. Introduction·································································································································································· 8

II. What is the framework of the initiative?···································································································· 10

III. What is CCRIF, and how has it been beneficial for Caribbean countries?··························· 12

IV. What is parametric insurance, and what are its benefits?······························································ 14

V. Why is risk pooling beneficial to all members of CCRIF?································································ 16

VI. What is the cost of insurance coverage?································································································ 18

VII. What are the benefits for CARICOM members and COSEFIN states in joining
CCRIF?············································································································································································· 21

VIII. How will this initiative be implemented?······························································································ 23

IX. Why are donor contributions essential?·································································································· 26

Contacts·········································································································································································· 27

Annex 1: Fiscal impacts of selected disasters in the Caribbean and Central American
region················································································································································································ 28

Annex 2: General government gross debt as percent of GDP of selected COSEFIN
and CARICOM countries······································································································································· 29

Annex 3: CCRIF’s catastrophe risk and insurance model···································································· 30

Annex 4: How are disaster risk financing instruments related to a broader Disaster
Risk Management strategy?·································································································································· 32
                                                                                                                                                                                  7


                                                                                                                                                                                  CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                                                                                                  CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                       Executive Summary                                                                          PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                                                                                                  CATASTROPHE RISK
                                                                                                                                                                                  INSURANCE




C
        ountries in the Caribbean and Central America have relatively low fiscal resilience to the
        adverse effects of earthquakes, tropical cyclones, and other major hydro-meteorological
        events such as excess rainfall. Due to the fiscal challenges associated with the impacts
of natural hazards, the Council of Ministers of Finance of Central America, Panama and the
Dominican Republic (COSEFIN) requested the World Bank to identify alternatives for sov-
ereign risk protection. The World Bank — in partnership with the United States Department
of Treasury — assessed various options, which guided COSEFIN to identify the Caribbean
Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF1) as the best option. By becoming members of
CCRIF COSEFIN governments will join current Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
member countries in being able to purchase parametric insurance coverage akin to consequential
loss insurance, which will provide immediate cash payouts in the aftermath of a major natural
event. This insurance instrument will be particularly useful in financing the post-disaster re-
covery needs as payouts are made quickly , allowing the affected government time to mobilize
additional resources for longer-term reconstruction activities.

CCRIF provides cost-effective and fast-disbursing liquidity, and is an efficient way to finance a
liquidity gap arising in the immediate aftermath of disaster. Traditional indemnity insurance makes
claims payments based on the formal confirmation of losses. By contrast, CCRIF is the world’s first
multi-country risk-pooling facility that has developed and successfully offered parametric insur-
ance against tropical cyclones and earthquakes (and now excess rainfall). Backed by both traditional
reinsurance and capital markets, CCRIF functions as a joint reserve mechanism and enhances its
members’ financial resilience to disasters caused by natural events. By providing a policy payout in
14 days or less – in the event of a tropical cyclone or earthquake of sufficient magnitude (based
on pre-agreed policy trigger) – CCRIF represents an efficient instrument to provide short term
liquidity, as part of a broader Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (DRFI) strategy.

This initiative for the Caribbean and Central American Partnership for Catastrophe Risk In-
surance requires initial support from donors to capitalize the facility and reduce premium costs.
Donors are in a unique position to help expand this tested model to a highly vulnerable region
and to be an early supporter of what has already become a replicable model. Grant resources
from donors will help build COSEFIN reserves more quickly. As CCRIF builds its risk-bearing
capacity for the COSEFIN portfolio during the implementation, higher price ratios will be
offered at the end of this initiative. Under a conservative retention scenario, for each additional
US$10 million of retention, about 10 percent of further premium reduction beyond the initial
pooling benefit would be achieved.

Multi-country risk pooling allows significant savings for members. COSEFIN members that
join CCRIF will pool their risk in a separate portfolio from the Caribbean countries, but both
sub-regions will approach the reinsurance market jointly. Accessing the reinsurance market with
a diversified risk pool and adequate reserves, will allow COSEFIN members to benefit from an
approximate 36 percent reduction in premium costs, in comparison to the indicative commercial
premium for individually purchasing catastrophe insurance on the open market.

1	 Sixteen governments are current members of CCRIF: Anguilla, Antigua & Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda, Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Haiti,
Jamaica, Saint Kitts & Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent & the Grenadines, Trinidad & Tobago and the Turks & Caicos Islands. CCRIF has begun or will soon begin to offer new
products, which include excess rainfall coverage as well as insurance/ reinsurance for weather-related risks to small entrepreneurs in the Caribbean and financial institutions
that lend to them. Today, CCRIF actively seeks to expand its membership base.
              8


   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE




                   I. Introduction




                        C
                                ountries in the Caribbean and Central America are highly vulnerable to the adverse ef-
                                fects associated with earthquakes, tropical cyclones, and other major hydro-meteorological
                                events such as excess rainfall. Key socio-economic sectors including transport, health,
                        education, water and sanitation, and agriculture have been greatly affected by disasters caused
                        by natural hazard events. Response efforts in the immediate aftermath of disasters typically
                        place significant strain on the fiscal systems of affected countries. Consequently, Ministers of
                        the Central American Integration System (SICA2) and CARICOM countries have expressed
                        a strong intention to collectively manage their disaster risk. Doing so will enhance the fiscal
                        resilience of Caribbean and Central American countries.

                        Since 1980, nine countries in the Caribbean and Central America have experienced a di-
                        saster event with an economic impact greater than 50 percent of their annual gross domestic
                        product (GDP). These countries include3: Saint Lucia (1980), Jamaica (1988), Antigua and
                        Barbuda (1995), Dominica (1995), Saint Kitts and Nevis (1995, 1998), Honduras (1998),
                        Grenada (2004), Guyana (2005), and Haiti (2010) (See Annex 1). Although earthquakes
                        are associated with the highest probable maximum loss per event to governments in Central
                        America and some Caribbean islands, extreme rainfall events have been known to cause the
                        greatest accumulated losses to certain countries in the Caribbean basin. Hydro-meteoro-
                        logical disasters are by far the most frequent in both sub-regions, with associated economic
                        damages equivalent to more than 1 percent of national GDP per year for 14 countries in
                        the sub-regions4.

                        Disasters caused by natural events represent a significant explicit and implicit contingent liability
                        to governments, which is often associated with large fiscal costs. This liability is often implicit;
                        governments often act as (re)insurers of last resort, without precisely knowing its disaster risk
                        exposure. By understanding the loss potential of disasters caused by natural events and the
                        extent of public intervention in recovery and reconstruction efforts, governments can ascertain
                        their respective contingent liabilities. Sovereign disaster risk financing and insurance can also



                        2	 SICA is the Central America Integration System (Sistema de la Integración Centroamericana). Under SICA, the Ministers of Finance are organized in COSEFIN. The rest of
                        the document will refer to COSEFIN rather than SICA.
                        3	 The year of the disaster event is indicated in parentheses.
                        4	 According to the Global Climate Risk Index 2013 compiled by S. Harmeling and D. Eckstein for Germanwatch, the average annual economic losses due to weather-related
                        disasters as a percent of GDP in the period from 1990 to 2012 were: Grenada (9), Dominica (7), St. Kitts (5), Belize (4), Antigua and Barbuda (4), Honduras (3), Saint Lucia
                        (2), Nicaragua (2), Guyana (1), Haiti (1), El Salvador (1), Jamaica (1), Guatemala (1), and Saint Vincent (1).
                                                                                                     http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/




safeguard against sudden macroeconomic shocks that negatively impact fiscal performance, and,
in turn, economic development.

Caribbean and Central American governments are constrained in their ability to access quick
liquidity to absorb fiscal shocks associated with natural hazard impacts because they have limited
ability to create contingency funds, and limited capacity for external borrowing. The relatively
small size of Caribbean and Central American economies, combined with constrained public
finances, increases the opportunity costs of allocating resources to contingency reserves (See
Annex 2).

Post-disaster liquidity is an important tool for post-disaster recovery. A critical challenge con-
fronting governments in the aftermath of a disaster is the need for short-term liquidity, which
is vital for assuring emergency response activities.




                                                                                                                                    CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                                                    CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                                                    PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                                                    CATASTROPHE RISK
                                                                                                                                    INSURANCE

                                                                                                                                    9
             10


   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE


                   II. What is the framework
                   of the initiative?




                        T
                              he objective of the proposed initiative is to improve affordability of high quality sovereign
                              catastrophe risk transfer associated with tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and/or excess rainfall
                              for COSEFIN and CARICOM member countries, and to enhance the capacity of Ministries
                        of Finance for developing and implementing disaster risk financing and insurance strategies. This
                        objective will be achieved through expanding CCRIF services and membership and will con-
                        tribute to the fiscal resilience of participating countries for covered catastrophic events.

                        The proposed initiative will be financed through the payment of annual insurance premiums by
                        (current and new) CCRIF member countries as well as through donor contributions. Donors will
                        play a critical role in financing CCRIF expenditures associated with retention and transfer of
                        its pooled catastrophe risk for a period of four years. This would allow CCRIF to offer cheaper
                        catastrophe coverage options to its members than it could without donor contributions. At the
                        same time donor support will help CCRIF in building capital reserves for the sustainable con-
                        tinuation of its operations beyond this four-year initiative. This will be implemented through
                        four components:

                        *	 Component 1: Finance Parametric Earthquake Risk Insurance for COSEFIN countries
                           within CCRIF. Component 1 will finance costs associated with reinsurance for earth-
                              quake risk contracts and/or accessing capital markets as well as financing all insurance
                              payouts5 not covered by reinsurance in the aftermath of an earthquake. This funding
                              will help CCRIF build reserves to underwrite coverage more quickly. As CCRIF builds
                              its risk-bearing capacity for the COSEFIN portfolio during project implementation,
                              higher coverage price ratios for the earthquake product will be offered over time.

                        *	 Component  2: Finance Parametric Climate Risk Insurance for COSEFIN countries with-
                           in CCRIF. Component 2 will enable CCRIF to provide tropical cyclone (hazards related
                              to wind speed and storm surge) and/or excess rainfall coverage to COSEFIN members
                              as a measure to adapt to climate change. The corresponding tropical cyclone models for



                        5	 Payouts paid would depend on individual country decisions regarding the level of premium and the amount of risk transferred to the reinsurance/capital market. Payouts for
                        earthquakes will depend also on the source magnitude and hypocenter (location and depth) of the earthquake using data obtained from the United States Geological Survey
                        (USGS). The magnitude of the earthquake is translated into a ground shaking intensity across each affected country which in turn drives generation of a modeled loss. The
                        payout increases as the level of losses increases, and losses are directly calculated from the amount of ground shaking in the affected country and what assets are exposed to
                        what level of shaking. The specific payout totals are based on the level of coverage a country has. Each individual country chooses its own coverage options in terms of the
                        deductible coverage limit, the ceding percentage, and premium.
      COSEFIN countries are available and the insurance coverage is ready to be offered for
      the 2014 hurricane season, yet technical design work remains to be completed for the
      excess rainfall product. This work includes preparing a country-risk assessment model,
      calibrating this model, performing actuarial analyses, and designing country-specific
      insurance based on these parameters. This component would finance the technical and
      insurance design work to underwrite the potential excess rainfall losses in close collabo-
      ration with the interested countries, starting in 2015.

      Component 2 will cover the main costs of CCRIF’s risk retention and transfer with regards
      to the tropical cyclone and excess rainfall perils of participating COSEFIN countries. The
      three specific activities financed under this component include the following: (i) cov-
      ering all costs associated with reinsurance contracts and/or accessing capital markets;
      (ii) financing all insurance payouts not covered by the reinsurance in the aftermath of a
      tropical cyclone6 or excess rainfall event; and (iii) consultancy services required for the
      technical work to develop the excess rainfall products.

*	 Component 3: Finance Parametric Climate Risk Insurance for CARICOM countries
   within CCRIF. Component 3 will enable CCRIF to provide excess rainfall coverage
      to CARICOM member countries as a measure to better adapt to climate change. The
      current tropical cyclone policy for CARICOM countries is linked to wind and storm
      surge damage caused by an eligible hurricane. In response to strong interest expressed by
      CARICOM stakeholders, CCRIF initiated designs of a new insurance product to cover
      disasters caused by excess rainfall, both due to hurricanes and other hydro-meteorologi-
      cal events. As of April 2014, CCRIF has generated preliminary country-risk assessment
      models for excess rainfall and is advancing work on model calibration in collaboration
      with interested governments.

      This component will cover the main costs of CCRIF’s risk retention and transfer with
      regards to excess rainfall perils of participating CARICOM countries. Three specific activ-
      ities are financed under this component: (i) covering all costs associated with reinsurance
      contracts and/or accessing capital markets; (ii) financing all insurance payouts not cov-
      ered by the reinsurance in the aftermath of an excess rainfall event; and (iii) consultancy
      services required for the technical work needed to develop the excess rainfall product.

*	 Component  4: Technical Assistance and Capacity-Building for Disaster Risk Financing
   and Insurance. Under Component 4, technical assistance will enhance the capacity of
      current and new CCRIF member countries to safeguard fiscal accounts and balances
      against natural catastrophes while allowing for rapid mobilization of resources in case
      of a disaster. Overall activities will therefore support the following three objectives: (i)
      the generation of catastrophe risk profiles for each country and measurement of each
      country’s contingent liabilities; (ii) the design of catastrophe risk financing strategies;
      and (iii) the strengthening of transparency and accountability related to post-disaster
      budgetary management and damage evaluation.




                                                                                                                                                                               CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                                                                                               CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                                                                                               PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                                                                                               CATASTROPHE RISK
6	 The payouts for hurricanes are determined based on government losses calculated using storm data from the National Hurricane Center and parameters fixed within the         INSURANCE
loss estimation model used to underpin CCRIF’s policies. The model calculates the level of wind and ocean hazards, such as storm surge encountered across the affected area,
and uses the pre-fixed value and distribution of government exposures to those hazards to calculate a government loss.
                                                                                                                                                                               11
             12


   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE
                   III. What is CCRIF,
                   and how has it been
                   beneficial for Caribbean
                   countries?




                        C
                               CRIF is the world’s first multi-country catastrophe risk pooling mechanism, and also the
                               first insurance facility to successfully develop parametric policies backed by both traditional
                               reinsurance and capital markets. Established in 2007 and registered as an insurance
                        company in the Cayman Islands, CCRIF functions as a joint reserve mechanism and enhances
                        its members’ financial resilience to natural hazard events, such as hurricanes and earthquakes, by
                        providing financial liquidity when a policy is triggered.

                        Since 2007, CCRIF has made eight payouts of a total value of US$32 million to its current mem-
                        bers, and these payouts have proven useful to manage budget volatility in the immediate aftermath
                        of a disaster (See Table 1). Seven CCRIF members that were affected by covered natural hazard
                        events received a rapid payout providing immediate liquidity at a critical time, with no restric-
                        tion on the use of these funds. This flexibility allowed the recipient countries to implement
                        their emergency response activities more efficiently than would have been possible without the
                        payouts or incurring additional public debt in the short-term.

                        The satisfaction of current CCRIF members is best measured by the consistent annual policy re-
                        newal of all 16 countries since 2007. For the seventh consecutive year ( June 1, 2013 to May 31,
                        2014), all 16 original members renewed their policies. For the current policy year, the combined
                        aggregate coverage limits for all participating countries were US$368 million for tropical cy-
                        clone events and US$251 million for earthquake events.

                        Table 1: CCRIF payout summary since 2007

                                     Country                      Event                 Date                Payout (US$)
                         Dominica                              Earthquake             29-Nov-07               528,021
                         St. Lucia                             Earthquake             29-Nov-07               418,976
                         Turks and Caicos Islands          Tropical Cyclone Ike        1-Sep-08              6,303,913
                         Haiti                                 Earthquake             12-Jan-10              7,753,579
                         Anguilla                          Tropical Cyclone Earl       1-Aug-10              4,282,733
                         Barbados                         Tropical Cyclone Tomas       1-Oct-10              8,560,247
                         St. Lucia                        Tropical Cyclone Tomas       1-Oct-10              3,241,613
                         St. Vincent and the Grenadines   Tropical Cyclone Tomas       1-Oct-10              1,090,388
                         Total payouts:                                                                     32,179,470
                                                                                                      G.J. Arango, 2012




On the financial side, CCRIF has proven to be robust with seven years of demonstrated experience
in successfully securing reinsurance contracts and making timely payouts to participating countries
in the event of an eligible catastrophe. At the end of the financial year 2012—2013, CCRIF’s
externally audited financial statements showed assets of US$125.1 million, while confirming
that CCRIF has followed standard commercial practices and transparent audit reports. For
the current policy year, CCRIF retained US$27.5 million of risk and reinsured an additional
US$107.5 million, giving it the capacity to make payouts arising from a series of catastrophic
events having a modeled probability of occurring only once in 536 years, without drawing on
more than US$27.5 million of its own assets.

The Facility is designed to provide affordable insurance while remaining financially sustainable.
The high level of country enrollment allows CCRIF to diversify its portfolio efficiently and
thus access reinsurance on more affordable terms. The high level of country enrollment permits
CCRIF to offer lower premiums than would be charged if individual countries were to approach
the reinsurance market directly, providing an average savings of 36 percent.




                                                                                                                     CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                                     CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                                     PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                                     CATASTROPHE RISK
                                                                                                                     INSURANCE

                                                                                                                     13
             14


   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE

                   IV. What is parametric
                   insurance, and what are
                   its benefits?




                       C
                                CRIF’s insurance coverage relies on parametric methods, which are a cost-effective way
                                to finance any liquidity gap arising in the immediate aftermath of a disaster. Parametric
                                insurance products are insurance contracts that make payments based on the intensity
                        of an event (for example, wind speed, earthquake intensity, volume of rainfall) or the amount of
                        loss calculated in a pre-agreed model. Unlike traditional insurance settlements that require an
                        on the ground assessment of individual losses, parametric insurance relies on an assessment of
                        losses using a predefined methodology that is based on variables that are exogenous to both the
                        individual policyholder and the insurer, but have a strong correlation to individual losses. (See
                        Annex 3 for more details on CCRIF’s catastrophe model.)

                        Parametric insurance is typically less expensive than traditional indemnity insurance and allows
                        for faster payouts. The selection of a parametric instrument as a basis for CCRIF policies was
                        largely driven by the fact that this type of insurance is generally: (i) more cost-effective than a
                        traditional indemnity insurance product as it does not require a loss assessment procedure in
                        the case of a hazard event, (ii) much easier to administer, and (iii) carries a lower uncertainty
                        loading by reinsurers. Parametric insurance also allows for claims to be settled very quickly. This
                        is an important feature considering the urgent need for liquidity after a catastrophe. In addition,
                        the instrument is also less exposed to moral hazard and adverse selection problems (which are
                        costly to monitor) as the cost of insurance can be immediately related to the probability of an
                        event and the payout is independent of any mitigation put in place after the policy is issued. The
                        parameters of CCRIF’s insurance policies are illustrated in Box 1.
Box 1: The parameters of CCRIF insurance coverage

Participating countries decide on the parameters of their coverage. The procedure is broadly similar for earthquakes, tropical
cyclones, and excess rainfall. The policyholder needs to determine the following parameters (see Figure 1):


*	 Deductible:  The “deductible” is based on the likely severity of the event that gives rise to a payment, and therefore is the
   loss value at which the contract is triggered. Under CCRIF’s current policy parameters, the event cannot be more frequent
       than a 1-in-10 year event (i.e. an event of catastrophic proportions that it is statistically unlikely to occur more frequently
       than one in ten years). Generally, CCRIF members have chosen deductibles between 1-in-10 to 1-in-20 years for cyclones
       and 1-in-20 to 1-in-50 years for earthquakes.


*	 Coverage   limit: The severity of the event at and above which the maximum payment is triggered. This is called the
   coverage limit. Current CCRIF members have chosen coverage limits between 1-in-75 and 1-in-200 years.


*	 Ceding percentage: The portion of the estimated government loss between the deductible and coverage limit that is
   covered by the policy.


Payouts for earthquakes would depend on the magnitude, and hypocenter (location and depth) of the earthquake using
data obtained from the USGS. Earthquake magnitude is translated into a ground shaking intensity across each affected country,
which in turn drives the generation of a modeled loss. The payout increases as the level of losses increases, and losses are directly
calculated from the amount of ground shaking in the affected country and what assets are exposed to what level of shaking.


Payouts for hurricanes are determined based on government losses calculated using storm data from the National Hurricane
Center and parameters fixed within the loss estimation model are used to underpin CCRIF’s policies. The model calculates the
level of wind and ocean hazards, such as storm surge, encountered across the affected area and uses the pre-fixed value and
distribution of government exposures to those hazards to calculate a government loss.


  Figure 1: Parameters of insurance coverage


                                                                                                Losses retained by the country
             Coverage Limit                                                                                        1/75 to 1/200
   The severity of the event at
        and above which the
        maximum payment is
                     triggered.
                                                          Insurance Payout




                   Coverage
                                                              Maximum




   The difference between the
       coverage limit and the                                                                                Ceding Percentage
  deductible mulitplied by the                                                                               The percentage of coverage that
        “ceding percentage.”                                                                                 a country decides to acquire.




                     Deductible                                                                                    1/10 to 1/20               Trigger
          (Attachment Point)7                                                                                                                 This point represents the minimum
                                                                 Line of                                                                      intensity of an event from which the
        This quantity represents                                Contingent
        the losses retained by a                                                                                                              insurance begins to pay.
                                                                  Credit
        country. A deductible is
       the quantity of expenses                                                            Losses retained by the country
        that a country must pay
         “out of pocket” before                                      Reserve                                                                                                                   CARIBBEAN AND
         CCRIF begins payment                                         Fund                                                                                                                     CENTRAL AMERICAN
           for remaining losses.                                                                                                                                                               PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                   FINANCIAL COVERAGE                                                                                                                          CATASTROPHE RISK
 7. The attachment point can be described as the minimum severity of the event loss which gives rise to a payment and therefore is the loss value at which the policy contract is triggered.   INSURANCE
 The attachment point therefore functions like a deductible in a standard insurance policy.


                                                                                                                                                                                               15
             16


   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE

                   V. Why is risk pooling
                   beneficial to all members
                   of CCRIF?




                        A
                               s a risk aggregator, CCRIF will provide insurance coverage to participating countries at
                               a significantly lower cost than individual governments could obtain on their own, by en-
                               abling participating countries to pool their individual risks into a single, better diversified
                        portfolio. The pooling concept makes the overall risk more stable and therefore more attractive
                        to the reinsurance market, thereby reducing the cost of reinsurance. Since disaster risks among
                        the Caribbean islands are not perfectly correlated, the variance of the losses under CCRIF
                        insurance portfolio is less than the combined variance experienced by the individual states.
                        With a possible inclusion of Central American countries, the variance of losses in the expanded
                        CCRIF insurance portfolio would further decrease.

                        COSEFIN countries could benefit from savings roughly equivalent to 36 percent of the total pre-
                        mium volume and CARICOM countries could benefit from additional savings equivalent to 25
                        percent if countries approach the reinsurance market and capital markets through CCRIF together
                        rather than independently. Covering diverse risks implies that payments will trigger with more
                        regularity and there will be less uncertainty with regards to the timing and amount of capital
                        that needs to be available for payouts. Therefore, less capital is required per country to be held in
                        a risk reserve or paid as part of an insurance premium in order to ensure solvency for an event of
                        a specified return period. The underlying risk of each country is unchanged in the risk pooling
                        mechanism. This means that the cost reduction in the insurance premium does not provide a
                        disincentive for countries to also work on improving their disaster risk reduction with an aim
                        to reduce their annual expected losses. There are five key aspects that will allow cost savings for
                        both current and new members of CCRIF: (i) diversification itself, (ii) CCRIF reputation in
                        international reinsurance markets (iii) economies of scale on operating costs, (iv) higher CCRIF
                        retention of lower layers of reinsurance coverage, and (v) access to capital market because of the
                        size of the aggregated portfolio (See Figure 2).

                        As country membership, capital from donors, and the size of the bundled portfolio increase, there is
                        a directly correlated increase in the benefit for both partners. Table 2 shows possible benefits for
                        both CARICOM and COSEFIN members under different scenarios.

                        The deeper the partnership between current and new members of CCRIF, the greater the benefit is
                        for both of them. If only three countries pool their risk they can experience reductions of at least
                        20% in their indicative premium. Actual benefits to the three COSEFIN countries may be high-
                        er, because there would be a significant pricing advantage that we have not been able to quantify
Figure 2: Conceptual benefits and premium savings due to risk pooling and improved
information

                   Factors contributing to                                Technical insurance premium                                         Technical insurance premium
                     potential premium                                     (BEFORE risk pooling and with                                       (AFTER risk pooling and with
                           savings                                             weak risk information)                                           improved risk information)



      • Credibility of a tried and tested model well
        accepted by the reinsurance market
                                                                                  Uncertainty Loading
                                                                                                                                                  Potential Premium
      • Reduction of variance of loss due to wider                                                                                                     Savings
        risk pooling



      • Lower reinsurance costs due to better
        structured and diversified portfolio                                                                                                         Uncertainty Loading
                                                                                      Cost of Capital
      • Joint reserves to retain the first
        aggregate loss                                                             (reserves and cost of
      • Critical mass and access to capital                                             risk transfer)
        markets                                                                                                                                          Cost of Capital
                                                                                                                                                      (reserves and cost of
                                                                                                                                                           risk transfer)

      • Economies of scale in operating
        costs (e.g. fixed costs)                                                     Operating Costs
                                                                                                                                                        Operating Costs




      • Underlying risk is unchanged                                             Annual Expected Loss                                               Annual Expected Loss




Table 2: Premium savings distributed based on each sub-region’s average annual loss

                         Possible Participation Scenarios with New COSEFIN Members                                                                     COSEFIN               CARICOM

 A) Three Central American countries join1                                                                                                                 20%                    Fee

 B) Three countries join & Increased capital retention capacity of US$7.5 million2                                                                         22%                    10%

 C) Six countries join & Increased capital retention capacity of US$15 million3                                                                            27%                    11%

 D) Six countries join & Increased capital retention capacity of US$7.5 million &
                                                                                                                                                           36%                    25%
 Access to capital market4

 Notes:
 1. Minimal level of partnership: the reinsurance is placed through CCRIF without sharing diversification. CCRIF will charge a service fee corresponding to the value of the use of CCRIF brand
 and risk model.
 2. Based on donor contributions of US$35 million.
 3. Based on donor contributions of US$75 million.
 4. Same as scenario C, but due to its size, CCRIF can access the capital market and reduce its cost by US$2m.




associated with the market’s trust in CCRIF as a risk placer compared to any new risk placer in
the market. If, on top of the three-country pool, CCRIF mixes its own portfolio and increase
its current retention by US$7.5m, both COSEFIN and CARICOM members would obtain
additional benefits. Such benefits are increased if there are six countries and higher retention
(because more capital is available). If CCRIF has enough volume of risk to place, it could access                                                                                                 CARIBBEAN AND
the capital markets for risk transfer of part of its risk, which could lead to additional cost savings.                                                                                           CENTRAL AMERICAN
These scenarios illustrate the importance of one-time capital provided by donors and the benefits                                                                                                 PARTNERSHIP FOR
of intra-regional and inter-regional collaboration. Finally, it is important to mention that the                                                                                                  CATASTROPHE RISK
reinsurance market is currently soft, but eventually the market will become hard again, implying                                                                                                  INSURANCE
savings may be higher with higher prices in the future than with current ones.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  17
             18


   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE




                   VI. What is the cost of
                   insurance coverage?




                        P
                             olicies are priced individually according to the characteristics of the coverage that each par-
                             ticipating government chooses8. CCRIF offers flexible terms and conditions that allow its
                             members to tailor the coverage to their own catastrophe risk financing strategy. CCRIF
                        members decide whether to obtain coverage for earthquakes, tropical cyclones, excess rainfall, or
                        all of these events, and determine the frequency and severity of the potential perils they wish to
                        cover. In doing so, they factor in a number of considerations, including the premium they wish
                        to pay, their access to other domestic or external sources of finance in the event of a disaster, and
                        the speed with which they could access these resources following the disaster.

                        Indicative parameters for insurance coverage (by country) for the new members are provided
                        in Table 3 below, for an insurance premium of US$5 million per peril. For instance, taking the
                        example of Honduras, Table 3 demonstrates that a US$5 million premium will allow Honduras
                        to insure earthquake events with a deductible of US$5 million and coverage limit of US$139
                        million. The minimum (maximum) coverage would be equivalent to US$108 (134) million (with
                        the range due to the potential low and high end of the pricing that CCRIF will achieve for the
                        Central American countries in year 1 of their pool). The rate-on-line, which is defined as the
                        cost of insurance expressed as a percentage of the coverage, would be equivalent to 3.86 percent.

                        Table 4 provides an overview of CCRIF premiums for current members and aggregated risk
                        (per peril and total). The table demonstrates that for the 2013—14 season, a total premium of
                        US$19 million (US$12 million for tropical cyclone insurance and US$7 million for earthquake
                        insurance) would cover a total aggregate risk of US$619 million (US$368 million for tropical
                        cyclone insurance and US$251 million for earthquake insurance).

                        It is important to note that a CCRIF policy does not offer full insurance coverage for all damag-
                        es and losses associated with a disaster event. The choices a country faces in considering risk
                        transfer options are best informed if made as part of a broader DRFI strategy (see Box 2). A
                        comprehensive DRFI strategy allows governments to employ a broad range of instruments that
                        mitigate the impact of small but recurrent hazard events, as well as more destructive and less
                        frequent ones. A DRFI strategy takes into account (i) the timing of resources needed following

                        8	 The basis for calculating the cost of transferring risk to the market in partnership with CCRIF is the catastrophe modeling and a government’s choice of insurance coverage.
                        Through the “Multi-Peril Risk Estimation System” (MPRES), CCRIF calculates a participating government’s average annual loss (AAL) for the risk it is transferring to CCRIF. The
                        insurance premium a government will pay for annual coverage is then set based on the AAL and the standard deviation of losses, in order to cover the combined cost of AAL,
                        CCRIF’s operating costs, and its needs for reserve growth in line with its reinsurance strategy.
Table 3: Parameters of insurance coverage provided at a cost of US$5 million per peril
(earthquake or tropical cyclone)

                                                Deductible             Coverage Limit               Annual Limit              Annual Limit              Rate on Line
               Country                            (US$)                    (US$)                       (US$)                     (US$)                     (US$)
                                                (20 years)              (150 years)                  (Minimum)                (Maximum)                  (Median)

 Costa Rica (EQ)                                    67 M                      682 M                     140 M                      177 M                   3.15%

 Dominican Republic (EQ)                            44 M                      566 M                     135 M                      172 M                   3.26%

 El Salvador (EQ)                                  163 M                    1,091 M                     132 M                      167 M                   3.34%

 Guatemala (EQ)                                    198 M                    1,499 M                     133 M                      168 M                   3.32%

 Honduras (EQ)                               5.0 M (10 years)                 139 M                     108 M                      134 M                   3.86%

 Nicaragua (EQ)                                     56 M                      424 M                     131 M                      165 M                   3.38%

 Panama (EQ)                                        23 M                      284 M                     137 M                      174 M                   3.22%


 Dominican Republic (TC)                           290 M                    2,762 M                     133 M                      169 M                   3.31%

 Guatemala (TC)                                    5.0 M                      34 M                       22 M                       28 M                   3.50%

 Honduras (TC)                               10 M (10 years)                  135 M                      80 M                       96 M                   5.68%

 Nicaragua (TC)                              1.0 M (10 years)                 93 M                       75 M                       92 M                   5.48%

 “Premium is $5M per peril subject to max 100% ceding. Guatemala TC premium is $875K, Honduras EQ premium is $4.675M, Nicaragua TC premium is $4.575M
 EQ=Earthquake; TC=Tropical Cyclone; M= Million.”




Table 4: CCRIF premium and risk summary for Caribbean countries, 2007–2014 (US$
million)

                                                                                  Tropical               Tropical
                                                        Total                                                                     Earthquake              Earthquake
        Year               Total Premium                                         Cyclone                 Cyclone
                                                   Aggregate Risk                                                                  Premium              Aggregate Risk
                                                                                 Premium              Aggregate Risk

 2007-08                           19                      495                       14                      365                        5                    130

 2008-09                           22                      562                       15                      385                        7                    177

 2009-10                           21                      601                       14                      408                        7                    193

 2010-11                           21                      618                       13                      386                        8                    232

 2011-12                           20                      624                       12                      371                        8                    253

 2012-13                           20                      626                       12                      373                        8                    253

 2013-14                           19                      619                       12                      368                        7                    251



disaster events, (ii) a quantified understanding of the sovereign risk the government is seeking to
manage, and (iii) a mix of retention and risk transfer mechanisms that most efficiently matches
the government’s needs. Parametric insurance instruments such as those provided by CCRIF
should be part of such a strategy, whereby a CCRIF policy covers short-term liquidity problems
resulting from high-risk layer events such as earthquakes, tropical cyclones, and excess rainfall.


                                                                                                                                                                         CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                                                                                         CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                                                                                         PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                                                                                         CATASTROPHE RISK
                                                                                                                                                                         INSURANCE

                                                                                                                                                                         19
                   Box 2: Conceptual framework for sovereign financial protection against natural hazards

                   The World Bank has developed an operational framework for Ministries of Finance to develop a sustainable and effective
                   budget protection strategy against natural hazards, as part of their broader fiscal risk management program. The World
                   Bank framework for disaster risk financing aims to assess the contingent liabilities associated with natural hazards; manage the
                   budget volatility caused by natural hazards; and reduce the government’s contingent liability associated with natural hazards by
                   promoting ex ante risk financing solutions.


                   An effective budget management strategy should allow for rapid mobilization of resources in case of a disaster, while
                   protecting fiscal accounts. When confronted by a disaster, governments must mobilize resources quickly without jeopardizing
                   their fiscal balance. This is generally done by building a financial protection strategy that combines a number of instruments in a
                   risk-layering approach to match potential financial needs and manage volatility on the fiscal accounts. The strategy incorporates
                   budget allocations and reserves, contingent credit, and risk transfer instruments (Figure 3). This initiative focuses on risk transfer
                   solutions for the high risk layer that complement the instruments used in lower risk layers.


                   Market-based risk transfer is usually an effective but expensive proposition for governments that otherwise have access to
                   sovereign financing. The swiftness at which risk transfer instruments can provide liquidity without requiring access to credit
                   makes them attractive to some governments. This is particularly the case for smaller states that do not generally have sufficient
                   capacity to build reserves and are restricted in their access to credit due to already high debt ratios. CCRIF provides an example
                   where small island states acted together to create a regional reserve mechanism to secure access to immediate liquidity in case
                   of a major disaster. Risk transfer instruments can also be useful to manage the budget volatility on government accounts, for
                   example when the speed of post-disaster budget reallocation is an issue. The cat bonds issued by Mexico in 2006, 2009, and
                   2012 provide an example of creative use of risk transfer instruments.


                   Catastrophe risk pooling, at the regional or national level, aggregates risk into larger, more diversified portfolios, with
                   participants benefitting from cost savings and access to international markets. The cost of risk transfer to international markets
                   depends on many factors, including the riskiness of the portfolio as a fraction of the size of the portfolio and the amount of
                   capital (if any) directed toward risk retention. Pooling risks generate diversification benefits that are reflected in reduced insurance
                   premiums.


                   An optimal national DRFI strategy combines ex ante and ex post financial instruments. Ex ante instruments, such as the
                   insurance provided by CCRIF, allow immediate injections of liquidity in the aftermath of disasters that ensure continuity of
                   government operations and enable critical infrastructure to be quickly restored. Examples of ex ante instruments include reserve
                   funds, contingent financing, and risk transfer. Funding from ex post instruments is normally greater but arrives later in the
                   recovery and reconstruction phases and can be used to finance reconstruction costs. Examples include budget contingencies,
                   budget reallocation, debt, and tax increases.




                    Figure 3: The different risk layers and corresponding disaster risk financing instruments
                                                                                                                                    Financial Instruments
                                                                                                Level of Disaster Risk            to Manage Disaster Risk
                                                    Low    High

                                                                                                    High Risk Layer                Disaster Risk Insurance
                                                                                           (e.g., large earthquakes, torpical     (e.g., parametric insurance,
                         Probability of the Event




                                                                  Severity of the Impact




                                                                                                   storms, hurricanes)                 catastrophe bonds)


                                                                                                  Medium Risk Layer
                                                                                                                                 Contingent Lines of Credit
                                                                                           (e.g., floods, minor earthquakes)
   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                    Low Risk Layer              Contingent Budgets, Reserves,
 PARTNERSHIP FOR                                                                            (e.g., local floods, landslides)     Annual Budget Allocations
CATASTROPHE RISK                                    High   Low
       INSURANCE

             20
                                                                                                       21


                                                                                                       CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                       CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                       PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                       CATASTROPHE RISK

                                                  VII. What are the benefits                           INSURANCE


                                                  for CARICOM members
                                                  and COSEFIN states in
                                                  joining CCRIF?




T
     he specific benefits associated with a CCRIF partnership for both current and new members
     are significant. Four anticipated benefits include: (i) lower premiums for all participating
     countries, (ii) cost-savings due to efficiency and scale, (iii) increased access to reinsurance
and capital markets, and (iv) enhanced regional collaboration and cooperation. Detailed discus-
sion of these benefits is provided below.

*	 Lower  Premiums. COSEFIN countries could benefit from savings roughly equivalent
   to 36 percent of the total premium value when approaching the reinsurance market
   through CCRIF. As part of a collective, CCRIF members are able to secure premiums
   from the reinsurance market at rates lower than if individual states went to the market
   independently, or if COSEFIN decided to create its own CCRIF-like mechanism.
   Savings resulting from the partnership can be shared among COSEFIN and current
   CCRIF member countries.

*	 Cost-Savings   Associated with Efficiency Gains. While partnership agreements would
   first need to be finalized in order to quantify the exact cost-savings benefits, efficiency
   gains will nevertheless result due to the nature of parametric insurance in and of itself, as
   well as from the sharing of specific administrative and operating costs.

*	 Increased Access. CCRIF parametric model is a payout mechanism already accepted
   by reinsurance markets. Capital markets are increasingly interested in CCRIF as a
   diversification option as well, and the potential to increase CCRIF volume will likely
   enable CCRIF to find further efficiency gains by placing some of its risk on capital
   markets. This would translate into additional premium reductions for its members.

*	 Increased Regional Cooperation and Collaboration. Significantly, a CCRIF partnership
   joining COSEFIN and CARICOM states could strengthen diplomatic and economic
   engagement among the countries of the region at a time when countries in the Carib-
   bean and Central America are seeking new economic opportunities and markets in their
   own region. A partnership with CCRIF can further solidify an existing cooperation
   agreement among Caribbean and Central American countries in the field of disaster
   risk management.
               Michel Matera (2004)




                                      Additionally, new members will gain access to the know-how and expertise of CCRIF in
                                      multi-country risk pooling, parametric insurance, and accessing reinsurance and capital markets.
                                      CCRIF’s extensive experience working as a regional insurance entity further helps guarantee
                                      the quality of service required by new members. Significantly, the fact that CCRIF is already
                                      licensed and operating — with institutional arrangements established, service providers in place,
                                      and parametric risk transfer instruments already active — means that new members will benefit
                                      from the time-efficiency, and greatly reduced implementation risk, associated with joining a
                                      mechanism that is tried and tested.

                                      Significant benefits are also associated with pooling risk to safeguard against excess rainfall. Fig-
                                      ures show that while less intense than large events (i.e. tropical cyclones and earthquakes),
                                      catastrophic events associated with excess rainfall (e.g. flooding, landslides) are more frequent.
                                      By some estimates, excess rainfall events are associated with economic damages equivalent to
                                      more than 1 percent of national GDP per year for 14 countries in the sub-regions. It is within
                                      this context that the same rationale for developing a risk pooling mechanism for earthquakes
                                      and tropical cyclones applies and arguably more economic benefits could arise for participating
                                      countries in CCRIF excess rainfall product line. This product will likely be available for Carib-
                                      bean members in 2014 and Central American members in 2015.

                                      The benefits of CCRIF membership for COSEFIN and CARICOM countries are associated
                                      with minimal risk to the existing capital, structure and/or operations of the Facility. COSEFIN
                                      membership in CCRIF will be achieved via the establishment of a segregated portfolio, which
                                      pools the tropical cyclone and earthquake risk of participating COSEFIN member states. The
                                      segregation of the portfolio makes it possible for current CARICOM members to keep their
                                      accumulated capital reserves legally separate from new COSEFIN members’ capital reserves
                                      and risk. Additionally, CCRIF annually models its exposure, and on the basis of this model-
                                      ing, CCRIF Board makes decisions annually on its maximum desired exposure to any single
                                      member’s risk. Therefore, the risk to current members of allowing COSEFIN countries to join
   CARIBBEAN AND                      is minimal.
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE

             22
                                                                                                                                                                                          23


                                                                                                                                                                                          CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                                                                                                          CENTRAL AMERICAN

                                                                                           VIII. How will                                                                                 PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                                                                                                          CATASTROPHE RISK

                                                                                           this initiative be                                                                             INSURANCE


                                                                                           implemented?



B
      ased upon past experience and lessons learned during the initial creation of CCRIF, the
      World Bank is establishing a Multi-Donor Trust Fund to facilitate the channeling of funds
      between donors and the proposed initiative. A Grant Agreement will be signed between
the World Bank and CCRIF in the amount of donor pledges received and used for the ex-
ecution of Components 1, 2, and 3 towards the financing of reinsurance premiums and/or
access to capital markets and payouts within CCRIF risk retention. Under Component 1 of
the MDTF, CCRIF will pool the earthquake risk of participating COSEFIN member states
in a segregated portfolio. Component 2 will enable CCRIF to provide tropical cyclone (wind)
and excess rainfall coverage to COSEFIN members, and Component 3 will enable CCRIF to
provide excess rainfall coverage to CARICOM members. Based on lessons highlighted from
the previous MDTF and requested by both client countries and donors, a fourth component has
been included to provide Bank-executed technical assistance, which is designed to complement
the implementation of Components 1, 2, and 3. Technical assistance will be strategically used
to enhance DRFI capacities among client countries as well as ensure timely delivery of the
Caribbean and Central America Catastrophe Risk Insurance Program (See Figure 4).

Insured countries will pay an annual premium commensurate with their own specific risk exposure.
Parametric insurance products will be priced for each country based on the individual country risk
profile. Annual premiums will typically vary between US$200,000 and US$5 million. A limited
portion of the premiums paid by participating countries will be dedicated toward the payment
of administrative costs (minimal), while donor contributions will reduce expenses incurred by
client countries when participating in CCRIF. The combination of country premium payments
and donor contributions will help build the needed reserves over the lifespan of the Trust Fund,
thereby creating a self-sustaining initiative by the time of Program close9. (See Figure 5.)

CCRIF is restructuring itself as a Segregated Portfolio Company (SPC) under the laws of the
Cayman Islands pertaining to captive insurance companies, in order, inter alia, to manage COSE-
FIN risk effectively. CCRIF expects to complete the necessary documentation for this legal
transformation by June 2014. Once restructured as an SPC, CCRIF will be able to establish
a segregated portfolio for each of its business lines. Initially, CCRIF expects to establish two
segregated portfolios for tropical cyclone and earthquake risk: one for the Caribbean, and a
second for Central American countries. This SPC structure also creates a “stop loss” effect for
each business line, because none of the segregated portfolios have a legal right to draw capital
from the other in the event that payout obligations of the policy that is underwritten exceed its
own capital and reinsurance lines. Thus, capital provided to underwrite risk in the Caribbean
segregated portfolio will be shielded from losses associated with underwriting in the COSEFIN
segregated portfolio, and vice versa.


9	 Reinsurers provide risk capital through proportional or excess-of-loss treaties; they require that the primary insurer (in this case, CCRIF) retains at least some of the risk. More
importantly, a critical level of initial reserves is essential to ensure the long-term sustainability of the Facility.
                   Figure 4: Components of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund

                                                          FREE STANDING MULTI-DONOR TRUST FUND                                                  Trustee Level
                                                  Caribbean and Central America Catastrophe Risk Insurance Program
                      Program Development Objectives:
                      To improve affordability of high quality sovereign catastrophe risk transfer associated with tropical cyclones, earthquakes,
                      and/or excess rainfall for COSEFIN and CARICOM member countries; and
                      To enhance the capacity of their Ministries of Finance for developing and implementing disaster risk financing and insurance
                      strategies


                         Component 1:              Component 2:             Component 3:                              Component 4:
                       Finance Parametric       Finance Climate Risk     Finance Climate Risk           Technical Assistance and Capacity Building
                         Earthquake Risk            Insurance for            Insurance for             for Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance
                          Insurance for          COSEFIN countries       CARICOM countries
                       COSEFIN countries            within CCRIF             within CCRIF
                          within CCRIF
                                                                                                       Activities Activities   Project        Administration
                                                                                                     in Caribbean in Central Supervision         Costs
                                                                                                                   America

                                                         92%                                                         4%                            4%
                                                                                                                                             Admin Cost
                                                                                                                                               + Fee
                       Elegible expenses:                                                             Elegible expenses:
                       . Costs associated with reinsurance contracts and/or accessing capital         Technical assistance to Ministries of Finance
                       markets
                       . Insurance payouts not covered by the reinsurance
                       . Consultancy services required to launch climate risk products
                                                                                                Grant Level
                                            Recipient-Executed (CCRIF)                                                    Bank-Executed



                   Figure 5: Flow of funds
                       Donor                                                                          CCRIF                                Country
                                                Multi-donor Trust Fund
                       Contribution                                                                                                        Contribution


                                                                                                                                           Country 1
                      Donor 1 initial                                                      Reserve needs                                   contribution
                      contribution              Relations with CCRIF are                   Initial reserves
                                                driven by a Grant Agreement

                                                                                           Operating expenditures                          Country 2
                      Donor 2 initial
                                                Expenditure financed                       Reinsurance needs                               contribution
                      contribution
                                                have to follow procedures                  Insurance payouts
                                                established in an Operations
                      Donor 3 initial            Manual                                                                                    Country 3
                      contribution                                                         CCRIF administration                            contribution
                                                                                           Financial audits
                                                Funds are released                         Board meeting expenses
                                                as required
                      Donor 4 initial
                      contribution                                                                                                         Country 4
                                                                                           Bank-Executed                                   contribution
                                                                                           Technical Assistance



                                 Central American states would partner with CCRIF through a segregated-cell approach. Cen-
                                 tral American and Caribbean states will be grouped into legally separated pools of risk (two
                                 ‘segregated cells’) allowing for separation of risk management operations for Central Amer-
                                 ican and current CCRIF countries (e.g. pricing, policy format) but a bundled access to the
   CARIBBEAN AND                 reinsurance market. In addition, CCRIF may establish a third cell (a ‘reinsurance cell’) where
CENTRAL AMERICAN                 Central American and Caribbean countries could share capital in accordance with members’
 PARTNERSHIP FOR                 willingness to share risk and thereby improve diversification benefits. This insurance pool will
CATASTROPHE RISK                 mimic the existing cell for CCRIF, which provides parametric insurance for earthquake and
       INSURANCE                 tropical cyclone coverage to CARICOM member countries. A diagram depicting the approach
                                 is provided in Figure 7.
             24
Box 3: Current governance structure of CCRIF

CCRIF is currently governed by a Board of Directors consisting of a chairman and four Directors composed of representatives
of client countries and participating donors. Two are appointed by the Trustee on instructions from CARICOM on behalf of
CCRIF member states and the other two by the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) on behalf of the donors that contributed
to the first MDTF. These four Directors elect a Chairman of the Board. Reinforcing this governance structure are four Board
Subcommittees: Audit and Risk Management, Risk Transfer and Underwriting, Investment Policy, and Technical Assistance. Figure
6 below details the Management Structure of CCRIF.


The duties of the Board members are mandated under Cayman law, and additional responsibilities are set out in the Oper-
ations Manual. The Board is responsible for making strategic decisions and is supported with technical advice from a Facility
Supervisor, and by other services provided by various contracted service providers, including an Asset Manager and a Placing
Broker. The Chairman’s duties include deciding which matters need to receive full Board attention, subject, however, to advice
on regulatory/legal aspects from the Insurance Manager. The duties of the other Board members include but are not limited
to ensuring that CCRIF is operating within the mandate of the business plan as approved by the Cayman Islands Monetary
Authority, reviewing and approving the annual budget, changes to the CCRIF Operations Manual, the selection of service
providers, the annual risk transfer placement and the financial structure, annual financial statements, and annual audit results.



Figure 6: Management structure of CCRIF

       Participant representatives                                                                               Underwriting and risk transfer
                                                                       Board of Directors                        subcommittee
       Ministries of Finance
                                                                       Chairperson
                                                                       2 Member (CARICOM) Appointees
                                                                                                                 Audit and risk management
                                                                       2 Donor (CDB) Appointees
                                                                       World Bank (Observer Status)              subcommittee
    Donor consultative committee
                                                                       CEO (Ex Officio)
                                                                                                                 Investment subcommittee

                                                                       Chief Executive Officer
                                                                                                                 Technical assistance
                                                                                                                 subcommittee


             Corporate
                                                                                     Facility               Insurance                 Asset
          communications                        Placing broker
                                                                                   supervisor                manager                manager(s)
             manager
 http://www.ccrif.org/content/aboutus/ccrif-organisational-structure




Figure 7: Schematic of the modalities of a Caribbean - Central American partnership in
CCRIF

                      Caribbean Catastrophe Risk                                                                 Payouts          Reinsurer
                       Insurance Facility (CCRIF)                                 Potential
                                                                                   Shared                                         Reinsurance
                                                                                   Capital                                        contract




                                                                                Reinsurance
                              Participation                                      Contract                           Participation
                                Deposit                                                                               Deposit

                                 Annual                        Caribbean                      Central American           Annual          Central
   Caribbean                                                                                                                                        CARIBBEAN AND
                                Premium                         Capital                            Capital              Premium         American
   Countries
                                                                                                                                        Countries   CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                  Payout                                                                                Payout                      PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                                                                    CATASTROPHE RISK
                                                                                                                                                    INSURANCE

                                                                                                                                                    25
             26


   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE


                   IX. Why are donor
                   contributions essential?




                        D
                               onors will play an essential role in enabling COSEFIN states to join CCRIF by supporting
                               the capitalization of the COSEFIN countries’ risk retention capacity, similar to when
                               CARICOM countries established CCRIF. Initial donor support in 2007 enabled CCRIF
                        to build reserves during its first four years of operation at an accelerated pace, while also financ-
                        ing initial operating expenditures and paying claims within its risk retention.

                        Donor contributions are associated with significant cost savings to member countries. The re-
                        duction of the indicative premium with each additional US$10 million of capital reserves is
                        typically about 10 percent under a conservative retention scenario.

                        In addition, initial donor support to build reserves is essential as the Facility is required to have a
                        minimum amount of capital reserves in order to access the reinsurance market. Reinsurers always
                        require that the primary insurer (in this case, CCRIF) retains at least some of the risk.

                        This proposed initiative was developed based on receiving strong commitment from donors to
                        finance the initial coverage for COSEFIN countries through CCRIF, as well as the development
                        and launch of an excess rainfall product for CARICOM and COSEFIN countries. Participation
                        from the international donor community is necessary in order to establish the MDTF to address
                        Caribbean and Central American countries’ requests for disaster risk insurance. As was the case
                        at CCRIF’s inception, initial donor capital will be placed in an MDTF that would be used by
                        the Facility to make payouts until the trust fund is exhausted (See Figure 4). The MDTF will
                        enable the underwriting of the parametric products and technical assistance for COSEFIN and
                        CARICOM countries that will complement the entry of COSEFIN countries into CCRIF.
                        While the parametric product is recipient-executed, the latter is Bank-executed.

                        Donor support will represent an important contribution to the sustainability of the Facility. A
                        minimum level of initial reserves will be essential to ensure the long-term sustainability of the
                        Central American portfolio, and therefore the Facility. These reserves will allow the Facility to
                        retain some of the risk as well as to purchase reinsurance, giving CCRIF the opportunity to
                        grow its reserves over time. CCRIF’s financial stability and its capacity to attract and sustain
                        business are the main factors that determine the sustainability of the proposed initiative.
                                                                                                               27


                                                                                                                CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                                CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                                PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                                CATASTROPHE RISK
                                                                                                                INSURANCE




                                                                                              Michel Matera (2005)




Contacts
*	 Niels                ead Disaster Risk Management Specialist and Regional
         Holm-Nielsen, L
   Coordinator, Latin America and the Caribbean, The World Bank,
   nholmnielsen@worldbank.org, +1 (202) 458–1709

*	 Leonardo                 eputy Assistant Secretary,
            Martinez-Diaz, D
   Environment and Energy, US Department of Treasury,
   leonardo.martinez@treasury.gov, +1 (202) 622-2916

*	 Milo           hairman of the Board, Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility,
        Pearson, C
   milopearson@sbcglobal.net

*	 Isaac  Anthony, Chief Executive Officer, Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility,
   ccrif.ceo@gmail.com, +1 (758) 285-6397
             28


   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE
                   Annex 1: Fiscal impacts
                   of selected disasters
                   in the Caribbean and
                   Central American region



                                                                                                         Nominal US$               2000 Real US$                                          Damages &
                                                                                      Name of                                                                 2000 Real US$
                            Country                   Year       Event Type                               Damages &                 Damages &                                             Losses as %
                                                                                       Event                                                                      GDP
                                                                                                            Losses                    Losses                                               Real GDP

                   Belize                            1961            Storm              Hattie            $60,000,000               $181,743,227               $90,765,704                     200%

                   Nicaragua                         1972        Earthquake          Earthquake                  n/a                        n/a                        n/a                      93%

                                                                                      David &
                   Dominica                          1979            Storm                                $52,000,000               $173,039,998               $147,404,440                    117%
                                                                                      Frederick

                   Saint Lucia                       1980            Storm               Allen            $92,592,593               $185,663,130               $267,518,285                     69%

                   Jamaica                           1988            Storm              Gilbert                  n/a                        n/a                        n/a                      65%

                   Antigua and Barbuda               1995            Storm                Luis           $350,000,000               $460,192,062               $649,771,716                     71%

                   Dominica                          1995            Storm             Marilyn           $175,000,000               $238,597,094               $305,454,756                     78%

                   Saint Kitts and Nevis             1995            Storm                Luis           $197,000,000               $261,310,686               $306,066,092                     85%

                   Saint Kitts and Nevis             1998            Storm             Georges           $400,000,000               $490,250,167               $352,152,046                    139%

                   Honduras                          1998         Hurricane              Mitch                   n/a                        n/a                        n/a                      81%

                   Grenada                           2004            Storm                Ivan           $889,000,000               $774,586,949               $517,390,197                    150%

                   Guyana                            2005            Flood               Flood           $465,100,000               $416,246,243               $738,235,712                     56%

                   Haiti                             2010        Earthquake          Earthquake                  n/a                        n/a                        n/a                     120%

                   Source: WB Analysis of EM-DAT database; Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) ; Zapata, Ricardo & Benjamin Madrigal (2009), “Economic impact of disasters: Evidence
                   from Damage and Loss Assessmnet (DALA) assessments by Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) in Latin America and the Caribbean”, Economic Commission for
                   Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) - Serie Estudios y perspectivas – Mexico – No 117; ECLAC (2011), “An Assessment of the Economic Impact of Climate Change on the Agriculture Sector
                   in Saint Lucia”; Richards, Allison (2008), “Development Trends in Jamaica’s Coastal Areas and the Implications for Climate Change,” Sustainable Development and Regional Planning Division,
                   Planning Institute of Jamaica; ECLAC (2005), “Caribbean Small States, Vulnerability and Development”; Government of Haiti (2010), “Post Disaster Needs Assessmnet (PDNA) at a Glance”.
                                                                                                                                                                                               29


                                                                                                                                                                                               CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                                                                                                               CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                                                                                                               PARTNERSHIP FOR

                                                                                  Annex 2: General                                                                                             CATASTROPHE RISK
                                                                                                                                                                                               INSURANCE

                                                                                  government gross debt
                                                                                  as percent of GDP of
                                                                                  selected COSEFIN and
                                                                                  CARICOM countries


                                                                               COSEFIN countries

                 Country                             2012              2013             2014              2015              2016             2017              2018             2019

Costa Rica                                            35.1             37.0              39.4              42.9             46.5              50.1             53.9              57.9
Dominican Republic                                    30.2             33.8              35.4              36.7             38.4              39.4             40.3              41.4
El Salvador                                           55.1             54.9              57.1              59.5             61.7              63.8             66.0              68.0
Guatemala                                             24.4             24.4              25.1              25.7             26.3              26.8             27.1              27.3
Honduras                                              34.4             40.2              44.9              48.6             52.0              55.5             59.2              62.8
Nicaragua                                             43.2             42.4              40.6              39.7             39.3              38.6             38.0              37.3
Panama                                                42.6             41.3              41.4              41.3             38.9              36.7             34.4              32.2
Source: International Monetary Fund (IMF) World Economic Outlook Database April 2014. Estimates start after 2012 (except Dominican Republic and El Salvador, where estimates start in 2013).




                                                                              CARICOM Countries

                 Country                             2012              2013             2014              2015              2016             2017              2018             2019
Antigua and Barbuda                                   87.8             92.2             100.7             102.4            100.1              97.8             95.4              93.3
The Bahamas                                           51.2             56.3              59.3              59.6             58.9              57.6             55.8              54.0
Barbados                                              85.8             92.0              94.7              95.0             94.3              92.7             90.8              88.6
Belize                                                75.4             75.5              80.4              92.6             91.8              91.0             90.5              91.1
Dominica                                              73.3             75.0              75.8              76.3             76.7              77.0             77.6              78.5
Grenada                                              108.5            115.0             117.0             115.7            111.7             107.2            102.3              97.8
Guyana                                                64.3             63.9              64.4              64.6             63.8              62.7             59.2              57.1
Haiti                                                 16.4             21.3              24.4              29.4             34.1              38.8             42.7              46.1
Jamaica                                              146.9            138.9             133.7             129.1            123.9             115.4            107.0              99.0
St. Kitts and Nevis                                  137.0            104.9              91.2              84.6             77.3              70.7             65.6              61.4
St. Lucia                                             71.7             79.8              83.7              87.0             90.0              92.2             93.9              95.3
St. Vincent and the Grenadines                        71.7             76.4              85.0              84.9             83.5              81.7             80.0              78.2
Source: International Monetary Fund (IMF) World Economic Outlook Database April 2014. Estimates start after 2013 (except Guyana, where estimates start in 2012).
             30


   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE

                   Annex 3: CCRIF’s
                   catastrophe risk and
                   insurance model




                        C   CRIF’s parametric insurance policies are based on a ‘modeled loss’ approach, utilizing a ca-
                            tastrophe risk model consisting of five modules (see Figure 8):

                        Hazard module: The hazard module defines the frequency and severity of a peril at a specific loca-
                        tion or within a grid. This is done by analyzing the historical event frequencies and reviewing
                        scientific studies performed on the spatial distribution, severity, and frequencies in the region
                        of interest. A simulated event set is then produced covering a thousand to tens of thousands of
                        years of events. This module then analyzes the hazard intensity at all locations for each event in
                        the simulated set by modeling the attenuation/degradation of the event from its source location/
                        track to the site under consideration and evaluates the propensity of local site conditions either
                        to amplify or to reduce the impact.

                        Exposure module: The exposure values of “assets at risk” are estimated from available secondary
                        data sources combined with the distribution of population. This “proxy” approach is used when
                        the preferred site-specific data are not available. Based on these data, the module computes the
                        value for different exposure types in each grid cell.

                        Vulnerability module: This module quantifies the damage caused to each asset class by the intensity
                        of a given event at a site. Damage is estimated in terms of a mean damage ratio (MDR). The
                        MDR is defined as the ratio of the repair cost divided by the replacement cost of the structure.
                        The curve that relates the MDR to the hazard (earthquake, tropical cyclone, or excess rainfall)
                        intensity is called a vulnerability function. Each exposure type will have its own vulnerability
                        curve for each peril.

                        Damage module: To calculate losses, the damage ratio derived in the vulnerability module is trans-
                        lated into a dollar loss by multiplying the damage ratio by the value at risk. This is done for each
                        asset class in each grid cell. Losses are then aggregated as required. Government assets or assets
                        that are likely to be financed with government resources can be easily isolated and an assessment
                        of financial needs for reconstruction calculated. Based on the likely timing for reconstruction,
                        these costs can be ventilated between short-, medium-, and long-term financial needs.

                        Loss module: The module estimates the losses from the damage distribution. When dealing with
                        government losses, this module estimates relief and recovery costs and tax revenue losses.
                                                                                             Michel Matera (2004)




Figure 8: CCRIF’s Catastrophe Risk Insurance Model


                                                                         Key
    Event
    Characteristics                                                       Input data
                        Hazard         Hazard          Hazard
                        Model         Estimates         Maps
    Land cover
                                                                               Model
    and elevation
                                                       Risk
                       Exposures    Vulnerability
                                                       Maps               Product
                                     /Damage
     Possible inputs                   Model
     Population
     distribution                                       Loss
                                                      Estimate
     Local data                                                    Insurance
                                                                     Model
                                                       Contract
     Economic                                        information
     information
                                                                                Portafolio
                                                                                 Losses




                                                                                                               CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                               CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                               PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                               CATASTROPHE RISK
                                                                                                               INSURANCE

                                                                                                               31
             32


   CARIBBEAN AND
CENTRAL AMERICAN
 PARTNERSHIP FOR
CATASTROPHE RISK
       INSURANCE   Annex 4: How are
                   disaster risk financing
                   instruments related to
                   a broader Disaster Risk
                   Management strategy?



                        T
                             he use of risk transfer instruments such as CCRIF can be an important element in a country’s
                             DRM strategy. However, a comprehensive DRM strategy that includes financial instru-
                             ments requires attention and policy action in a broader set of areas, as illustrated in Figure
                        9. A DRM strategy includes five elements: (i) risk identification, (ii) risk reduction, (iii) financial
                        protection, (iv) preparedness, and (v) post-disaster reconstruction. The components of each are
                        described below.

                        Risk identification: Understanding hazards, exposure, and vulnerability is the ﬁrst step toward
                        managing disaster risk. Today, a range of new methods can help governments, communities, and
                        private actors assess risk. Quantifying and anticipating the potential impacts of natural hazards
                        on society and the economy, disaster and climate risk assessments can inform decisions on how
                        to manage risk, and facilitate access to development assistance.

                        Risk reduction: Action can be taken to reduce risk through development policies and investment
                        programs. Information about disaster risk can help guide investment to address existing risk; for
                        example, through the retroﬁtting of critical infrastructure or the establishment of social safety
                        nets for vulnerable populations. Risk information can also guide policies and programs that seek
                        to avoid the creation of new risks, for example through improved territorial planning or building
                        practices.

                        Adequate preparedness is essential, because risk can never be completely eliminated or reduced.
                        Preparedness through civil protection and early warning systems saves lives, protects livelihoods,
                        and is one of the most cost-effective ways to reduce the impact of disasters. Preparedness ac-
                        tivities include enhancing capabilities at the local level to plan for and respond to disasters, and
                        ensuring that local actors are linked to early warning systems.

                        Financial protection strategies, such as the insurance provided by CCRIF, can help protect gov-
                        ernments from the economic burden of disasters. Insurance increases the ﬁnancial capacity of
                        the state to respond to emergencies, while protecting the ﬁscal balance. Additionally, financial
                        protection strategies also include private insurance policies purchased by businesses, households,
                        or individuals, who insure their private property from disaster risks.
Figure 9: The five pillars of a comprehensive disaster risk management strategy

                                                             Maps of hazards, risks, community perception.
                                                             development, risk modelling.
                           Risk Identtification
                                                             Social perception, priority settings.




                                                             Territorial and sectorial planning, building codes.
                             Risk Reduction                  Mitigation works, structural reinfocement.
                                                             Education, creation of a culture of prevention.




                                                             Reserve mechanism, budget planning.
                          Financial Protection               Risk transfer, insurance, etc.
                                                             Budget appropriation, execution in emergency.




                                                             Alert and early warning systems.
                                                             Response planning, training, equipment.
                             Preparedness                    logistics, simulations.
                                                             Response systems management.




                                                             Institutional planning, strengthening.
                      Post-Disaster Reconstruction           Recovery, planning reconstruction policies.
                                                             Rehabilitation plans.




After a disaster, the reconstruction process is an important opportunity to promote resilience. The
risk awareness of governments and affected populations is at its highest in the aftermath of
disasters. This is the opportune time to change policies and practices that do not appropriately
consider risk. .




                                                                                                                   CARIBBEAN AND
                                                                                                                   CENTRAL AMERICAN
                                                                                                                   PARTNERSHIP FOR
                                                                                                                   CATASTROPHE RISK
                                                                                                                   INSURANCE

                                                                                                                   33
