                                                    87931




MAKING ROADS SAFE
I N L AT I N A M E R I C A A N D T H E C A R I B B E A N




                        “   We are running out of time.
                                    President Óscar Arias Sánchez   ”
                                      Sponsors
 The First Latin American and Caribbean Road Safety Stakeholders Forum
                          Organizing Committee:

           National Road Safety Council of Costa Rica (COSEVI)
     Ministry of Public Works and Transportation of Costa Rica (MOPT)
  UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)
Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO) / World Health Organization (WHO)
               FIA Foundation for the Automobile and Society
                    World Bank Global Road Safety Facility
                  Inter-American Development Bank (IADB)
                      Global Road Safety Forum (GRSF)




                        FIA     Foundation
                        for the Automobile and Society




  The Organizing Committee wishes to thank our additional sponsors for
                 their support of the San José meetings.

                                      3M
                   Automobile Club of Costa Rica (ACCR)
                              Bidez & Associates
                            Chevron Corporation
                                 Copa Airlines
       Costa Rican Institute for Energy and Telecommunications (ICE)
              National Insurance Institute of Costa Rica (INS)
                                 Riteve S y C
                               Shell Corporation
                        Union Institute and University


           The Global Road Safety Forum wishes to thank the
                      sponsors of this document.


              FIA Foundation for the Automobile and Society
                       Richard Stanley Productions
                  World Bank Global Road Safety Facility


          Please visit www.taskforce.org/grsf to find out more about
                   global road safety activities and events.
M                            aking Roads Safe
         in Latin America and the Caribbean




    “We have an opportunity to address this
    threat, to substitute peace and survival for
    violence and death....I know we can succeed;
    I only fear that we are running out of time”
                                                       Óscar Arias Sánchez
                                                      President, Costa Rica




                                 Edited by
               Lisa Hayes, Mark Rosenberg, and Jerry Abraham



All distribution of this document in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
  photocopying, recording, or otherwise, must credit The Global Road Safety Forum.

              © Global Road Safety Forum 2007. All rights reserved.
       750 Commerce Drive, Decatur, GA, USA, 30030. www.taskforce.org/grsf.
                               Acknowledgements
          This work has resulted from the collaborative efforts of a number of key individuals
and institutions—the Ministry of Public Works and Transportation of Costa Rica (MOPT), the
National Road Safety Council of Costa Rica (COSEVI), the UN Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO),
the World Health Organization (WHO), the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), the
World Bank, the FIA Foundation for the Automobile and Society, the FIA, and the Global
Road Safety Forum (GRSF). We would like to thank Karla Gonzalez, Roy Rojas, Jessica
Alvarado, Ricardo Sanchez, Alberto Concha-Eastman, Etienne Krug, Luis Moreno, Pietro
Masci, Tony Bliss, and David Ward for sponsoring this Forum. Their expertise, participation,
and passion made this event possible.

         We want to thank Carlos Macaya, Leda Aguilar Córdoba and the Automobile Club of
Costa Rica for their help in many aspects of the meeting, especially for graciously hosting the
Forum participants at the Gala Dinner and the Prince Michael International Road Safety
Awards.

          We owe a great debt of thanks to President Óscar Arias Sánchez for his dedicated
support for road safety in Costa Rica and the entire Latin American and Caribbean region:
he has been instrumental in bringing road safety to the forefront. We also thank his staff for
their steadfast support for this work; in particular, we would like to thank Karla Gonzalez and
Ignacio Sánchez for all they did to build support for this presidential initiative. We thank
HRH Prince Michael of Kent for saluting progress in road safety throughout the region and for
recognizing Costa Rica's Por Amor seatbelt campaign.

          The Global Road Safety Forum would like to acknowledge all the speakers and par-
ticipants at the First Latin American and Caribbean Road Safety Stakeholders Forum who
came from far and wide. They are the heart and soul of our continuing effort. We would also
like to thank the work group chairs—Eduardo Vazquez-Vela (Political Will), Nani Rodriguez
(Information and Surveillance Systems), João Pedro Corrêa (Communications), Greg Speier
(Intrastructure), and Julio Urzúa Negrete (Knowledge Sharing)—for all that they did to help
develop the agenda for the Forum and the curriculum for the training sessions. All of the
training session leaders gave generously of their time and expertise: Karla Gonzalez, Wahid
Ali Al-Kharusi, Eduardo Bertotti, Alberto Concha-Eastman, John Dawson, Bella Dinh-Zarr,
Philip Gold, Lucien Jones, Etienne Krug, Kate McMahon, Eugenia Rodriquez, Ernesto
Tennenbaum, and Jay Winsten. We thank Margaret McIntyre for her hard work in helping to
plan and execute the Forum.

          We thank our other sponsors for their generosity and support to bring together glob-
al partners to address road safety: COSEVI, Bidez and Associates, the Chevron Corporation,
the FIA Foundation, Union Institute and University, and the World Bank. In addition, we
would like to recognize our in-kind sponsors: 3M, Copa Airlines, ICE, INS, Riteve, and the
Shell Corporation. We are grateful to Nuvia Ramírez and Juan Carlos Ramírez for their tire-
less efforts and event planning services. We also wish to acknowledge the FIA Foundation for
their support of the report itself; Richard Stanley, Hugh Hood, and the FIA Foundation for
producing a clear and powerful video on road safety including wonderful interviews with
stakeholders from the region; Rita Cuypers for ensuring the interviews and Gala were exe-
cuted seamlessly; Cathey Oldroyd for graphic design and layout of the report; Maria Fe Torres
for her tireless translations and Julio Urzúa Negrete for additional help with translation and
document preparation; Sonia Zuña, Ivy Newman, and Kim Smith for their support; and Tom
Rosenberger, Daniel Martins and Gloria Freeman for operational support.


                                                                       Lisa Hayes
                                                                       Mark Rosenberg
                                                                       Jerry Abraham
                                                                       Editors
                                                     Table of Contents

Peace on the Roads, President Óscar Arias Sánchez of Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                              7
First Latin American and Caribbean Road Safety
Stakeholders Forum: Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    9
     The Road Safety Crisis: Background of the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  9
     Moving Toward a Solution: Previous Progress in the Region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                     10
     Building Capacity in the Region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11
     Sharing Perspectives, Forging Consensus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         11
     The Road Ahead: Combining Scientific Knowledge, Social Strategy, and Political Will . . . . . . . . . .                                   14
Champions for Road Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     Dr. Óscar Arias Sánchez, President of the Republic of Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     HRH Prince Michael of Kent, Prince Michael International Road Safety Awards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     Luis Alberto Moreno, President of the Inter-American Development Bank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Declaration of San José: We Must Stop the Epidemic of Deaths on Our Roads . . . . . . . 22
Forum Contributors (please see Spanish language side for complete listing)
Photography Credits (please see Spanish language side for photo credits)


                      The Enclosed interactive CD includes the items listed in the
                        Table of Contents above as well as the following items:

Making Roads Safe in Latin America and the Caribbean, a documentary by Richard Stanley
Agenda
Forum Training Sessions
       Strengthening National Road Safety Plans
       Road Safety Data Systems
       Road Infrastructure Assessment and Development
       Communicating Key Messages for Road Safety
       Advocating for Global Road Safety
Forum Presentations
       Standing on the Shoulders of Giants
       Celebrating Road Safety Successes
       Vision for the Future: Working Together to Create a Multi-Sectoral Regional Actor
       Realizing the Potential of A Multi-Sectoral Approach
       Communications and Campaigns: Identifying Major Messages and Working with TV, Radio,
       and Print Media to Deliver Them
       Envisioning a Future for Regional Collaboration: Reports of the Working Groups
       Resource Mobilization: Strategies for Engaging Global, Regional & National Players
       The Road Ahead for the Regional Initiative
A Message from Luis Alberto Moreno, President of the Inter-American Development Bank
“Peace on the Roads”, an Op-Ed Piece by President Óscar Arias Sánchez of Costa Rica
Forum Participant List and Directory
Biographies of Forum Speakers
Select Photographs from the 2006 San José Forum
                                                                         Peace on the Roads      7




       P               eace on the Roads
                       by Óscar Arias Sánchez
                       Saturday, September 9, 2006; The Washington Post

         In the 1980s Central America was engaged in violent struggles that claimed
the lives of more than 70,000 people. But we were able to bring a peaceful resolu-
tion to these struggles, restore human rights and work for a better future. I
dedicated my life to this cause.
         Times have changed, and now peace requires a different kind of
fight. We face a danger that not only kills people but lulls us into an
unconscious silence. It doesn't attract media and global attention as wars    “We face a danger
and murders do, but it is violence nonetheless—violence on our roads.         that…does not attract
         Road traffic injuries kill 1.2 million victims around the world
                                                                              media and global
each year, a toll equivalent to the disease burden of tuberculosis or
malaria. And as with these diseases, the tremendous burden of death and       attention as wars and
disability resulting from these injuries falls primarily on low- and middle-  murders do, but it is
income countries where victims are commonly the most vulnerable road          violence nonetheless—
users: pedestrians, bicyclists and motorcyclists. When the person killed
or seriously injured is the breadwinner, the families of these victims are    violence on our roads.”
often forced into poverty. The cumulative cost to the Latin American and
Caribbean region is about 1 percent of our gross domestic product, or
more than $20 billion a year.
         World Bank statistics show that in 2000, the Latin American and
Caribbean region had the highest average rate of road traffic deaths per capita in
the world: We lose about 122,000 lives every year. And for every person who dies,
20 to 50 are seriously injured. If we do not take strong and effective measures, this
number is sure to rise markedly.
         There are powerful tools that can save lives in our region and elsewhere.
In Costa Rica, we combined a public awareness campaign with a new seat belt law
and strong police enforcement to increase seat belt usage for drivers from 24 per-
cent to 82 percent, and recorded fatality rates dropped. In Ghana, placement of
speed bumps and rumble strips at crash hot spots reduced fatalities by 55 percent
and serious injuries by 76 percent. In Thailand, a compulsory helmet law for
motorcyclists reduced serious head injuries by 40 percent and mortality from
motorcycle injuries by 24 percent. These interventions are not only effective, they
are some of the least expensive ways to save lives that we have—for any part of the
world.
         Our failure to use these powerful tools for prevention means that we
simply allow these violent deaths to continue. We must not turn away from what
is happening. It is both urgent and important that all nations of the Latin American
and Caribbean region work together to stop the growing epidemic of deaths and
injuries on our roads.
         Toward this end representatives of every country in the region have been
invited to meet in San José, Costa Rica, next week to sign the Declaration of San
José. The declaration will urge all nations of the region to implement recommen-
dations of the World Bank and World Health Organization's World Report on Road
Traffic Injury and Prevention.
         Emphasizing road safety as a critical part of sustainable development, we
will urge that resources be committed that are commensurate with the need and
magnitude of the problem. And we hope that development banks will lead the
way by requiring that at least 10 percent of their investments for infrastructure
      8 Making Roads Safe in Latin America and the Caribbean




                    development be applied to road safety programs. I have signed a presidential
                    decree that commits Costa Rica to exactly this course.
                             We will also urge that resources be committed to the World Bank Global
                    Road Safety Facility by the industrialized nations so that the facility can reach a
                    total investment of at least $300 million by 2015. This program has the potential
                              to make funds available to the countries in our region to develop road
                              safety programs and the management capacity needed to make them
“We will urge that            work.
resources be committed                 Finally we will commit to jointly develop a regional organization
that are commensurate         that will represent all relevant sectors of government, civil society, and
                              the private sector and promote a region-wide approach to road safety.
with the need and                      We have an opportunity to address this threat, to substitute
magnitude of the              peace and survival for violence and death. We have faced such choices in
problem.”                     the past and we have won. The people of this region have the same right
                              to safety as those in other parts of the world. I am committed to promot-
                              ing road safety because I know it will benefit Costa Rica and every other
                    country in our region. We hope our success will also be a beacon of hope for many
                    others in Asia, Africa and other parts of the world. I know we can succeed; I only
                    fear that we are running out of time.


                       The writer is President of Costa Rica. He was awarded the 1987 Nobel Peace
                       Prize for his work to end conflicts in several Central American countries.
                       © 2006 The Washington Post Company.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Executive Summary   9




                                                                                   E
                                                                                The First Latin American and Caribbean
                                                                                                                      xecutive Summary
                                                                                   Road Safety Stakeholders Forum
                                                                              September 12-14, 2006—San José, Costa Rica

                                                                              The Road Safety Crisis: Background of the Problem
         Road traffic crashes kill over 1.2 million people a year, a death toll that ex-
ceeds fatalities due to malaria and approaches deaths attributable to tuberculosis
(TB). The number of deaths from malaria has started to decrease and it is predict-
ed that the deaths from TB will soon start to decrease; but the deaths from road
traffic injuries are predicted to double by the year 2020. And these road traffic
deaths are just the tip of the iceberg: for every single death there are 20-50 serious
road traffic injuries. Yet in the face of this rapidly growing epidemic, most people
are completely unaware of this looming threat, especially in low- and middle-income
countries where more than 85% of all road traffic deaths occur. According to World
Bank statistics, Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) have the highest per
capita road traffic fatality rates of any region in the world, killing 122,000 people
a year and costing Latin America and the Caribbean an estimated $18.9 billion
USD annually, typically 1.5% of GNP.
         In addition to the devastating human toll, road traffic injuries are a root
cause of poverty in this region. Road crashes kill and disable wage earners, leaving
families without economic support. Road traffic injuries disproportionately impact

                                                                                                                 Latin America and the Caribbean
                                                                                                  have the highest per capita road traffic fatality rate in the world,
2000 and 2020 Predicted Road Traffic Fatalities per capita (in thousands)




                                                                                                                                                                                                            2000
                                                                            35.0
                                                                                                            and will still have the highest rates in 2020
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2020


                                                                            30.0
               by Region, Adjusted for Underreporting




                                                                            25.0



                                                                            20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    31.0




                                                                            15.0
                                                                                                                                                                                             26.1
                                                                                                                                                                                    22.3
                                                                                                                                                                    21.2



                                                                                                                                                                             19.2
                                                                                                                                                             19.0
                                                                                                                                                  18.9




                                                                            10.0
                                                                                                                                 16.8
                                                                                                               14.9
                                                                                                        12.3
                                                                                     11.8




                                                                                                                          10.9




                                                                                                                                           10.2




                                                                             5.0
                                                                                            7.8




                                                                             0.0
                                                                                   High Income        Sub-Saharan      East Asia and     South Asia       East Europe      Middle East     Latin America
                                                                                    Countries            Africa           Pacific                             and              and            and the
                                                                                                                                                          Central Asia     North Africa     Caribbean
                                                                                                                                        Region

                                                                                                                                                         Source: World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention, 2004.
10 Making Roads Safe in Latin America and the Caribbean




                the poor and vulnerable road users, and, when
                the victims are not poor to begin with, the con-
                sequences of these injuries often plunge the
                victims and their families into poverty.
                Tragically, for many children their entire
                future is erased as road traffic crashes are the
                number one killer of all children, aged 18 and
                younger.
                         However, there is hope. The predicted
                devastation from road traffic injuries can be
                stopped. Evidence from the world's developed countries shows that road traffic
                injuries can be prevented with specific, proactive, measures that target the three
                major components of the road safety “system”: the roadway, the vehicle, and the
                road user. The present and urgent challenge is to work with and support the people
                of LAC in translating and transforming these known solutions into a regional strat-
                egy that is both socially and economically appropriate for their region.

                        Moving Toward a Solution: Previous Progress in the Region
                        A number of key regional institutions have helped to raise awareness of the
                road safety crisis in the Latin American and Caribbean region. The Inter-American
                Development Bank (IADB) brought road safety leaders and experts together in
                1998 in Brasilia to address the road traffic injury problem. This group issued the
                Declaration of Brasilia that called for collaborative multi-sectoral efforts to pro-
                mote road safety in the region.
                        In 2004, a multi-sectoral coalition brought the crisis of road traffic injuries
                in developing countries to the attention of world leaders through technical briefings,
                a General Assembly session, and a Stakeholders Forum at the United Nations. In
                April 2004, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the World Bank published
                                                                        the World Report on Road
                                                                        Traffic Injury Prevention
                                                                        and WHO sponsored World
                                                                        Health Day with the theme
                                                                        of road safety. The General
                                                                        Assembly declared the
                                                                        global road safety crisis to
                                                                        be a UN priority, and passed
                                                                        a resolution designating
                                                                        WHO as a coordinator of
                                                                        road safety activities for the
                                                                        different parts of the UN.
                                                                        WHO, in turn, asked the
                                                                        Global Road Safety Forum
                                                                        (GRSF) to take responsibil-
                                                                        ity for advocacy and social
                                                                        mobilization at global and
                regional levels. GRSF saw the very high rates of road traffic injuries and deaths in
                the Latin American and Caribbean region and decided to focus on reducing the
                high burden of deaths and injuries in this region.
                        The activities in this region have gained significant momentum over the
                last two years. The Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the UN Economic
                Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the IADB, the World
                Bank, the FIA Foundation, the Chilean National Traffic Safety Commission
                (CONASET), and the GRSF held a very productive planning meeting in Santiago,
                Chile, January 18-19, 2006. Their goal was to help organize a long-term regional,
                multi-sectoral road safety initiative in Latin America and the Caribbean bringing
                together all relevant parts of government (including transportation, health, law
                                                                             Executive Summary   11




enforcement, education, finance, and urban planning), civil society (including
advocacy organizations, academia, foundations, automobile clubs, and profession-
al organizations), and the private sector (including road builders, automobile
manufacturers, motor vehicle product manufacturers, insurance companies, and
commercial road users) to reverse the rapidly expanding epidemic of road traffic
injuries and deaths in the region. The group from 11 different countries that met
in Santiago said that not only was this possible-it was absolutely essential. To pre-
pare for a regional forum in September 2006, participants formed 5 working
groups: Political Will, Information Systems, Communications and Culture Change,
Knowledge Sharing, and Infrastructure.

        Building Capacity in the Region
        ECLAC, the National Road Safety Council of Costa Rica (COSEVI), the FIA
Foundation, PAHO, the IADB, the World Bank, and the Global Road Safety Forum
(GRSF) sponsored the First Latin American and Caribbean Road Safety Stakeholders
Forum in San José, Costa Rica on September 12-14, 2006. With over 185 stakehold-
ers representing 24 different countries in the region, the Forum aimed to:
        • Organize a regional, multi-sectoral approach to road safety in Latin
          America and the Caribbean.
        • Build political will within national governments and other policy-making
          organizations throughout the region to reduce deaths and disability from
          road traffic injuries.
        • Promote integration of the relevant areas of government, civil society,
          and the private sector in order to accelerate national road safety plans
          and programs throughout the region.
        • Ensure that this regional road safety effort is both collaborative and
          sustainable.

          The Forum began with a full day of intensive training sessions organized
by the working groups established at the Santiago meeting to address five key road
safety areas. The national road safety
planning sessions focused on improving
safety by integrating contributions from
various sectors as well as defining the crit-
ical elements for a national road safety
plan. The road safety data systems train-
ing focused on identifying the rationale and
requirements for a regional road safety sys-
tem, reviewing the epidemiology of road
traffic injuries, identifying best practices in
collecting and analyzing data, and setting
and tracking targets. The infrastructure
training reviewed elements of safe roadside design and road safety assessment pro-
grams. The communications sessions focused on media campaigns and road safety
week activities (formulating key messages, using TV and radio). And finally, the
global road safety advocacy sessions focused on understanding the global road
safety crisis and the advocacy and coalition-building work that is needed to mobi-
lize resources throughout the region and the world.

        Sharing Perspectives, Forging Consensus
        The Forum was designed to achieve specific targeted objectives. It began
by acknowledging the important contributions of many individuals and organiza-
tions that had helped to bring our understanding of road safety in the region to
where it is today. In what is now a highly quoted statement, the famous Sir Isaac
12 Making Roads Safe in Latin America and the Caribbean




                Newton was supposed to have said that "If I have seen further, it is by standing on
                the shoulders of giants." Karla Gonzalez, Minister of Public Works and Transport of
                Costa Rica, and Dr. Maria Luisa Avila, Minister of Health for Costa Rica, welcomed
                participants from 34 different countries and Minister Gonzalez reviewed progress
                that had been made in the region from the earlier meetings in Brasilia, to the plan-
                ning meeting in Santiago, concluding with important and well-documented
                                                     progress that had been made in Costa Rica.
                                                     Prince Michael of Kent traveled from the United
                                                     Kingdom to salute the progress that had been
                                                     made in organizing for road safety at the global
                                                     level and within specific counties, and noted
                                                     that Costa Rica had mounted an award-winning
                                                     campaign to save lives by increasing seatbelt
                                                     use. Etienne Krug, of WHO, reviewed progress
                                                     that had been made globally and regionally since
                                                     2004 using the framework of the World Report
                                                     on Road Traffic Injury Prevention, and Ricardo
                                                     Sanchez of ECLAC, reviewed what other regions
                                                     had done and gave ECLAC's vision for what is
                                                     possible in this region through collaboration.
                Finally, David Ward showed a video about the high-level Commission for Global
                Road Safety and key recommendations of its Make Roads Safe report, specifically
                that 10% of all road infrastructure investment should be used to improve road safety,
                and that $300 million USD should be made available through a Global Action Plan
                for road safety capacity building in low- and middle-income countries using a
                newly established Global Road Safety Facility at the World Bank.
                         A number of countries in the region have had successful interventions
                designed to address particular aspects of the road safety problem. In Peru, there
                has been a very successful collaboration between the Touring and Automobile Club
                of Peru and the government. In Jamaica, a systematic effort to build political will
                was inspired by a crash that claimed almost an entire family and led to the creation
                of the National Road Safety Council. In Bogota, a multi-sectoral effort to reduce
                speeding resulted in a dramatic decrease in road traffic deaths.
                         Mexico highlighted the important role of research in identifying risk fac-
                                                     tors that could lead to new life-saving
                                                     interventions. The Global Road Safety
                                                     Partnership presented a collaborative effort with
                                                     a number of cities in Brazil which seems to be a
                                                     factor in a widespread decrease in road traffic
                                                     injuries. And a collaborative effort between the
                                                     Chevron Corporation and a number of state and
                                                     local governments sparked a discussion about
                                                     the need for a focused and efficient intervention
                                                     that can be rigorously evaluated; this is critical if
                                                     a partnership between governments and the pri-
                                                     vate sector is to be successful.
                                                              Then the Forum participants faced a
                                                     challenge: given the ability of a variety of sectors
                to contribute to the solution, how many more deaths might be prevented if each
                sector contributed all that it could to preventing road traffic injuries and deaths?
                Is there a way that these different sectors might be pulled together both within
                individual countries and on a region-wide basis to make the knowledge and
                resources available in specific countries accessible throughout the region?
                Panelists from eight different countries answered these questions while giving
                examples of the most successful examples of life-saving interventions from trans-
                portation (infrastructure and vehicle design, and road user behavior), law
                enforcement (control of drink driving and speed, and seat belt and helmet usage),
                                                                          Executive Summary       13




health (emergency response, acute care, and rehabilitation), and health education
(school-based programs, educational campaigns, and culture change).
          The second day of the Forum was structured to focus participants' atten-
tion on the effective use of communication campaigns, pointing out that there is
increasing evidence for the effectiveness of particular types of messages (available
through the Global Transport Knowledge Partnership) and specific ways
of targeting different groups of road users and persons at risk. There are
also creative ways to use popular TV shows to incorporate powerful mes-
sages about drinking and driving and other critical cultural aspects of
                                                                              “If I have seen further, it
road safety. Effectively working with TV and radio journalists is neither     is by standing on the
automatic nor simple but it is a necessary ingredient for a successful        shoulders of giants.”
campaign. All participants were also urged to utilize Global Road Safety
Week to launch national and regional campaigns and to take advantage                     –Sir Isaac Newton
of the many resources and strong support provided by WHO and PAHO
through their toolkits, website, and staff.
          The working groups that had been organized at the Santiago Planning
Meeting summarized the key issues defined by their collaborative efforts, updating
participants on what they had accomplished and their priorities for continuing col-
laborative efforts. Each group met during the Forum and committed to submit to
the yet-to-be-formed regional organization a list of priority issues that could help
compose the agenda for the new coalition or committee.
          A critical question that all participants brought to the Forum was: where
and how could the countries of the region obtain the financial resources needed
to build their road safety capacity? Both the World Bank and the Inter-American
Development Bank (IADB)
have committed to making
investment in road infra-
structure a priority and they
are interested in helping
countries mobilize resources
to support national road
safety plans and addressing
obstacles and opportunities
for a regional road safety ini-
tiative. In most cases, the
first critical step is for a con-
sultation that can help
countries find out what road
safety resources could be
accessed through the Multi-
lateral Lending Institutions
and then to arrange a consul-
tation for how best to
structure loan applications.
          There was a strong
consensus and sense of
urgency that the nations of
the Latin American and
Caribbean region should work together to stop the growing epidemic of road traf-
fic injuries and death. But there was also clear recognition that the region has no
effective mechanism to promote this collaboration and manage joint projects in
road traffic safety. The most advanced region in terms of collaboration is the
European Region and there are many lessons to be learned from their experience,
both in terms of things to copy, things to modify, and things to avoid. PAHO has
been working to facilitate regional collaboration on road safety and, together with
other regional and global organizations, stands ready to help countries strengthen
their national road safety plans. And the International Road Assessment Program
14 Making Roads Safe in Latin America and the Caribbean




                (iRAP) is developing an approach to assess a country's roadways as a first step to
                identifying, implementing, and monitoring the impact of the most critical safety
                improvements that could be made to save lives on these roads.
                         As the Forum drew to a close, participants focused in on the rationale for
                a regional actor. A regional panel of experts proposed a way forward that reflected
                the sense of the forum participants. The panel discussed the following reasons for
                why a concerted approach to road safety is necessary in the region.
                         • The nations of the Latin American and Caribbean region can stop the
                           growing epidemic of deaths and injuries on our roads by working together.
                         • However, we do not have a mechanism to promote collaboration and
                           manage our joint projects in road safety.
                         • Therefore, we must work together to develop a regional committee that
                           will draw upon all relevant sectors of government, civil society, and the
                           private sector to promote a region-wide approach to road safety. We must
                           improve our road safety information and surveillance data systems,
                           effectively share road safety knowledge and best practices across the
                           region, and promote harmonization of laws for road safety.

                         They proposed a transitional commission that would develop this regional
                committee drawing from all relevant sectors of government, civil society, and the
                private sector to: strengthen the capacity to collect, use, and share road safety
                information throughout the region; promote harmonization of laws for road and
                vehicle safety; and share road safety information and best practices across the
                region. They proposed that the institutional members of the transitional commis-
                sion would include ECLAC, PAHO, IADB, the World Bank, and the FIA Foundation.
                Additional members from Latin American and Caribbean countries, NGOs, acade-
                mia, and the private sector would also be asked to join. The Forum participants
                also resoundingly supported the Declaration of San Jose and called for a future
                ministerial meeting and another regional road safety stakeholders' forum to discuss
                progress in the region and vote on the proposal from the transitional commission
                for a new regional road safety committee. Finally, participants also expanded the
                membership and continued the mandate of the five working groups.
                         To convey the IADB's strong sense of support for the regional road safety
                effort, Luis Alberto Moreno, President of the IADB, sent a videotaped message to
                personally thank the participants for moving this important issue forward, and
                stressed the importance of working together on this issue. The highlight of the
                Forum was a moving speech by Dr. Oscar Arias Sanchez, President of the Republic
                of Costa Rica, and Nobel Peace Prize Laureate (1987). President Arias also signed
                the Declaration of San José on behalf of Costa Rica and shared with a standing-
                room only crowd the important role that road safety played in the policies and the
                lives of the Costa Rican people. He also noted how important this problem is for
                the region, claiming 122,000 lives every year, and hoped that collectively the
                region could start to save these lives and assure a richer future for its people.

                        The Road Ahead: Combining Scientific Knowledge, Social
                        Strategy, and Political Will
                          Recently, President Óscar Arias Sánchez, a Nobel Peace Prize Laureate,
                officially agreed to serve as Honorary Chairman of the Transitional Commission for
                Road Safety in Latin America and the Caribbean. The Commission has proposed
                to work together during 2007, with advocacy and capacity-building support from
                the Global Road Safety Forum, to develop a regional coordinating mechanism that
                will draw upon all relevant sectors of government, civil society, and the private sec-
                tor to promote a region-wide approach to road safety. President Arias' leadership
                represents an extraordinary opportunity for progress in road safety in Latin
                America and the Caribbean. Because of the resounding support for the transitional
                commission, the FIA Foundation has agreed to support the work of a temporary
                                                                                                                Executive Summary   15




secretariat for the Transitional Commission that will move the San José action
items forward. The Automobile Club of Chile is contributing office space and
administrative support to the transitional commission secretariat in
Santiago, Chile. The secretariat and members of the commission
will continue the essential work of proposing and widely vetting a      “We are running out of time.”
proposal for a new regional road safety coalition or committee; gath-
                                                                          –President Óscar Arias Sánchez
ering signatures for the Declaration of San José from heads of state,
ministers, and stakeholders from all nations in the region; and
preparing for the Second Latin American and Caribbean Road Safety Stakeholders
Forum. The working groups will work closely with the secretariat to build political
will throughout the region, develop surveillance standards and data systems that
unite the region, form knowledge sharing networks, create effective marketing
campaigns and communications strategies, and raise awareness of the importance
of safe designs and assessment of roadways in Latin America and the Caribbean.
         The stakeholders strongly believe that these efforts will address and
reverse the growing road safety crisis in Latin America and the Caribbean. With
the support of President Óscar Arias Sánchez and the institutional members of the
Transitional Commission, the secretariat and stakeholders will work to convince
other Latin American and Caribbean leaders to move forward with road safety
plans and strategies in their countries as well as commit much needed resources
for road safety within the region. As the Transitional Commission for Road Safety
in Latin America and the Caribbean works to define their organizational structure
and governance, to build partnerships among various sectors, and reverse the cur-
rent deadly trend in road traffic injuries and deaths, we must continue to hear the
words of President Óscar Arias Sánchez, “we are running out of time”.




                  The Transitional Commission is another step forward in
                         a multi-year regional road safety initiative



                                                                                                      Regional
                                                                                                    Road Safety
                                                              1st             Transitional           Committee
                                        Regional           Regional           Commission           (Organization)
      IADB           PAHO               Planning         Stakeholders
     Brasilia       Meetings            Meeting             Forum



     Brasilia       Brasilia            Santiago           San José                                      2007
      1998         2004, 2005             2006               2006

  Transitional Commission Membership:       Transitional Commission Objectives:    Transitional Commission Outcomes:
        Honorary Chair: Óscar Arias         • Represent all relevant sectors       • Develop and vet proposal for
                   PAHO                     • Promote a region-wide approach to      regional committee
                   ECLAC                      road safety                          • Mobilize political will by collecting
                                            • Strengthen regional information        government signatures for the
                 World Bank                                                          Declaration of San José
                                              systems
                    IADB                                                           • Organize 2nd Stakeholders Forum to
                                            • Promote harmonization of laws for
               FIA Foundation                 road and vehicle safety                adopt proposal for permanent
      (others from Latin America and                                                 regional committee
                                            • Share road safety knowledge and
      Caribbean representing NGOs,            best practices
       Governments, and academia)
16 Making Roads Safe in Latin America and the Caribbean




             C      hampions for Road Safety
              in Latin America and the Caribbean

                                         Óscar Arias Sánchez
                                President of the Republic of Costa Rica
                            A Human Dimension to Our Roads
                                            It is a great honor for me to act as your host. This forum
                                   is a conspicuous demonstration that finally, we Latin Americans
                                   understand that we should address our shared problems togeth-
                                   er. The interest of each of our countries in preserving the lives
                                   and safety of our people has brought us here today and we must
                                   commit ourselves to action.
                                            As we all know, motor vehicles have changed human
                                   life. When, in 1908 Henry Ford introduced his “Model T”, few
                                   could predict that it was the beginning of a new era that would
                                   transform industry, trade, and daily life beyond all recognition.
                                   In terms of efficiency, the benefits of the automotive era are
                                   unquestionable and irreversible. However they have not been
                                   without cost. Every day we pay a heavy and increasing environ-
                                   mental price with the emissions of more than 600 million motor
                                   vehicles. We also pay a high price in death and injuries.
                                   Throughout the world, one million two hundred thousand peo-
                                   ple die each year in road crashes, while 50 million are injured.
                                   Today, more than three thousand people will die on the roads.
                                            Apart from the enormous physical, emotional and psy-
                                   chological damage that road crashes cause, there is obviously a
                                   very high economic cost to society for our carelessness behind
                                   the wheel. Most fatal injuries from road crashes occur to those
                between 15 and 44 years of age who are often the sole or principal sources of
                income for their households. It is estimated that on average, deaths and injuries on
                the roads cost countries around 2% of their gross domestic product. This is an
                unacceptable price for any country, but especially for poor nations like ours.
                        Violence on the roads does not affect everyone equally. While developed
                countries have seen a gradual fall in deaths and injuries on the roads, the least
                developed countries have seen these numbers rise. The most vulnerable groups
                vary from region to region: in developed countries the majority of fatalities are
                among vehicle occupants. In Asia, however, they are cyclists and motorcyclists. In
                Africa and South America, it is pedestrians and users of public transport who are
                the worst affected.
                        As we see, the problem has many facets, and so must the solutions put for-
                ward be multi-faceted and knit together a variety of sectors. This makes regional
                                                                     Champions for Road Safety        17




efforts such as this one very relevant. Perhaps the most notable example of this is
provided by the European Union, whose Parliament is promoting a European Road
Safety Action Program in an attempt to reduce by half the number of road accident
victims in member countries by 2010.
          Similarly, Latin America must adopt integral regional strategies
aimed at combating danger on the roads. In other words, we must put              “The problem has many
into practice preventive and punitive policies that are applicable to all
road users: drivers, pedestrians and passengers. This also means carrying        facets, and so must the
out surveillance and monitoring driver behavior; on vehicle equipment            solutions be multi-faceted
and maintenance; and on the improvement, maintenance, and signaling              and knit together a
of road networks. Above all it means educating and raising the awareness
of citizens about the importance of respecting traffic regulations.              variety of sectors.”
          But regional strategies will do little without a commitment to                –Óscar Arias Sánchez,
improved road safety from each and every nation. And when I speak of
commitment, I am speaking of concrete results, quantifiable objectives,                  President, Costa Rica
and performance indicators.
          In this regard the Government of Costa Rica is implementing a Strategic
National Road Safety Plan in an attempt to reduce road deaths by more than 20%,
from 14 to 11 fatalities for each 100,000 inhabitants, before the year 2011.
          The current administration has also given its backing to a bill by the
Minister of Public Works and Transportation, Ms. Karla Gonzalez, which would
increase fines for traffic offences by 1300%, because we are convinced that obvious
and avoidable causes of road crashes, such as high speed, alcohol and drug use,
imprudent overtaking, and failure to use seat belts, should be clearly and heavily
penalized by the State.
          Costa Rica defines itself above all, as a country at peace. It is a country
which is proud of its democracy, of having abolished its army, of creating dialogue
and tolerance as its chosen means of living our lives and resolving conflicts. In con-
trast, it seems that once behind the wheel, Costa Ricans are transformed—like Dr.
Jekyll after drinking his potion—into completely different creatures: contemptu-
ous of the law, unconcerned about the consequences of their actions, and
indifferent to suffering and death.
          You may say that I am exaggerating. Nevertheless, the figures are com-
pelling. According to the most recent UN Human Development Report, 1,059 Costa
Ricans were the victims of intentional homicide between 2001 and 2004. But this
figure, alarming and increasing as it is, pales by comparison with the number of
deaths in traffic crashes: more than 2,500 in this same period. In other words, for
each intentional homicide in Costa Rica, there are 2.5 deaths resulting from traf-
fic accidents. We are not the only country in the region with this phenomenon.
According to figures from the World Health Organization, at the end of the last
decade a list of the ten nations with the highest rates of death from traffic crashes
included six Latin American countries, including the first three. In this aspect, our
region is the world's most violent.
          We must be very clear about one thing: road safety shares much more than
just the word with citizens' safety. Deaths and injuries on the road are also expres-
sions of the violence that is having such a dramatic impact on society; they are
problems of public health, but above all, the problem is one of preserving our phys-
ical and emotional integrity as citizens. Just as insecurity grows, so insecurity on
the roads has to do with the weakening of the ability of state and community to
prevent and manage violence. This is aggravated by the fact that in contrast to the
more traditional expressions of violence, such as assault and theft, road crashes
cannot be addressed by individuals through the use of private security mecha-
nisms. In this matter, more than in almost any other, the State cannot be replaced
as the promoter of preventive and punitive public policies.
          Therefore, the mission before you all is a mission of peace. That mission is
to reclaim the roads for our children, for our families and for everyone. It is to help
    18 Making Roads Safe in Latin America and the Caribbean




                                    us to recover a more civilized, more respectful form of living, better
“Deaths and injuries on the         protection for lives in our cities. It is a mission linked to the human
                                    face of our lives.
road are also expressions of                 The World Health Day 2004, dedicated to road safety, used
the violence that is having         the following motto: “Road safety is no accident!” This is the message
such a dramatic impact on           we must embrace in meetings such as this which ends today; this is
                                    the proclamation that each one of you must take back to your coun-
society…Therefore, the
                                    tries: road safety is not an accidental result of our national policies.
mission before you all is a         Road safety cannot be achieved by chance, on the contrary, it
mission of peace.”                  requires an enormous effort on the part of governments, companies,
                                    research centers and academics and, of course, citizens. It requires
          –Óscar Arias Sánchez, planning and methodical work. Above all it requires the courage to
           President, Costa Rica adopt ambitious commitments and face great challenges.
                                             I hope, therefore, that the hours of reflection and effort that
                                    you have shared during this Road Safety Forum will bear fruit and
                      that the results of this exchange and the work which has yet to be done will trans-
                      form life on our roads, from Monterrey in Mexico to Ushuaia in Argentina—the
                      length and breadth of our land where civilization is so keenly sought.




                                           HRH Prince Michael of Kent
                                 Prince Michael International Road Safety Awards
                                Working Together to Make Roads Safe
                                We here are all agreed that to reduce road fatalities and injuries we need
                       effective action at many levels—from government, from industry, from NGOs, and
                       from communities themselves. Action is required nationally, especially in the
                       developing world, and internationally through the United Nations and its relevant
                       agencies, donor governments and the development banks.
                                The automobile clubs have a real responsibility in this work and I am
                                                                    delighted that so many are represent-
                                                                    ed at this important meeting. The FIA
                                                                    American Congress held here as well
                                                                    as the First Latin American and
                                                                    Caribbean Road Safety Stakeholders
                                                                    Forum are vital steps in this process.
                                                                             Since I first started my road
                                                                    safety awards in the United Kingdom
                                                                    in 1987, I have been impressed by
                                                                    the unstinting work of so many indi-
                                                                    viduals often struggling with limited
                                                                    resources to bring the government's
                                                                    attention to the terrible toll of death
                                                                    and injury on our roads. For some
                                                                    years I have been particularly keen
                                                                    that my awards should be available
                                                                    more widely, particularly to recog-
                       nize the essential work of many 'lone voices' in the developing world where, as we
                       all know, there is a huge challenge. I am therefore pleased to once again pay trib-
                       ute to the WHO and World Bank, who were winners of my International Award in
                       2005 for the World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention, a landmark instru-
                       ment in putting road safety onto the global political radar.
                                                                    Champions for Road Safety       19




         In just a few short years much has been achieved. The UN Road Safety
Collaboration, led by WHO, and the new World Bank Global Road Safety Facility
now provide an institutional framework for effective action. “Make Roads Safe”,
the report of the Commission for Global Road Safety published earlier this year,
provides a compelling argument for why governments should provide the resources
to enable this action on global road safety.
         I also know just how much the FIA Foundation has done to support,
encourage and lead these initiatives. I am sure that you will all agree that its work
since its creation only five years ago has been quite remarkable. My thanks go not
just to David Ward and his excellent team, but to Max Mosley for having the fore-
sight to lead in the establishing of the FIA Foundation and for his unstinting work
in supporting the cause of road safety.
         Before you begin the working sessions of this regional forum, I would like
to offer a few pointers for your discussion based on my own experience of working
in road safety since 1987, when I first established my award scheme.
         The first lesson I have learned is the need for strong government
leadership—In the United Kingdom we have been fortunate to have                  “The practical challenge
retained such commitment even through many changes in government                 is to translate this
over the last 20 years—in fact many former road safety ministers and
government officials still support my award scheme and act as advisers
                                                                                 knowledge into policy and
to RoadSafe. Better still each successive government has built on its pre-       programs and to build the
decessor's plans and improved their strategic approach to road safety.           political and financial
         The second lesson is the need to develop a cadre of well informed
                                                                                 support for their
and capable officials and practitioners. Transport officials, researchers,
the police and engineers as well as those responsible for both public and        implementation.”
individual education need professional support. The many institutions
                                                                                 –HRH Prince Michael of Kent
and professional bodies need to have strong, well founded development
programs in place to ensure that knowledge is passed on and good ideas
not lost.
         The need to share and exchange knowledge is an essential part of this
process. Equally important is the need to promote and encourage good practice. I
am delighted to be able to offer the services of RoadSafe to support this process.
         The third lesson is the need for well planned and well resourced research.
Despite the clear understanding we have about the essential steps needed to make
roads safe, the fact is that improved safety results from an understanding of the
complex interaction between the driver, the road, and the vehicle. Without good
quality research which is well coordinated and with the results shared, it is unlike-
ly that rapid progress can be made. Here again there is a need for a platform to
share and disseminate this research—the UK Global Transport Knowledge
Partnership should be a vehicle for this working closely with the UN Collaboration
and the World Bank Global Road Safety Facility.
         Finally the last lesson is that for real development to take place initiatives
need to be conceived and delivered in partnership. They must be well planned with
sound engineering underpinned by well developed laws which are effectively
enforced, and above all good public understanding and sympathy which requires
effective public education programs.
         Again I believe that the Por Amor Costa Rica Seat Belt Campaign is a first
class example of this partnership approach, which was a collaborative venture led
by the Ministry of Public Works and Transportation (MOPT) in association with the
National Road Safety Council of Costa Rica (COSEVI), the National Insurance
Institute of Costa Rica (INS), the Automobile Club of Costa Rica, and, indeed, the
FIA Foundation.
         As many of you will know, following a challenge to the law in the 1990s
seat belt use had fallen to 24 percent. Yet by the summer of 2004, through a com-
bination of new legislation, awareness campaigns, and effective enforcement, seat
belt compliance rose to 82 percent in Costa Rica.
20 Making Roads Safe in Latin America and the Caribbean




                         I believe that regional forums like this one provide a valuable opportunity
                to share knowledge and to exchange ideas and programs that have been proven to
                work, such as the Por Amor Costa Rica Seatbelt Campaign. Of course the practical
                challenge is to translate this knowledge into policy and programs and to build the
                political and financial support for their implementation.




                                             Luis Alberto Moreno
                        President of the Inter-American Development Bank
                          Road Safety—A Priority for the IADB
                         This Forum is a fundamental step for strengthening cooperation among the
                different stakeholders in planning and implementing corrective measures aimed at
                reducing and preventing deadly road crashes. We at the IADB are very pleased to
                join you and co-sponsor this forum along with the National Road Safety Council of
                                    Costa Rica, the UN Economic Commission of Latin America and
                                    the Caribbean, the Pan-American Health Organization, the
                                    World Bank, the FIA Foundation and the Global Road Safety
                                    Forum.
                                             Financing of road projects is an activity in which we have
                                    wide experience at the Bank. More and more, these include specif-
                                    ic components regarding road safety. In fact, during the last 15
                                    years we have approved more than 66 road development and
                                    improvement projects, most of which included road safety compo-
                                    nents, for a total amount of approximately US$ 4.6 billion dollars.
                                             Likewise, we have promoted research and dialogue on
                                    the institutional, technical and educational aspects of road safe-
                                    ty. Together with the Department of Transportation of Brazil
                                    (DENATRAN), we met with regional representatives some years
                                    ago to insist on the need to increase road safety measures in
                                    order to minimize road traffic injuries and death as well as to
                                    start a comprehensive review of the most important problems in
                                    the region. This collaboration resulted in an IADB-sponsored
                road safety workshop held in December 1999 in Brasilia as well as the launch of
                the IADB-sponsored book, Traffic Safety. We also actively particpated in the UN
                General Assembly road safety session as well as the First UN Global Road Safety
                Stakeholders Forum, held at the United Nations Headquarters in 2004. Since then,
                we have promoted dialogue and improved safety components in our road projects.
                         Challenges in road safety are not new. Several studies, such as the World
                Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention, published by the World Health
                Organization and the World Bank in 2004, show the urgency of doubling our efforts
                in this area. In 2000, Latin America and the Caribbean had the highest rate in the
                world for the number of casualties per 100,000 inhabitants (26 deaths/100,000
                inhabitants). If measures are not taken to reverse this situation, the projections
                indicate an even higher rate of casualties for this region in 2020 (31
                deaths/100,000 inhabitants).
                         Let's not forget that road safety is a legitimate topic for public policy.
                Therefore, we can and must make use of appropriate analytical and operational
                instruments and technologies to provide a quick response to today's prevalent
                problems.
                         Issues related to road safety can be grouped into four dimensions:
                         1. Assessment of needs.
                                                                    Champions for Road Safety       21




        2. Risk mitigation in existing roads and highways.
        3. Prevention by institutionalizing preventive measures in road networks,
           the introduction of appropriate road designs such as “intelligent road
           systems”, and market solutions such as insurance.
        4. Rapid response in addressing the emergency medical needs resulting
           from by road crashes.

          While we have made much progress in these four dimensions here at the
Bank, in most countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, there is still much
work to do to improve road safety in a sustainable way.
          As it is indicated in the Forum agenda, we must act quickly in order to
have a rapid, visible, short- and long-term impact in reducing the number of people
who die or suffer from road traffic injuries. And we must consider a series
of approaches that involve governments and citizens, as well as social
institutions, and the private sector (including insurance companies).           “I hope after you
          Today, in the region, the demand for investments in urban and         return…you will continue
rural transportation infrastructure is growing. At the Bank, we acknowl-
                                                                                interacting with the Bank
edge we have an important mission by providing support to countries in
relation to their investments in the transportation sector.                     to design and finance
          We are greatly pleased by the effort made here at the Forum to        projects that help Make
develop a shared data system on road traffic injuries and road safety           Roads Safe in our
information that will help assess the results of investments made in the
transportation sector related to the protection of human lives. I hope we       region…and turn our
continue working together to quickly turn our collective knowledge into         collective knowledge into
shared results. For this reason, we have at your disposal numerous ana-         shared results.”
lytical, technical and operational resources as well as financing facilities.
          We should not miss the opportunity provided by this Forum to               –President Luis Moreno,
forge consensus on priorities and plans for minimizing the number of                                   IADB
road traffic injuries and deaths. This constitutes the basis for national
road safety action plans to be adopted by each country and adapted to
each country's needs.
          I hope after you return to your countries you will continue interacting with
the Bank in order to design and finance projects that help Make Roads Safe in our
region. We are sure Latin American and Caribbean countries and the global com-
munity are ready to act together according to the World Report and its
recommendations to provide greater road safety to all people in the region, espe-
cially to those, who are most vulnerable.
          Once again, I like to thank President Óscar Arias for his leadership in road
safety advocacy. A great political vision is required to give this issue the impor-
tance it deserves.
22 Making Roads Safe in Latin America and the Caribbean




            Declaration of San José:
            We Must Stop the Epidemic of Deaths on Our Roads


            Background:
            We are running out of time.



           R           Road traffic injuries constitute a major but neglected public health problem that claims 1.2
                       million victims a year, equivalent to the disease burden of tuberculosis or malaria, with con-
                       siderable social and economic costs of up to 1.5% of GDP, or more than (US) $20 billion for
                       the region. The tremendous burden of death and disability resulting from road traffic crash-
            es falls primarily on low- and middle-income countries. In addition, the loss of the family breadwinner
            through death or disability often forces the families of these victims into poverty.

            Latin America and the Caribbean Region (LAC) had the highest average deaths per capita in the world
            for the year 2000 (26 deaths/100,000 people) and the highest projected rate for the year 2020 (31
            deaths/100,000 people), in the absence of any further action. This suggests that by 2020 the projected
            deaths per capita in LAC could be up to 6 times higher than the current rate in the countries with the
            best rates in the world (UK, Sweden, and The Netherlands).

            This is a very preventable problem. The World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention, a landmark pub-
            lication prepared jointly by the World Bank and the World Health Organization, provides a framework for
            addressing this problem and the basis for a common approach to a regional road safety policy.

            Road traffic injuries have been recognized as an extensive and serious global health problem by the
            United Nations (UN General Assembly Resolution 58/9) and by the World Health Assembly (WHA res-
            olutions 27.59 1974 and 57.10 2004). The member states of these organizations are already on
            record as having declared this a global epidemic whose solution requires coordinated international
            efforts.

            Important groundwork has already been prepared by previous regional efforts of the Pan American
            Health Organization (PAHO), the World Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).
            Standards for enhancing road and vehicle safety have been developed and implemented in the devel-
            oped countries; the World Health Organization's UN Collaboration is helping to develop best practice
            manuals; and a number of Latin American countries have developed national plans and programs for
            road safety. We have an opportunity to build upon these important works by developing regional road
            and vehicle safety standards and by implementing evidence-based interventions that have already
            been shown to be cost-effective for reducing the impact of road traffic crashes.

            Our response requires a coordinated and multi-sectoral approach, from all relevant parts of govern-
            ment (including transportation, health, law enforcement, education, finance, and urban planning), civil
            society (including advocacy organizations, academia, foundations, automobile clubs, and professional
            organizations), and the private sector (including road builders and road maintenance organizations,
            automobile manufacturers, motor vehicle product manufacturers, insurance companies, and commer-
            cial road users). Our interventions must also mobilize all the relevant sectors to cover all three phases
            of road traffic injury control: prevention of crashes and injuries in the first place; provision of prompt
                                                                                        Declaration of San José   23




and high-quality acute care to those injured in traffic crashes; and the provision of rehabilitation and
long-term care to those who have been injured in order to minimize disabilities.

Viewing this situation with great concern, we, the undersigned:

1.         Declare that it is both urgent and important that all the nations of the Latin American and
Caribbean region work together to stop the growing epidemic of deaths and injuries on our roads.
Road safety must become a health, transportation, law enforcement, education, and development pri-
ority for our nations and the region.

2.        Urge all nations of the region to implement the recommendations of the World Report and to
use this as the framework for addressing road safety nationally, regionally, and globally. Attention
must be paid to the principle risk factors identified in the World Report: lack of safe infrastructure,
non-use of seat-belts and child restraints, non-use of helmets, alcohol use, and excessive speed.

3.        Urge that resources be committed to road safety commensurate with the need and magni-
tude of the problem. Development banks should lead the way by requiring that at least 10% of their
investments for road infrastructure development be applied to road safety programs. The final results
should be audited by independent parties using objectively constructed road safety audits or road
assessment programs.

4.        Urge that resources be committed to the World Bank Global Road Safety Facility by the
industrialized nations so that the Facility can reach a total investment of at least (US) $300,000,000 by
2015 so that there will be funds available to the countries in the region of Latin America and the
Caribbean to develop road safety management capacity, catalyze increased investment, and accelerate
knowledge transfer.

5.        Commit to work together to develop a regional committee that will:
          a. Represent all relevant sectors of government, civil society, and the private sector,
          b. Promote a region-wide approach to road safety,
          c. Strengthen the capacity to collect and use road safety information throughout the region,
          d. Promote harmonization of laws for road and vehicle safety, and
          e. Share road safety information and best practices across the region.

6.         Commit to mobilize the active participation of regional ministers of transportation, health,
law enforcement, education, and others to set and achieve measurable targets for road safety and traf-
fic-injury prevention in the states of the region.




     Karla González                   Óscar Arias Sánchez                        Mark Rosenberg
 Minister of Public Works and    President of the Republic of Costa Rica           Executive Director,
  Transportation, Costa Rica                                                    Global Road Safety Forum
