                       87984




The State of
Social Safety Nets   2014
The State of Social Safety Nets 2014
                                                                                                                      iii




                                                                T A B L E                  O F          C O N T E N T S

Foreword                                                                                               v

Acknowledgments                                                                                      vii

Structure of the Report                                                                               ix

Abbreviations and Acronyms                                                                            xi

Executive Summary                                                                                    xiii

Section 1: Coverage                                                                                    1

    1.1      Basic Definitions                                                                          1

    1.2      Coverage Estimates                                                                        2

Section 2: Program Inventory                                                                           7

Section 3: Spending                                                                                   15

Section 4: Policy, Institutions, and Administration                                                  23

    4.1      Policies and Strategies                                                                 23

    4.2      Institutions                                                                            25

    4.3      Administration                                                                          26

Section 5: Results and Evidence                                                                       31

    5.1      Performance of Social Safety Net Programs                                                31

    5.2      Evidence from Impact Evaluations                                                        33

Annexes

    Annex 1:       Countries Included in the Report                                                   37

    Annex 2:       Program Inventory                                                                  41

    Annex 3:       Spending                                                                          55

    Annex 4:       Policies, Institutions, and Administration                                         61

    Annex 5:       ASPIRE Performance Indicators Based on Household Surveys                          83

    Annex 6:       References                                                                        89

Endnotes                                                                                             103

Boxes

    Box 1.         Types of Social Safety Net Programs                                                 3

    Box 2.         Top Five Safety Net Programs, by Scale (Millions of Individuals)                   12

    Box 3.         Top Five Social Safety Net Programs, by Share of Population Covered
                   (Percentage)                                                                       12

    Box 4.         Spending on Fuel Subsidies Is Often Higher Than on Social Safety Nets              19

    Box 5.         Institutions, Coordination, and Scalable Social Safety Nets: Lessons
                   from Ethiopia and Mexico                                                          26

    Box 6.         Social Registries as a Backbone for Program Integration: The Cadastro in Brazil   27
iv   TABLE OF CONTENTS

                             Box 7.       The Management Information System in Colombia, RUAF                            29

                             Box 8.       Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity Indicators
                                          Based on Household Surveys                                                     32

                         Figures

                             Figure 1:    Social Safety Nets Are a Component of Social Protection Systems                 1

                             Figure 2:    Most People Living in Extreme Poverty Are Not Covered by Social Safety Nets,
                                          Especially in Lower-Middle-Income Countries (Millions)                          2

                             Figure 3:    Flagship Social Safety Net Programs Often Do Not Meet the Scale
                                          of the Poverty Challenge                                                       4

                             Figure 4:    Percent of Poorest Quintile Covered by Social Safety Nets, by Income and Region 5

                             Figure 5:    Social Safety Nets Have Been on a Steady Rise                                   7

                             Figure 6:    School Feeding Programs Are the Most Prevalent Type of Transfer                 8

                             Figure 7:    Almost Half of the Countries Have Four or Five Program Types                    8

                             Figure 8:    Number of Countries with at Least One Given Program Type, by Region            10

                             Figure 9:    Percentage of Countries with a Cash or In-Kind Program, by Income Group        11

                             Figure 10:   Percentage of Population Covered by Largest National Program, by Type          13

                             Figure 11:   Spending on Social Safety Net in More than Half of the Countries
                                          Is Below the Global Average                                                    16

                             Figure 12:   External Financing Represents the Main Source of Safety Nets
                                          Funding in Some Countries                                                      17

                             Figure 13:   On Average Regions Spend More on Social Safety Net than on Fuel Subsidies      18

                             Figure 14:   Variations in Social Safety Nets Spending Are Higher in Lower-Income Countries 19

                             Figure 15:   Social Safety Net Spending Is Not Always Commensurate with
                                          Country Level of Income                                                        20

                             Figure 16.   Safety Net Spending Has Been Growing over the Last Decade
                                          in Eastern Europe, Central Asia, and Latin America                             21

                             Figure 17:   Status in Social Protection Policies/Strategies as of 2013 (Percentage)        23

                             Figure 18:   Number of Countries with Available Policy/Strategy (Cumulative), 2004–2013     24

                             Figure 19:   The Average Size of Transfers Does Not Fill the Poverty Gap                    31

                         Tables

                             Table 1:     Number of Countries with at Least One Given Program Type, by Region             9

                             Table 2:     Number of Countries with at Least One Given Program Type, by Income Group       9

                             Table 3:     Remittances Inflows Are Higher Than Social Safety Nets Spending
                                          in Low-Income Countries                                                        17

                             Table 4:     Social Protection Policy/Strategy Status as of 2013 (Number of Countries)      24

                             Table 5:     Selected Examples of Social Registries, Latest Available Data                  28

                             Table 6:     Examples of Recent Impact Evaluations of Social Safety Net Programs,
                                          by Channels of Impact                                                          34
                                                                                                                     v




                                                                                                       F O R E W O R D

Over the last decade, developing and emerging countries have been rapidly building, improving
and enhancing their social safety net programs and integrating them into broader social protection
systems. Long prominent in mostly high-income and middle-income countries, social safety nets
have gained relevance in lower income countries as well, boosted by south-south cooperation and
learning and a strong foundation of rigorous and reliable evidence that shows their efficacy in a wide
variety of contexts.

For the World Bank Group, helping countries build and strengthen their social safety nets and social
protection systems is a central part of our core strategy to help end extreme poverty and to promote
shared prosperity. Accordingly, the World Bank’s 2012 Social Protection and Labor Strategy committed
to helping countries build social protection systems, especially where the needs were the greatest.
Globally, there is also a broad emphasis on the importance of social safety nets for development goals,
as, for instance, reflected in the move to enshrine them in the post-2015 global development agenda.

So what are social safety nets? They are programs comprising of non-contributory transfers in cash
or in-kind, designed to provide regular and predictable support to poor and vulnerable people. Social
safety nets, which are also known as “social assistance” or “social transfers,” are part of broader social
protection systems that also include measures such as contributory insurance and various labor
market policies. Social safety nets play a number of important roles. For example, they help alleviate
poverty, food insecurity, and malnutrition; they contribute to reducing inequality and boosting shared
prosperity; they support households in managing risks and cope with shocks; they help build human
capital and connect people to job opportunities; and they are an important factor in shaping social
contracts between states and citizens.

This publication begins a series that will monitor and report on social safety nets in developing
countries. This first report in the series provides key social safety nets statistics and explains trends
using information from 146 countries, including detailed household survey data from 69 countries in
the World Bank’s Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity (ASPIRE) database.
This report reviews important policy and practical developments in social safety net programs and
highlights emerging innovations. While the primary focus is on developing and emerging countries,
it also includes some references to high-income settings. This report is designed for policymakers,
analysts, and practitioners interested in both social safety nets in particular and social protection
more widely.

This series will give context and provide details to complement what is already available. For example,
the International Labor Organization (ILO) produces an annual publication on extending social security
in the world. Other organizations have published reports on specific social safety net interventions.
For example, over the past five years the World Bank has published comprehensive publications on
conditional cash transfers and public works, while the World Food Programme (WFP) recently launched
a report on the state of school feeding worldwide. Furthermore, initiatives are underway to develop
common inter-agency frameworks and protocols for assessing social protection systems, including
the generation of relevant program and system-level data and information.

What is still lacking is the global picture. How many people do social safety net programs reach in
the developing world? How well are extreme poor people and countries covered? What are the main
programs available? What types of programs are more prevalent in a given context? The first edition
of The State of Social Safety Nets series will review the current state of social safety nets and to what
extent countries are using them to alleviate poverty and build shared prosperity.
vi   FOREWORD

                In line with the spirit of the initiative, future issues of State of Social Safety Nets will monitor and
                update data and trends, providing ongoing snapshots of the latest available information.

                Even as you read this report, there are likely to be exciting new developments as different countries
                roll out, expand, and refine their social safety nets and integrate them into social protection systems.
                At the same time, new and updated data—both from surveys and from administrative data—are
                becoming increasingly available for new variables, new time periods, and even new countries. Future
                installments of the series will thus seek to stay current with the latest innovations, carefully tracking and
                reporting on developments around the world as they relate to the ever-expanding, and ever-changing
                landscape of social safety nets.



                Arup Banerji
                Director, Social Protection and Labor
                The World Bank
                                                                                                            vii




                                                                    A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S

This report was prepared by a team of authors comprising Ugo Gentilini, Maddalena Honorati, and
Ruslan Yemtsov. The authors are with the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice of the World
Bank and worked under the guidance of Arup Banerji (Director of the Social Protection and Labor
Global Practice) and Anush Bezhanyan (Practice Manager). Excellent research assistance was provided
by Ana Veronica Lopez, Dahye Seo, Marina Novikova and Gabriela Cunha. Precious comments were
received from Jehan Arulpragasam, Margaret Grosh, and Cem Mete. Insightful feedback and advice
were provided by Hideki Mori, Robert Palacios, Phillippe Leite, Lucian Pop, Ihsan Ajwad, Tomas
Damerau, Abla Safir, and Frieda Vandeninden. The team is grateful to the extended cross-regional Atlas
of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity team for contributing to the development of the
Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity global database. Special thanks to Colin
Andrews, Mirey Ovadyia, Claudia Rodriguez-Alas and Eric Zapatero for their inputs and suggestions.
Raiden Dillard was key for the report’s design and layout. The editorial work was graciously offered by
Aliza Marcus and the final formatting was conducted by Ngoc-Dung Thi Tran. For further information,
please contact socialprotection@worldbank.org.
                                                                                                                     ix




                                    S T R U C T U R E                             O F          T H E       R E P O R T

The report is broken down into five sections:

•   Section One sets out preliminary estimates on the coverage of social safety nets—namely, how
    many people are reached by those programs, and where.
•   Section Two examines a range of program characteristics, such as the type of programs available
    and the scale of the major initiatives.
•   Section Three presents levels and patterns in social safety nets spending.

•   Section Four discusses findings from a stock-taking of key policy, institutional, and administrative
    developments.
•   Section Five offers an overview of evidence from selected performance indicators and recent
    impact evaluations.

A set of six annexes on inventories, data, statistics, “newsfeeds” and resources complement and
complete the report.




                        Structure of the                                 
                        report 
                                          Section 1. Coverage




                                                              
                                          Section 2. Inventory




                                          Section 3. Spending




                                   Section 4. Policies, Institution, and
                                             Administration




                                    Section 5. Results and Evidence
                                                                           
                                                                                           xi




         A B B R E V I A T I O N S                                   A N D   A C R O N Y M S

AFR      Africa region (Sub-Saharan)
ASPIRE   Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity
CCT      Conditional Cash Transfer
CIT      Conditional In-Kind Transfer
EAP      East Asia and Pacific region
ECA      Eastern Europe and Central Asia region
HIC      High-Income Country
ILO      International Labour Organization
LAC      Latin America and the Caribbean region
LIC      Low-Income Country
LMIC     Lower-Middle-Income Country
MENA     Middle East and North Africa region
MIC      Middle-Income Country
PPP      Purchasing Power Parity
PSNP     Productive Safety Net Program
SA       South Asia region
UCT      Unconditional Cash Transfer
UIT      Unconditional In-Kind Transfer
UMIC     Upper-Middle-Income Country
WFP      World Food Programme
                                                                                                                        xiii




                                                               E X E C U T I V E                             S U M M A R Y

What Are Social Safety Nets?
Social safety nets are non-contributory transfers designed to provide regular and predictable support
to targeted poor and vulnerable people. These are also referred to as “social assistance” or “social
transfers.” Social safety nets are part of broader social protection systems that may also include
measures such as contributory insurance and various labor market policies. The report considered five
types of social safety net programs, including conditional cash transfers, unconditional cash transfers,
conditional in-kind transfers, unconditional in-kind transfers, and public works. General subsidies
were not included in the review, while targeted and traceable waivers and subsidies were considered.

The global scale of social safety nets can potentially cover almost all of the world’s extreme poor.
Over 1 billion people in developing countries (or a fifth of the population) participate in at least
one social safety net program. The estimate is based on a review of 475 programs in 146 countries.
Therefore, the global scale of social safety nets is close to the number of people (1.2 billion) living on
less than $1.25 per day.

But the glass is only 1/3 full—most of the extreme poor are not covered by social safety nets. Only
345 million are covered by social safety nets, according to the most recent World Bank estimates. About
870 million people in extreme poverty remain uncovered. There are two primary reasons or this. First,
there are still many countries (both low-income and middle-income) that do not have scaled-up social
safety net programs. Second, many social safety nets may not specifically target the income-poor, but
instead have objectives such as improving nutrition, protecting orphans, or providing old age security.

One-third of social safety net beneficiaries live in countries where only 12 percent of the extreme
poor live. Some 352 million people of those receiving social safety net transfers are in upper-
middle-income countries (UMICs). These countries host only one in eight of the extreme poor worldwide.

The poorest countries are worse-off in terms of covering the extreme poor. About 479 million
extremely poor people in lower-middle-income countries (LMICs) lack social safety net support. In
low-income countries (LICs), where 47 percent of the population is extremely poor, social safety nets
cover less than 10 percent of the population (or only about one every five extremely poor people). To
cover all the extremely poor, social safety nets need to expand and include an additional 300 million
extremely poor people, hence at least doubling in size for these countries.

Yet there has been an exponential growth in social safety nets, especially cash-based programs. The
expansion of cash transfers is particularly evident in Sub-Saharan Africa. For example, back in 2010,
21 countries in the continent (or about half) had some form of unconditional cash transfer in place;
by 2013, the number had almost doubled and social safety nets are now implemented in 37 African
countries. Globally, the number of countries with conditional cash transfers increased from 27 in 2008 to
52 in 2013, while countries with public works expanded from 62 in 2011 to 85 countries in just two years.

Now every country has at least one social safety net program in place. For instance, school feed-
ing programs are present in 130 countries and are the most widespread type of social safety net.
Unconditional cash transfers are also common and now are implemented in 118 countries globally.

The five largest programs in the world account for almost half of global coverage. India’s National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, India’s School Feeding Program, China’s Di Bao, Brazil’s Bolsa
Familia and Programa de Alimentacao Escolar have a combined reach of over 486 million people.
The coverage of individual flagship programs shows significant variation, ranging from covering less
xiv   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                          than 1 percent of the population in some countries to over 30 percent in Brazil, Ecuador, Sri Lanka,
                          Mongolia, and St Lucia.

                          Most countries have flagship programs that are targeted to help the poor. An average developing
                          country covers an estimated 12 percent of its population with the largest social safety net flagship
                          interventions. Some 57 countries have social safety net coverage commensurate with the scale of
                          poverty as defined by countries themselves (i.e., measured by national poverty lines). For example in
                          Guatemala, 54 percent of population is below the national poverty line, and programs cover 49 percent
                          of the overall population. In such cases, the main policy challenge is to ensure that programs—though
                          large enough—also include sufficient numbers of poor people. But in 50 other countries, program
                          coverage is below the scale of the poverty challenge. For example, in Madagascar, 75 percent of the
                          population is deemed poor, but only 1 percent is currently covered; in Burundi, 67 percent are below
                          the national poverty line, and only 5 percent are reached by social safety nets.

                          Aggregate spending of social safety nets rises as countries get richer, but still averages just 1.6 per-
                          cent of GDP. The combined spending on social safety nets (excluding general price subsidies and
                          including external financing) in 107 developing and emerging countries amounts to $337 billion.
                          This is twice the amount needed to provide every person living in extreme poverty with an income
                          of $1.25 a day. Richer countries spend more—1.9 percent of GDP on average—than lower income
                          countries, who spend around 1.1 percent of GDP. Considerable cross country variation exists, mainly
                          due to factors such a the relative size of internal versus external finance, the scale of programs, or
                          the relative generosity of the benefits.

                          A quarter of spending on social safety nets is for the poorest 20 percent of households, but generally
                          it is insufficient to lift them out of poverty. The relatively low power of social safety net transfers
                          in many countries, even when targeted to the neediest, is because of the modest size of transfers
                          provided by social safety nets. On average, these transfers are just 23 percent of the poor household’s
                          already low income or consumption.

                          Remittances do not close the gap. The overall amount spent on social safety nets is less than the
                          volume of remittance inflows to the same group of countries (around $370 billion in 2012, out of which
                          only $28 billion flow to low-income countries). In upper-middle-income countries and high income
                          countries, the share of households receiving remittances is higher in poorest quintiles. The pattern
                          is reversed in low-income countries, where most of the recipients of remittances are in the richest
                          quintile. Globally, less than 15 percent of the remittances reach the extreme poor.

                          Many countries spend more on energy subsidies than on social safety nets. Energy subsidies, present
                          in many countries, account for a substantial portion of their government spending. General price
                          subsidies often represent the main form of social safety nets as in several countries in the Middle
                          East and North Africa, which spend significantly more on fuel subsidies (i.e., over 4 percent of GDP
                          on average) than on social safety nets programs (around 1 percent of GDP). Energy subsidies do
                          benefit the entire population through reduced prices of energy for heating, transport, and lighting
                          and through lower prices of energy-intense goods and services. But they mostly have an impact on
                          the upper income groups in the population, who are more likely to be consuming electricity and fuels
                          in larger quantities.

                          External financing represents the main sources of social safety net funding in some lower income
                          countries. Among a sample of 25 African countries, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Burkina Faso are the
                          most dependent on external finance for social safety nets. Donor financing in these three countries is
                          approximately 94, 85, and 62 percent of total spending respectively. In Ethiopia, the flagship Productive
                          Safety Net Program (PSNP) is almost entirely externally-financed. However, many low-income coun-
                          tries are increasingly putting these programs “on-budget,” and social safety net spending in most
                          middle-income countries are largely from domestic resources.
                                                                                                           EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   xv

Countries are moving from ad-hoc social safety net interventions to more integrated and efficient
social protection systems. The biggest shift in the nature of social safety net programs over the last
half-decade is towards building better-integrated social protection systems that weave together the
often disparate and fragmented social safety net programs, as well as those relating to social insurance
and labor markets. As of 2013, a total of 67 countries have a social protection policy or strategy in
place that outlines such systemic approaches, up from just 19 in 2009. At the same time, 10 countries
have now introduced institutional bodies (such as dedicated steering committees and agencies) to
coordinate social protection programs across sectors and ministries.

Administrative innovations like unified registries are reducing program fragmentation. A key step
in establishing common administrative systems includes the use of “social registries” containing infor-
mation on potential social safety net beneficiaries. These are databases that can be used by multiple
programs and institutions, thus helping reduce program fragmentation and avoiding duplication of
efforts. For example, in Brazil, the Cadastro social registry includes data on about 27.3 million people
and connects 10 programs. At least 23 developing countries now have a social registry at various
degree of development, while 10 countries are planning to establish one.

Robust evidence continues to mount on the impacts of social safety nets, although more research
is needed. Over the past three years, a total of 53 new impact evaluations on social safety nets have
been completed, many of which in Africa. These are cementing the robust evidence base of social
safety nets on a vast range of dimensions, such as poverty, inequality, food security and nutrition,
human capital, local economic multipliers, investments in productive activities, risk resilience, social
cohesion, and others. Yet more research might be needed on the performance of alternative design
and implementation options, on linking social safety nets to the ‘graduation’ agenda, and on adapting
social safety nets to different contexts, particularly urban areas and fragile states.
                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                   S E C T I O N


Coverage                                                                                                                1
1.1 Basic Definitions

S
        ocial safety nets are non-contributory transfers designed to provide regular and predictable
        support to targeted poor and vulnerable people. These are also referred to as “social assistance”
        or “social transfers.” Social safety nets are a component of wider social protection systems. In
general, social protection also includes contributory social insurance as well as active and passive
labor market programs. It may also comprise a set of policies and programs that facilitate people’s
access to social services in the context of education, health, nutrition, housing, and other sectors.
Figure 1 positions social safety nets within this space and provides examples of programs that may
or may not fall under the remit of social safety nets. Some of the types of social safety net programs
illustrated in the figure are further described in the next section.

Social safety nets programs have been examined according to three broad principles. First, the general
focus is on social safety net transfers, as opposed to the broader set of measures that may form the
social safety net universe. As such, the paper only examines universal or targeted non-contributory
transfers, as well as targeted and traceable waivers and subsidies. In other words, general untargeted
price subsidies were not considered.1 Second, the report included both key “modalities” in social safety
nets, namely cash and in-kind transfers. Although vouchers or near-cash transfers have a number of
commonalities with cash and in-kind modalities, vouchers were considered as part of a broader set
of in-kind transfers (and so were targeted subsidies).2 Finally, in line with the empirical literature, the
publication examined country portfolios according to three “classes” of interventions: conditional
transfers, unconditional transfers,3 and public works.4 Box 1 defines the resulting five types of social
safety net programs considered in the analysis.

Based on such approach, the report identified 475 programs in 146 developing countries (out of
the 155 countries surveyed).5 This forms the basis for the analysis in this section and Section 2 on
“program inventory.” For each program, Annex 2 reports the number of beneficiaries and the program

FIGURE 1 Social Safety Nets Are a Component of Social Protection Systems

                                                                                         Social protection
 Outside social
   protection
e.g., microcredit                                                                                             Social pensions, public works
                                             Social insurance and labor
                                                    market policy
                                       Contributory schemes (pensions, work
                                                                                                           Social safety nets
                                       incidence protection etc.), labor market
                                                                                                         (or social assistance)
                                                                                               Non-contributory transfers, fee waivers, etc.
                                                   Social services
                                                      Access to
                                   social services for education, health, nutrition

        Health insurance                                                                                                                  Unconditional transfers

                                             Outside social protection
                                              e.g., teacher training
                                                                                      Conditional cash transfers, school feeding

Source: Adapted from Gentilini and Omamo (2011)
2   CO
    COVERAGE
      VERA
      VE
    COVERAGE
        RAGE

               specific source of information. The analysis chiefly draws from Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of
               Resilience and Equity and is further complemented by databases from other international agencies,
               regional reviews, country assessments, and published materials.



               1.2 Coverage Estimates
               More than 1 billion beneficiaries are currently covered by social safety nets. This is a conservative
               estimate since the report only includes the largest program in each type described in Box 1.6 Figure 2
               represents coverage statistics for the world from the inventory of social safety net programs with a
               breakdown by income country groupings (see Annex 1 for definitions). It also compares the scale of
               social safety nets to the number of the extreme poor in the world (those living on less than $1.25 per
               day in purchasing power parity (PPP) in 2005 prices).

               The global scale of social safety nets can potentially cover almost all of the world’s extreme poor.
               The coverage of 1 billion people (or 1019 million) represents about one-fifth of the developing countries’
               population. This number is close to the 1.2 billion people estimated to be living on less than $1.25 per
               day in 2010.7 In other words, the inventory of social safety nets shows that, globally, programs have
               a potential to reach the vast majority of the extremely poor.

               The glass is still only 1/3 full; most of the extreme poor are in fact not covered by social safety
               nets. The main objective of social safety nets is to provide the poor and vulnerable with support.
               Even though globally social safety nets are at the scale to cover most among 1.2 billion extreme poor,
               only 345 million extremely poor people are in fact covered by social safety nets (Figure 2).8 About
               870 million people in extreme poverty remain uncovered.

               There are two primary reasons for this. First, there are still many countries (both low-income and
               middle-income) that do not have scaled-up social safety net programs. Second, many social safety
               nets may not specifically target the income-poor, but instead have other important objectives such
               as improving nutrition, protecting orphans, or providing old age security.

               Many social safety net beneficiaries live in countries hosting only a fraction of the extreme poor.
               In fact, every third beneficiary receiving social safety net transfers lives in upper-middle-income


               FIGURE 2 Most People Living in Extreme Poverty Are Not Covered by Social Safety
               Nets, Especially in Lower-Middle-Income Countries (Millions)
                                                                         345
                                                                         million
                        1 Billion                                        extreme
                        people                   674                     poor
                        covered                                          people
                        by social                                        covered
                        safety                                           by social
                        nets                                             safety
                                                 345                     nets

                        1.2 Billion                                                      315
                        extreme
                        poor                                                             173
                        people                   870               79
                                                                   99
                                                                                                                        278
                                                                                          479
                                                                   299                                                  74
                                                                                                                        93

                                            Developing       Low-Income Lower-Middle-Income                 Upper-Middle-Income
                                              World           Countries      Countries                           Countries

               Source: Poverty data are from the World Bank POVCALNET, program number of beneficiaries from Atlas of Social Protection:
               Indicators of Resilience and Equity and different data sources (Annex 2), Population is from World Bank Development Indicators 2014.
                                                                                                           COVERAGE   3



   BOX 1. Types of Social Safety Net Programs
   By combining different “modalities” and “classes” of transfers, a family of five types of social
   safety nets programs is generated, including conditional cash transfers, unconditional cash
   transfers, conditional in-kind transfers, unconditional in-kind transfers, and public works.


            Cash        Unconditional Cash Transfers         Conditional Cash Transfers
                                                                                            Public Works
            In-Kind    Unconditional In-Kind Transfers      Conditional In-Kind transfers

                                 Unconditional                        Conditional           Public Works


   Conditional cash transfers (CCTs) provide cash to participants upon their fulfillment of a set of
   conditions or co-responsibilities. Examples include programs that combine one or more conditions
   such as ensuring a minimum level of school attendance by children, undertaking regular visits
   to health facilities, or attending skills training programs; conditional cash transfers also include
   school stipend programs. For example, Mexico’s Oportunidades program falls under this category.
   Unconditional cash transfers (UCTs) include the provision of cash without particular
   co-responsibilities. Examples embrace various cash transfer programs targeted to particular
   categories of people, such as the elderly (also known as “social pensions”) or orphan children.
   The Hunger Safety Net Program in Kenya represents an example of such social safety net type.
   Conditional in-kind transfers (CITs) involve, similarly to conditional cash transfers, forms
   of compliance such as ensuring a certain level of monthly school attendance. In this case,
   however, the form of transfer is in-kind. Typical examples of conditional in-kind transfers are
   school feeding programs that provide on-site meals to children in schools. Sometimes, these
   programs also envision “take-home” food rations for children’s families. An example includes
   Brazil’s Programa Nacional de Alimentacao Escola.
   Unconditional in-kind transfers (UITs) envision the distribution of food, vouchers, or other
   in-kind transfers without any form of conditionality or co-responsibility. Examples may include
   the provision of fortified food supplements for malnourished pregnant women and children. The
   Public Food Distribution System in Bangladesh is an example of unconditional in-kind transfers.
   Public works programs (PWs) engage participants in manual, labor-oriented activities
   such as building or rehabilitating community assets and public infrastructure. Examples
   include seasonal labor-intensive works for poor and food insecure populations. Public works
   implemented under the Productive Safety Net Program in Ethiopia illustrate such type.

   Source: Adapted from World Bank (2012b) and Grosh et al. (2008).




countries, which host hardly more than 10 percent of the extreme poor globally. At the same time, the
poorest countries are worst-off in terms of covering the extreme poor. About 479 million extremely
poor people in lower-middle-income countries lack social safety net support. In low-income countries,
where 47 percent of the population is extremely poor, social safety nets cover less than 10 percent
of the population (or only one of every four extreme poor persons). To cover them, social safety nets
need to expand and include additional 299 million extreme poor people, hence at least doubling in
size for these countries.

Most countries have flagship programs that are targeted to help the poor. An average developing
country covers an estimated 12 percent of its population with the largest flagship interventions.
Some 57 countries have social safety net coverage commensurate with the scale of poverty in the
country (as measured by national poverty lines). Figure 3 shows combined coverage by the largest
social safety net programs in countries versus national poverty headcounts. The shaded area on the
graph represents countries where social safety nets are at scale comparable to national poverty rates.
4                                                     COVERAGE

                                                                         For example in Guatemala, 54 percent of population is below national poverty line, and programs
                                                                         cover 49 percent of the overall population. In such cases, the main policy challenge is to ensure that
                                                                         programs—although they may be very large already—also include sufficient numbers of poor people.

                                                                         In some countries, combined social safety net coverage exceeds the number of the poor; for example, in
                                                                         the Dominican Republic, 60 percent of population is covered by social safety nets, versus a poverty rate
                                                                         of about 40 percent (area on Figure 3, above the shaded region). In such cases, issues of coordination
                                                                         among social safety nets are at the forefront for achieving effective protection of the poor.

                                                                         In 50 other countries, program coverage is below the scale of the poverty challenge (Figure 3, the
                                                                         area below the shaded part). For example, in Madagascar, 75 percent of the population is deemed
                                                                         poor, but only 1 percent is currently covered; in Burundi, 67 percent are below the national poverty
                                                                         line, and only 5 percent are covered. These are countries where scaling up of existing social safety
                                                                         net programs or launching new flagship programs is the main policy challenge.

                                                                         Similar findings emerge by examining survey data from 69 countries included in Atlas of Social
                                                                         Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity. Countries with the highest coverage of the poorest
                                                                         20 percent of the population are Chile, Ecuador, Mongolia, Peru, Thailand, and Uruguay, where over
                                                                         80 percent of the poor (or the bottom quintile) are covered by social safety net transfers. Some large
                                                                         developing countries achieve high coverage too: for example, Indonesia covers 65 percent of the poor,
                                                                         Mexico 55 percent, and Brazil 53 percent.



FIGURE 3 Flagship Social Safety Net Programs Often Do Not Meet the Scale of the Poverty Challenge
                                                  0
                                                 70
                                                                                      . Lucia
                                                                                    St.Lucia
                                                                                    St.
                                                                                                                          minican Rep.
                                                                                                                        Dom
                                                                                                                        Dominican  e
                                                  0
                                                 60
                                                                                                   c
                                                                                                  Ecuador
                                                                                   Brazil
Percent population covered by flagship SSNs, %




                                                  0
                                                 50



                                                  0
                                                 40

                                                                                                                                                         Swaziland

                                                  0
                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                                         Haiti

                                                          Uruguay
                                                  0
                                                 20



                                                  0
                                                 10


                                                                                                                                                          Burundi
                                                  0                                                                                                                  Madagasca
                                                                                                                                                                     Madagascar
                                                      0             10        20                   30              40               50              60          70               80

                                                                                                Percent population below national poverty line, %

Source: Poverty data are from POVCALNET, program number of beneficiaries from Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity and different data sources
(Annex 2), Population is from World Bank Development Indicators 2014.
                                                                                                                                                                                   COVERAGE                  5

Coverage is low in the poorest countries where the needs are greatest. Overall, across all low-income
countries, less than 30 percent of the poor are covered (Figure 4). The region with highest coverage
rate is Latin America and Caribbean (53 percent), followed by Europe and Central Asia (50 percent).
In Africa and South Asia, social safety nets cover only a quarter of the poorest quintile.

Large gaps in coverage by social safety nets in poorest countries are not compensated by private
or informal forms of solidarity and assistance. Data from Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of
Resilience and Equity includes the percentage of households (in different income quintiles) receiving
private transfers or remittances.9 In upper middle income and high income countries, households in
the poorest quintiles receive on average higher remittances compared to the richest quintile. The
pattern is reversed in lower income countries, where the poor are not well covered by social safety
nets and most of the remittances recipients are in the richest quintile. Globally, less than 15 percent
of the remittances reach the extreme poor.


FIGURE 4 Percent of Poorest Quintile Covered by Social Safety Nets, by Income and Region
                              60                                                                                            60
Percent of Poorest Quintile




                                                                                              Percent of Poorest Quintile
                              50                                                                                            50

                              40                                                                                            40

                              30                                                                                            30

                              20                                                                                            20

                              10                                                                                            10

                               0                                                                                             0
                                   Lower-Income Lower-Middle- Upper-Middle-     High-Income                                      Africa   South   Middle East    East Asia      Eastern      Latin America
                                     Country    Income Country Income Country     Country                                                  Asia   and North     and Pacific   Europe and        and the
                                                                                                                                                     Africa                   Central Asia    Caribbean


Note: Data from Iraq 2006 survey are excluded from calculations of regional and income group averages.
Source: Authors calculations based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity indicators based on household surveys (Annex 5).
                                                                                                                                                                      7




                                                                                                                 S E C T I O N


Program Inventory
                                                                                                                                 2
T
      his section presents more detailed findings on the nature of the                                                       Unconditional cash transfers (Africa)
      social safety net programs included in the inventory. Programs
                                                                                                                 40                                           37
      are generally described using the taxonomy previously presented
in Box 1 and draws from the same inventory of 465 programs presented                                             35
in Annex 2.                                                                                                      30




                                                                                           Number of countries
There has been an exponential growth in social safety nets, especially                                           25
                                                                                                                                 21
cash-based programs. The expansion of cash transfers is particularly                                             20
evident in Sub-Saharan Africa. For example, in 2010, 21 countries in
                                                                                                                 15
the continent (or about half) had some form of unconditional cash
transfers in place; by 2013, the number had almost doubled and social                                            10
safety nets are now implemented in 37 African countries. Globally, the                                            5
number of countries with conditional cash transfers increased from 27
                                                                                                                  0
in 2008 to 52 in 2013, while countries with public works expanded from
                                                                                                                        2010 (Garcia & Moore)                 2013
62 in 2011 to 84 countries in just two years (Figure 5).
                                                                                                                            Conditional cash transfers in the world
Now every country has at least one social safety net program in place.
                                                                                                                 60
School feeding programs are the most prevalent type of program and                                                                                         52
                                                                                          Number of countries




are present in 130 countries. Unconditional cash transfer programs are                                           50
in place in at least 119 countries. In more than one third of the cases,
                                                                                                                 40
or 42 countries, the cash transfers are in the form of social pensions.
Conversely, conditional cash transfers are present in less than one-third                                        30             27
(52 countries) of the sample (Figure 6).
                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                 10

                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                      2008 (Fiszbein & Schady)            2013

                                                                                                                                  Public works in the world

                                                                                                                 90                                        84
                                                                                                                 80
                                                                                                                 70
                                                                                           Number of countries




                                                                                                                                62
                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                 30
FIGURE 5         Social Safety Nets Have Been on a Steady Rise                                                   20
Source: authors’ calculations for 2013 based on data in Annex 2. For unconditional cash                          10
transfers in 2010 see Garcia and Moore (2011), while 2008 data for conditional cash
transfers are from Fiszbein and Schady (2009). For public works up to 2011, the number                            0
refers to countries as reported in Subbarao et al. (2013).                                                             2011 (Subbarao et al.)             2013
8   PROGRAM INVENTORY

                        FIGURE 6 School Feeding Programs Are the Most Prevalent Type of Transfer
                                                   140              130
                                                                                                                              119
                                                   120


                                                   100
                                                                                                           89




                             Number of countries
                                                                                                                                                   85

                                                    80


                                                    60                                 52


                                                    40


                                                    20


                                                        0
                                                               Conditional     Conditional cash       Unconditional      Unconditional        Public works
                                                            inkind transfers      transfers         inkind transfers     cash transfers

                         Source: Authors’ calculations based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity and other sources (Annex 2).




                        Almost half of the countries show significant diversity in program portfolios. In particular, 73 countries
                        display all five or four programs types; 56 countries have three or two types, and 26 countries have
                        only one or none of the types (Figure 7). The large majority of countries in Africa (34 countries) and
                        Latin America (20 countries) show high program diversity (including four or five types of social safety
                        nets), while in other regions programs tend to be more evenly distributed across types.



                        FIGURE 7 Almost Half of the Countries Have Four or Five Program Types
                                                   60
                                                                                51
                                                   50
                        Number of countries




                                                   40
                                                                                                  33

                                                   30
                                                               22                                                  23

                                                   20                                                                               17

                                                                                                                                                        9
                                                   10


                                                    0
                                                        Countries with all Countries with 4 Countries with 3 Countries with 2 Countries with 1 Countries with no
                                                        5 program types program types program types program types program types program types

                        Source: Authors’ calculations based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity and other sources (Annex 2).
                                                                                                                                       PROGRAM INVENTORY                    9

TABLE 1: Number of Countries with at Least One Given Program Type, by Region

                                                                                       Region
                                                                           Eastern          Latin America       Middle East
                                                          East Asia      Europe and            and the              and               South      Total of Countries with At
            Program Type                    Africa       and Pacific     Central Asia         Caribbean         North Africa           Asia      Least One Program Type
 Conditional In-Kind Transfers                45              12              22                  29                  15                7                  130
 Conditional Cash Transfers                    13              6                6                  19                  3                5                   52
 Unconditional In-Kind Transfers              39               8                11                22                   5                4                   89
 Unconditional Cash Transfers                  37              11             28                  25                  12                6                  119
 Public Works                                 39               9               12                  14                  6                5                   85
 Total Number of Countries in                 48             20               30                  30                  19                8
 Respective Region

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity and other sources (Annex 2).




TABLE 2: Number of Countries with at Least One Given Program Type, by Income Group

                                                                                                        Region
                                                                                          Lower-Middle-        Upper-Middle-                           Total of Countries
                                                                       Low-Income            Income               Income              High-Income      with At Least One
                          Program Type                                  Countries           Countries            Countries             Countries         Program Type
 Conditional In-Kind Transfers                                               34                 39                    48                    9                 130
 Conditional Cash Transfers                                                  10                  18                    21                   3                    52
 Unconditional In-Kind Transfers                                              31                 31                   26                     1                   89
 Unconditional Cash Transfers                                                26                 37                    46                    10                   119
 Public Works                                                                 31                32                    20                    2                    85
 Total Number of Countries in Respective Income Group                        35                 48                    59                    13

Source: Authors calculations based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity and other sources (Annex 2).




The presence of program types varies by regions. The report examined the number of countries in
each region with at least one program of a given type (Table 1). Almost all countries in Eastern Europe
and Central Asia—28 out of 30—have an unconditional cash transfer program. Public works and
unconditional in-kind transfers are most prevalent in Africa, where 39 countries have such programs.
Conditional cash transfers are still a “trademark” of the Latin America region, where 19 countries
have one, compared with Middle East and North Africa, where only 3 countries have such a transfer
program (Figure 8 on page 10).

The availability of program types differs by countries’ income levels. Among the countries that
have an unconditional cash transfer (Table 2), most are upper-middle-income countries (46); both
conditional and unconditional in-kind transfers are equally distributed among low-income countries,
lower-middle-income countries, and upper-middle-income countries. The vast majority of condi-
tional cash transfers are in middle-income countries (39 countries), while low-income countries and
lower-middle-income countries combined house 63 countries with public works programs.

The percentage of countries with in-kind programs tends to decline with higher levels of income.
The choice between in-kind (i.e., food, vouchers, targeted subsidies) and cash-based social safety
nets is an important policy choice, including involving theoretical, operational and political economy
matters.10 The report examined the composition of cash versus in-kind social safety nets by consid-
ering unconditional cash transfers and conditional cash transfers as “cash” programs, and uncondi-
tional in-kind transfer and conditional in-kind transfer programs as “in-kind” social safety nets.11 The
10          PROGRAM INVENTORY

FIGURE 8 Number of Countries with at Least One Given Program Type, by Region
                                                Conditional inkind transfers                                                                Conditional cash transfers


                        South Asia               7                                                                   South Asia                       5

     Middle East & North Africa                           15                                         Middle East & North Africa               3

     Latin America & Caribbean                                        29                             Latin America & Caribbean                                                    19

Eastern Europe & Central Asia                                   22                              Eastern Europe & Central Asia                             6

              East Asia & Paciﬁc                      12                                                    East Asia & Paciﬁc                            6

                              Africa                                                 45                                    Africa                                   13

                                        0        10        20        30        40        50                                           0           5           10        15    20
                                                      Number of countries                                                                     Number of countries



                                             Unconditional inkind transfers                                                               Unconditional cash transfers


                         South Asia         4                                                                        South Asia               6

      Middle East & North Africa             5                                                       Middle East & North Africa                       12

     Latin America & Caribbean                                 22                                    Latin America & Caribbean                                     25

 Eastern Europe & Central Asia                       11                                         Eastern Europe & Central Asia                                       28

               East Asia & Paciﬁc                8                                                          East Asia & Paciﬁc                        11

                               Africa                                           39                                         Africa                                            37

                                        0        10        20        30        40        50                                           0        10             20    30       40
                                                      Number of countries                                                                     Number of countries


                                                                                                   Public works


                                                                South Asia           5

                                            Middle East & North Africa               6

                                            Latin America & Caribbean                          14

                                        Eastern Europe & Central Asia                         12

                                                      East Asia & Paciﬁc                  9

                                                                      Africa                                         39

                                                                               0         10         20     30       40       50
                                                                                              Number of countries

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity and other sources (Annex 2).
                                                                                                                                      PROGRAM INVENTORY   11

FIGURE 9 Percentage of Countries with a Cash or In-Kind Program, by Income Group

                                              In-kind transfers                        Cash-based transfers
                          100   92.9
                          90
                          80                         72.9
Percentage of countries




                          70                                                   62.7
                                                            57.2                        56.7
                          60
                                       51.4                                                                             50
                          50
                                                                                                             38.4
                          40
                          30
                          20
                          10
                           0
                                Low-Income          Lower-Middle-             Upper-Middle-                  High-Income
                                 Countries        Income Countries          Income Countries                  Countries

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity and other sources (Annex 2).




results indicate that the share of countries with at least one in-kind transfer tends, on average, to
be higher in low-income countries (over 90 percent) and subsequently fall below 40 percent in
high-income countries; at the same time, the share of countries with at least one cash-based program
tends to remain generally constant across income groups.

The five largest programs in the world account for about half of global coverage. The five largest
social safety net programs are all in middle-income countries and reach over 486 million people. The
Chinese Di-Bao is the largest unconditional cash transfer program, reaching about 78 million individuals.
With coverage of 52.4 million people per year, Bolsa Familia is the largest conditional cash transfer in
the world. Two Indian programs in the global inventory are on top of their respective types, including
the School Feeding Program (113 million) and the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (193 million). These are also the largest-scale social safety nets globally. The Child
Support Grant in South Africa is the largest social safety net in the continent, followed by Ethiopia’s
Productive Safety Net Program (Box 2).

Yet, the coverage of individual flagship programs shows significant variation, ranging from covering
less than 1 percent of the population in some countries to over 30 percent in Brazil, Ecuador, Sri Lanka,
Mongolia and St. Lucia (see Box 3).

However, it is clear that there is significant variance in the scale and coverage of flagship programs
across countries. For example, depending on the level of income, the difference in terms of the
maximum share of population ranges from about 15 percentage points in low-income countries to
over 50 percentage points in upper-middle-income country settings (Figure 10).
12   Program Inventory



                         Box 2. Top Five Social Safety Net Programs, by Scale (Millions of Individuals)

                                      Unconditional Cash Transfers                                 Conditional In-Kind/Near-Cash Transfers
                          Di-Bao (China)                                           74.8       School Feeding Program (India)                          113.6
                          IG National Old Age Pension Scheme (India)               19.2       Programa de Alimentacao Escolar (Brazil)                47.2
                          Bantuan LSM (Indonesia)                                  15.5       School Feeding Program (China)                          26.0
                          Child Support Grant (South Africa)                       10.8       School Feeding Program (South Africa)                    8.8
                          Child Allowances (Russia)                                10.5       School Feeding Program (Egypt)                            7.0

                                       Conditional Cash Transfers                                Unconditional In-Kind/Near-Cash Transfers
                          Bolsa Familia (Brazil)                                  57.8        Raskin (Indonesia)                                      18.5
                          Oportunidades (Mexico)                                 32.3         Housing and Heating Subsidy Voucher (Russia)              9.1
                          Pantawid (Philippines)                                 20.0         Samurdhi** (Sri Lanka)                                    7.7
                          Familias en Accion (Colombia)                            9.5        General Food Distribution Program (Sudan)                 5.1
                          Janani Suraksha Yojana (India)                           9.5        Red de Seguridad Alimentaria (Colombia)                   4.1

                                         Public Works Programs                                                         All Types
                          MGNREGS (India)                                       193.0         MGNREGA (India)                                        193.0
                          Productive Safety Net Program*                           7.5        School Feeding Program (India)                          113.6
                          (Ethiopia)                                                          Di Bao (China)                                          74.8
                          Regional PWs Program (Russia)                             1.5       Bolsa Familia (Brazil)                                  57.8
                          PGUD (Benin)                                              1.5       Programa de Alimentacao Escolar                         47.2
                          EGPP (Bangladesh)                                         1.2       (Brazil)

                         Notes: *About 80 percent of Productive Safety Net Program beneficiaries participate in PWs. ** Include other programs types.
                         Source: Authors’ calculations based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity and other sources (Annex 2).




                         Box 3. Top Five Social Safety Net Programs, by Share of Population Covered
                         (Percentage)

                                      Unconditional Cash Transfers                                 Conditional In-Kind/Near-Cash Transfers
                          Public Assistance Program (St. Lucia)                  56%          National School Meal Program (Swaziland)                27%
                          Child Money Program (Mongolia)                          33%         School Feeding Program (Timor Leste)                    24%
                          Social Welfare Benefits (Kosovo)                       24%          Programa de Alimentacao Escolar (Brazil)                24%
                          Child Support Grant (South Africa)                      21%         School Feeding (Lesotho)                                 21%
                          Targeted Social Assistance (Georgia)                   20%          School Feeding (Haiti)                                   21%

                                       Conditional Cash Transfers                                Unconditional In-Kind/Near-Cash Transfers
                          Bono de Desarrollo Humano (Ecuador)                     41%         Samurdhi* (Sri Lanka)                                   38%
                          Bolsa Familia (Brazil)                                 29%          CSA (Senegal)                                           26%
                          Programa Solidaridad (Dominican Rep.)                  29%          Comer es Primero (Dominican Rep.)                       20%
                          Mi Bono Seguro (Guatemala)                             28%          Subsidies for Housing and Utilities (Belarus)           16%
                          Oportunidades (Mexico)                                  27%         General Food Distribution Program (Sudan)               14%

                                         Public Works Programs                                                         All Types
                          Mgnregs (India)                                         16%         Public Assistance Program (St. Lucia)                   56%
                          Public Works Program (Zimbabwe)                         15%         Bono de Desarrollo Humano (Ecuador)                     41%
                          Pgud (Benin)                                            15%         Samurdhi* (Sri Lanka)                                   38%
                          Rural Public Works, Nsap (Sierra Leone)                 14%         Child Money Program (Mongolia)                          33%
                          Food for Assets (S. Sudan)                               9%         Bolsa Familia (Brazil)                                  29%

                         Note: *Include other program types.
                         Source: Authors’ calculations based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity and other sources (Annex 2).
                                                                                                                                       PROGRAM INVENTORY     13

FIGURE 10                          Percentage of Population Covered by Largest National Program, by Type

                           60.00
                                                                                                     56.25%


                           50.00



                           40.00
   Percent of Population




                                                                                                                                                       Max
                           30.00                                   29.07%                                                                              Min
                                                                                                                                                       Average
                           20.00
                                                                                                                                         17.67%
                                           15.43%

                           10.00                                   10.49%                            10.66%

                                           6.25%                                                                                         5.32%

                            0.00           0.61%                   0.09%                             0.081%                              0.68%
                                        Low-Income             Lower-Middle-                    Upper-Middle-                         High-Income
                                         Countries           Income Countries                 Income Countries                         Countries


Source: Authors’ calculations based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity and other sources (Annex 2).
                                                                                                             15




                                                                                     S E C T I O N


Spending
                                                                                                      3
T
       his section examines the latest available data on spending on social safety nets. The aggregate
       spending data reported in this section12 refers to non-contributory transfers and includes external
       assistance. Cross-country comparisons should be interpreted with caution as the definition of
social safety nets may not be fully consistent across countries. Despite some regional variations13 in
the definition of social safety nets, total social safety nets spending includes the following programs:
cash transfers and near cash (whether mean tested or categorical), conditional cash transfers, social
pensions, in-kind transfers (including school feeding, nutrition programs, food rations and distribution),
school supplies, public works and food for work programs, and fee waivers or targeted subsidies for
health care, schooling, utilities, or transport. Food and energy subsidies are excluded from social
safety net spending and this represents a major difference with previous attempts to measure social
safety net spending.14

The section is based on a total of 107 countries with most recent figures typically spanning 2008–2012
(see Annex 3 for a complete summary of spending data, years and data sources by country).15 Data
presented here are primarily based on data collection efforts by the World Bank, Eurostat, and Asian
Development Bank recent stock taking of social protection spending and available country documents.

Governments in developing and emerging countries spend on average 1.6 percent of GDP on social
safety nets programs (with a median country spending 1.2 percent). Aggregate spending on social
safety nets (excluding general price subsidies) reveals that considerable resources are committed
globally to fight extreme poverty. The combined spending on social safety nets amounts to $337
billion (in 2005 Purchasing Power Parity USD); this is twice the amount needed to provide every
person living in extreme poverty with an income of $1.25 a day.

Social safety net spending varies across countries, with the poorest spending on average less than
the rich. Figure 11 reveals considerable cross-country variation, ranging from 0.01 of GDP in Papua New
Guinea to approximately 6 percent of GDP in Georgia.16 For about half of the countries, spending falls
between 0 and 1.2 percent of GDP. Figure 11 also shows the large variation within each region, with
East Asia and Africa as the regions where spending varies the most. Social safety net spending ranges
from an average of 1.9 percent of GDP in 14 high-income countries, to 1.8 in 39 upper-middle-income
countries, to 1.5 in 34 lower-middle-income countries, to 1.1 percent of GDP in 20 low-income countries.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FIGURE 11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Percent of GDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Benin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Zambia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ghana
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cameroon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Median




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Tanzania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Average




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Niger
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mali
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Togo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kenya
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Burkina Faso
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Gambia, The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rwanda
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Madagascar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mauritania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Africa




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Liberia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mozambique
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Swaziland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Eritrea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Namibia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Botswana
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Seychelles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      South Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sierra Leone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mauritius
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lesotho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Papua New Guinea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Solomon Islands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vanuatu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lao, PDR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Samoa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              China
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Cambodia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Fui
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Marshall Islands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             East Asia and Pacific

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Palau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mongolia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kiribati
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Timor-Leste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Tajikistan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Latvia




represent the average and median safety nets spending across the sample of 107 countries with available data.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Azerbauan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kazakhstan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bulgaria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Macedonia, FYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Belarus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Armenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Montenegro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kosovo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Albania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Poland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Serbia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Slovakia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Moldova
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ukraine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Estonia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Russia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bosnia & Herz.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Eastern Europe and Central Asia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Romania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kyrgyz Rep.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Spending on Social Safety Net in More than Half of the Countries Is Below the Global Average




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Croatia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Georgia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Peru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Honduras
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       El Salvador
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          St. Lucia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                St. Kitts and Nev.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jamaica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Argentina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Chile




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the Caribbean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        St. Vincent




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Latin America and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Panama
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Belize
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nicaragua
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Egypt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Tunisia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               West Bank & Gaza
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Kuwait
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Morocco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Saudi Arabia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lebanon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Syria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jordan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      North Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Iraq




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Middle East and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Yemen, Rep.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bahrain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Afghanistan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               India
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bangladesh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bhutan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pakistan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nepal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Maldives




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             South Asia



Source: Authors’ calculations based on most recent spending data (Annex 3). The figure plots aggregate spending on social safety nets as percentage of GDP by country for latest available year (2008–2012). The horizontal lines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sri Lanka
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SPENDING                                                 16
                                                                                                                                                    SPENDING   17

FIGURE 12 External Financing Represents the Main Source of Safety Nets Funding in
Some Countries

                                                                                            Domestic
                                                                                            External
Percent of Total Safety Nets Spending




                                        100
                                         90
                                         80
                                         70
                                         60
                                         50
                                         40
                                         30
                                         20
                                         10
                                         0
                                              ria



                                                        e


                                                                 so



                                                                           n


                                                                                 go



                                                                                           a


                                                                                                    a


                                                                                                           er



                                                                                                                    n


                                                                                                                            e


                                                                                                                                      i


                                                                                                                                               ia
                                                                                                                                    al
                                                      on




                                                                         oo




                                                                                         bi


                                                                                                 ny




                                                                                                                  ni


                                                                                                                          qu




                                                                                                                                             an
                                                                                                         ig




                                                                                                                                   M
                                                               Fa
                                            be




                                                                               To


                                                                                        m




                                                                                                                Be
                                                                                               Ke
                                                    Le




                                                                      er




                                                                                                        N




                                                                                                                        bi




                                                                                                                                            rit
                                                                                      Za
                                          Li




                                                                                                                       am
                                                              a


                                                                   am




                                                                                                                                          au
                                                   ra


                                                            in
                                                          rk




                                                                                                                    oz




                                                                                                                                        M
                                                er




                                                                  C
                                                        Bu
                                              Si




                                                                                                                   M
Source: Monchuk (2013).




External sources of financing play a key role in lower income countries, representing in some coun-
tries the main sources of social safety net funding. While high-spending countries such as Georgia
and Mauritius finance their social safety nets domestically, Lesotho and Timor-Leste spend 3.9 and
5.9 percent of GDP, mostly relying on international assistance (and natural resource funds). Within a
sample of 25 African countries, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Burkina Faso are the most dependent on
external finance.17 Donor financing in these three countries is approximately 94, 85, and 62 percent of
total spending respectively. In Ethiopia, the flagship Productive Safety Net Program is almost entirely
externally financed. In Kenya, cash transfers for relief and recovery programs have been largely funded
by donors (donor financing was approximately 71 percent of total social safety nets spending). However,
many low-income countries are increasingly putting social safety nets programs “on-budget,” and
social safety nets in most middle-income countries are largely financed domestically.

Remittances have a great potential to complement government and external spending on safety
nets, especially in lower income countries. The overall amount spent on social safety nets globally
($337 billion) is less than the volume of remittances inflows to the same group of countries (around
$370 billion in 2012). Looking at the total value of public and private transfers to the population,
remittances account for a bigger share of the total transfers to the population in lower income countries,



TABLE 3: Remittances Inflows Are Higher Than Social Safety Nets Spending
in Low-Income Countries

                                                                                      Social Safety Net Spending        Remittances Inflows
                                                                                              ($ billions)                 ($ billions)
               Low-income countries (20)                                                          3.6                            28.4
               Lower-middle-income countries (34)                                               38.0                            186.3
               Upper-middle-income countries (39)                                              196.9                            135.0
               High-income countries (14)                                                       98.9                             19.7
               Total (107)                                                                     337.4                            369.5

Source: Authors’ calculations based on most recent spending data (Annex 3) and “Migration and Remittances Factbook,” the
World Bank. Remittances amounts refer to 2012.
18            SPENDING

     FIGURE 13 On Average Regions Spend More on Social Safety Net than on Fuel Subsidies
                                                                                                                                    4.1




                                                                   2.2

             1.7                                                                               1.7

                                        1.2
                                                                                                                          1.0                        0.9

                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                         0.4
                                                  0.3
                       0.1                                                   0.1


                Africa            East Asia and Pacific          Eastern Europe              Latin America              Middle East and               South Asia
                 (25)                     (18)                   and Central Asia          and the Caribbean              North Africa                   (8)
                                                                      (27)                        (17)                        (12)

     Source: Authors’ calculations based on most recent safety nets spending data (Annex 3). Spending on fuel subsidy refers to the pre-tax subsidies for petroleum
     products, electricity, natural gas and coal as percent of GDP in 2011 (IMF, 2013).



                                              (Table 3). However, Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity data shows that in
                                              lower income countries the majority of remittances recipients are in the richest quintile.

                                              Regional patterns emerge with countries in Eastern Europe spending more on social safety net
                                              programs. On average Eastern Europe and Central Asian countries spend the most (2.2 percent of
                                              GDP), followed by Latin America and the Caribbean and African countries (1.7 percent on average),
                                              East Asian and Pacific (1.2 percent of GDP), Middle East and North African (1 percent of GDP) and
                                              South Asian countries spending the least (0.9 percent on average). These regional patterns may reflect
                                              different country incomes and financial resources as well as variations in terms of the composition,
                                              scale and the key redistributive role that safety nets programs play in the overall country poverty and
                                              inequality reduction policies (Figure 13).

                                              Many countries spend more on energy subsidies than on social safety nets. For example, in the
                                              Middle East and North Africa region, countries spend more on fuel subsidies (over 4 percent of GDP
                                              on average) than on safety nets programs (around 1 percent of GDP). Nonetheless, even countries
                                              with comprehensive social safety net systems such as Ecuador spend more on fuel subsidies (6.3
                                              percent of GDP) than on social safety net programs (1.8 percent of GPD). Similarly, Indonesia spends
                                              2.6 percent of GDP on fuel subsidies and only 0.8 on social safety net (Box 4).

                                              Despite having fewer resources for social safety nets, some lower income countries allocate more
                                              funds than average. While on average richer countries spend more on safety nets programs, the
                                              range of spending is much wider in lower income countries. Interestingly, the maximum social safety
                                              nets spending in lower middle income countries (6.1 percent of GDP in Georgia) and in upper middle
                                              income countries (4.4 in Mauritius) are higher than the maximum spending value in our sample of
                                              high income countries (3.8 percent of GDP in Croatia) (Figure 14).

                                              In some cases, high or low spending on social safety nets may reflect policy preferences. Figure 15
                                              identifies those “outliers” by plotting their social safety nets spending against their GDP per capita.
                                              Countries with similar social safety nets spending have different GDP per capita; vice versa, countries
                                              with similar GDP per capita may spend on social safety nets very different shares of GDP. For example,
                                              Egypt’s spending on social safety nets is one-fifth of Georgia’s, although they have similar levels of
                                                                                                                           SPENDING   19



      BOX 4. Spending on Fuel Subsidies Is Often Higher Than on Social Safety Nets

      Fuel general subsidies are present in several countries and account for a substantial portion
      of government spending. Regardless of the level of income, fuel subsidies spending is highest
      in the Middle East and North Africa region and may crowd out public spending on safety nets
      and pro-poor policies.
      Even lower income countries such as Egypt, Yemen and Morocco spend about 6.7, 4.7 and
      0.7 percent of GDP on fuel subsidies and only 0.2, 1.4 and 0.9 percent of GDP on safety nets
      programs respectively.
      In oil exporting countries, fuel subsidies are used as policy instruments to distribute oil revenues
      across citizens. Energy subsidies benefit the population through reduced prices of energy for
      heating, transport, lighting and through lower prices of energy-intense goods and services.
      However, energy subsidies are often highly inequitable as they tend to benefit relatively more
      the upper income groups in the population. Studies from several countries have shown that fuel
      subsidies are regressive and ineffective in terms of protecting the poorest.

        Bangladesh
           Malaysia
                India
         Cameroon
              Jordan
          Indonesia
              Kuwait
      Yemen, Rep.
             Bahrain
            Ecuador
               Egypt
       Saudi Arabia
                 Iraq
                        0              2                4               6                8                  10    12


                            Fuel subsidy (% GDP)
                            Social safety nets spending (% GDP)

      Source: Authors’ calculations based on most recent safety nets spending data (Annex 3). IMF (2013).



FIGURE 14 Variations in Social Safety Nets Spending Are Higher
in Lower-Income Countries
7.0

6.0                                              6.1

5.0
                                                                            4.4
4.0
                                                                                                     3.8
                        3.5                                                                                      Max
3.0
                                                                                                                 Min
2.0                                                                                                  1.9
                                                                            1.8
                                                 1.5                                                             Average
1.0                     1.1
                                                                                                     0.8
                                                                            0.3
0.0                     0.0                      0.0
             Low-Income                Lower-Middle-             Upper-Middle                High-Income
              Countries              Income Countries          Income Countries               Countries
                (20)                       (34)                      (39)                        (14)

Source: Authors’ calculations based on most recent spending data available (Annex 3).
20                         SPENDING

FIGURE 15 Social Safety Net Spending Is Not Always Commensurate with Country Level of Income
                    7.00
                                                                                             GEO
                                                  TMP
                    6.00


                    5.00
 SSN Spending/GDP




                                                              LSO                                                       MUS

                    4.00                        SLE                                                                                HRV


                    3.00
                                                                                                                                                          R² ϭ 0.0325

                    2.00


                                                       KEN                                                            MKD
                    1.00
                                                 MLI
                                                                                               EGY                           MYS
                    0.00
                           6          6.5   7           7.5               8            8.5               9            9.5             10           10.5              11
                                                                 Log (GDP per capita, Purchasing Power Parity)

Source: Authors’ calculations based on most recent spending data (annex 3) and GDP per capita, purchasing power parity USD of the respective year. Note: TMP—Timor-Leste;
GEO—Georgia, LSO—Lesotho, SLE—Sierra Leone, MLI—Mali, KEN—Kenya, EGY—Egypt, MYS—Malaysia; MKD—Macedonia, Former Yugoslav Republic; FYR; MUS—Mauritius;
HRV—Croatia.



                                            income. Mauritius spends 4 times more than Macedonia and Lesotho almost six times more than Kenya.
                                            Conversely, a low income country such as Sierra Leone spends as much on social safety nets as high
                                            income country such as Croatia. Overall, the positive relationship between social safety nets spending
                                            and country income is not very strong (correlation of 0.03) and shows that resources spent on social
                                            safety nets may reflect policy choices instead of pure economic factors and level on development.

                                            Universal social pension programs explain the high social safety nets spending in Georgia and
                                            Lesotho. For example, Georgia does not have a contributory public pension scheme. Instead, it
                                            provides a flat universal pension to all elderly financed by general revenue, together with disability
                                            benefits. Within Georgia’s social protection system, spending on social pensions represents almost
                                            90 percent of overall expenditures; in other countries this type of spending is typically covered by
                                            the contributory social insurance system. If social pensions are excluded, its level of spending would
                                            not be different from other countries with similar income, around 0.6 percent of GDP.18 This is very
                                            similar to the other outlier in the chart, Lesotho. Also in this case, high spending is almost entirely
                                            devoted to the country’s generous universal social pension program for the elderly.

                                            Post-conflict contexts and the need to rebalance social dynamics may lead to more generous social
                                            safety nets systems. For example, Timor-Leste is a post-conflict country that emerged from a long
                                            period of civil strife and turmoil. The government used social protection and social safety nets to
                                            also foster social cohesion, including providing relatively generous welfare support to veterans. The
                                            rapid increase in the social assistance budget in Timor-Leste has been supported by growing fiscal
                                            space from oil-fund revenues.19 Sierra Leone, another post-conflict country with considerable natural
                                            wealth, has a similar social safety nets program, although it is mostly financed by external donors.

                                            Energy subsidies may crowd out other types of public spending, explaining low spending on social
                                            safety nets. Egypt and Malaysia, with similar level of income to Georgia and Mauritius, have large
                                            energy subsides which absorb significant fiscal resources. For instance, Egypt spends almost 7 percent
                                            of GDP on energy subsidies, followed by 2 percent of GDP spent on food subsidies, Malaysia spends
                                            about 3.7 percent in different subsidies, mostly energy-based.20
                                                                                                                                                   SPENDING                 21

Social safety net spending increased over time in most high spending countries. Over the past decade,
social safety net spending in selected Eastern Europe and Central Asian countries increased by 15 percent
annually on average21, going from an average of 0.9 percent of GDP in 2000, to 1.3 in 2005, to about
2 percent of GDP in 2010. In Turkey, the average annual growth rate of social safety nets spending
between 2006 and 2010 has been about 30 percent, while in Lithuania about 19 percent (Figure 16).


FIGURE 16 Social Safety Net Spending Has Been Growing over the Last Decade in Eastern Europe, Central Asia,
and Latin America
4.5
  4
3.5
  3
2.5
  2
1.5
  1
0.5
  0
        a

              ia

                    H

                                         ia

                               Es a
                                           a


                               Ko n

                                th o
                                           a

                            on nia

                             R gro

                                         ia

                                         ia

                              U ey
                                        ne


                                           a

                                           il

                             C hile

                              Ec bia

                             Sa or

                                         or

                                           s

                                           o

                                                                                                                                                                ru


                                                                                                                                                                            y
                                       az




                                       ra




                                                                                                                                                                       ua
      ni




                                         i
                                       ni

                                        a

                                        v

                                       ni




                                       in




                                       ic
                   Bi
            en




                                      ar

                                      at




                                     an

                                      rb




                                       d

                                     ad




                                                                                                                                                             Pe
                                    so




                                     rk
                                     st




                                     ai




                                    ex
   ba




                                    to




                                   ua


                                     o




                                    nt




                                  om




                                   du
                                   ne




                                   ua
                                   Br

                                    C
                                   ro




                                                                                                                                                                        g
                        lg




                                 Se

                                 Tu
          m




                                 kh




                                 ed



                                om




                                  kr




                                  lv
                                ge




                                                                                                                                                                     ru
                                M
 Al




                     Bu

                             C




                              on
                               te
        Ar




                              ol
                             za




                             ac




                                                                                                                                                                  U
                             Li




                            Ar




                            H
                          Ka




                           M




                          El
                          M




                                                                      2000          2005          2010

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Eastern Europe and central Asia Speed database (World Bank 2013e) and Cerutti et al. (2014) for selected countries. The 2010 data
point for Lithuania refers to 2009. BiH stands for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
                                                                                                               23




                                                                                               S E C T I O N


Policy, Institutions,
and Administration
                                                                                                        4

T
      his section frames social safety nets within the wider realm of social protection. Indeed, policies
      are seldom formulated for a narrow set of social safety net measures, but rather they include
      social safety nets as part of broader social protection systems.

Based on data from 135 countries gathered through internal policy monitoring and reporting materials,
this section presents cross-country information on social protection policy and strategic frameworks.
It also provides an overview of some of the main developments and innovations in the realm of insti-
tutional coordination and program administration. Annex 4 largely provides the source of information
for this section.



4.1 Policies and Strategies
About half of the surveyed developing countries have a social protection policy or strategy, while
these are absent in almost one-third of the countries. A total of 67 countries, or about 50 percent of
the 135 surveyed countries, have a social protection policy;22 19 percent (or 26 countries) are currently
planning or formulating one, while in about 31 percent of the cases a policy was not reported or it was
not possible to find through policy monitoring systems and literature reviews (Figure 17).


                 FIGURE 17 Status in Social Protection Policies/Strategies
                 as of 2013 (Percentage)

                                                                            Planned
                                                                              19%




                  Available
                    50%




                                                                                     Not reported
                                                                                         31%



                 Source: Authors’ calculations based on data presented in Annex 4.
24         POLICY, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION

                                           TABLE 4: Social Protection Policy/Strategy Status as of 2013 (Number of Countries)

                                                            N. of Countries                                            Status
                                                                (n= 137)                        Available             Planned        Not Reported   Total
                                             Income group
                                                  Low-Income Countries                                 16                   9              9             34
                                                  Lower-Middle-Income Countries                        17                   11            18             46
                                                  Upper-Middle-Income Countries                       34                    6             15             55
                                                  (Middle-Income Countries tot.)                      (51)                 (17)          (32)         (101)
                                             Region
                                                  East Asia and Pacific                                5                     1            13               19
                                                  Eastern Europe and Central Asia                      16                    1             6             23
                                                  Latin America and the Caribbean                      15                   5              8             28
                                                  Middle East and North Africa                         5                     1             3               9
                                                  South Asia                                           3                    4               1              8
                                                  Africa                                              23                   14              11            48
                                             Total by status                                          67                   26             42

                                           Source: Authors’ calculations based on data presented in Annex 4.


                                           A number of regional and income variations emerge. The detailed number of countries by status is
                                           laid out in Table 4, including by region and income group. In relative terms, although the availability
                                           of frameworks is not very dissimilar between middle-income countries and low-income countries
                                           (50 and 47 percent, respectively), social protection policies are considerably more widespread in
                                           low-income countries than lower-middle-income countries (a difference of 10 percentage points). East
                                           Asia and Pacific shows the higher rates in terms of unavailability of frameworks (about 68 percent),
                                           while Latin America and the Caribbean and Eastern Europe and Centra Asia show availability rates
                                           of 53 and 70 percent, respectively.

                                           The number of countries that introduced policy or strategies on social protection increased expo-
                                           nentially in the past decade. Countries have progressively introduced their policy frameworks. For
                                           example, between 2009 and 2013, an average of 12 countries per year formulated a new policy or
                                           strategy, raising the total number of countries with a policy or strategy from 19 to 67 (Figure 18).

FIGURE 18 Number of Countries with Available Policy/Strategy (Cumulative), 2004–2013

80

                                                                                                                                                    67
70

60                                                                                                                                         55

50
                                                                                                                                42
40

30                                                                                                              26
                                                                                              19
20                                                                            17
                                                                14
                             7                8
10
             3

 0
       1997–2004           2005            2006                2007           2008          2009               2010         2011          2012      2013

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data presented in Annex 4.
                                                                                 POLICY, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION   25

Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia emerge as the most vibrant regions in terms of planned or
ongoing initiatives. In Africa, about 30 percent of the countries are planning a social protection policy
framework, while half of the 8 South Asian countries are doing so. Initiatives being planned as of 2013
include the National Social Protection Strategy in Bangladesh, the Holistic Social Protection Paper
in Benin, a Social Protection Note in the Democratic Republic of Congo, a National Social Protection
Strategy in Ghana, and a National Social Protection Framework in Tanzania. In a more limited number of
cases, initiatives include the deepening of existing frameworks, such as in Dominica where the Growth
and Social Protection Strategy will be complemented by an Integrated Social Protection Strategy.

Out of the countries with a framework in place, about 70 percent have a “deliberate” policy or
strategy on social protection frameworks, while in the rest policies are embedded in wider devel-
opment and poverty reduction plans. As of 2013, deliberate frameworks are available in 68 percent
(or 46 countries) of the 67 countries with a policy or strategy, and tend to be more detailed and
comprehensive than sections of a development plan. In over three-quarter of the cases, deliberate
frameworks were introduced between 2010 and 2013. Examples of social protection policies enacted
in 2013 include Bhutan, Ethiopia, Gabon, Honduras, Jamaica, Mauritania and Sierra Leone.23



4.2 Institutions
Given the multi-sectoral nature of social protection, governments are increasingly establishing
mechanisms and bodies to enhance coordination across institutions, ministries and functions. Social
safety net programs often involve a range of ministries and sectors for program implementation,
especially in the case of conditional transfers. Also, coordination is key when connecting systems
functions, such as responses to crises (Box 5), or between social safety nets and insurance.

The report’s analysis shows that as of 2013, measures for institutional coordination are emerging in 10
cases described in Annex 4: Afghanistan’s Inter-Ministerial Committee on Social Protection, Benin’s
Comité Socle de Protection Sociale, Burkina Faso’s Conseil National de la Protection Sociale, the
Technical Working Group on Social Protection in Burundi, the Social Protection Thematic Group in
the Democratic Republic of Congo, the National Steering Committee on Social Protection in Nepal,
the Consultative Inter-Ministerial Committee on Social Protection in Niger, the SDC Sub-Committee
on Social Protection in the Philippines, and a Social Protection Core Team in South Sudan. In some
cases, new institutions were created, such as the National Social Protection Authority in Sierra Leone
and the Agency for Social Protection in the Seychelles.

A number of “second-generation” issues are also being tackled, such as deeper integration of institu-
tional and administrative platforms for social safety nets and social insurance. These are underway, for
example, in countries such as China, Georgia, Kazakhstan and Turkey. In Turkey, for example, households
applying for social assistance are automatically registered into the Turkish Labor Institution database
via the Social Assistance Information System (SAIS).
26   POLICY, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION



                            BOX 5. Institutions, Coordination, and Scalable Social Safety Nets: Lessons from
                            Ethiopia and Mexico

                            International experience suggests that in order for social safety net systems to be scaled up
                            in crises, some building blocks would need to be in place. These may include the following:
                            (a) linking early warning systems to programming; (b) establishing contingency plans;
                            (c) establishing contingency financing; and (d) building institutional capacity ahead of crises.
                            Connecting and integrating these blocks requires well-defined coordination mechanisms
                            among a network of ministries and agencies.
                            For example, Mexico’s Programa de Empleo Temporal (PET) is an inter-agency social safety
                            net program overseen by the Ministry of Social Welfare and implemented by several sector
                            ministries. A parliamentary act stipulates the responsibilities of each party and mandates the
                            coordination mechanism requiring the ministries involved to share a common beneficiary
                            database (registry). All implementing agencies receive data from the early warning system
                            that allows them prepare an emergency response or scale up in affected localities through
                            PET. In response to climate events and natural disasters, the Government of Mexico used PET
                            to provide rapid support to an additional 900,000 people between 2007 and 2011.
                            Similarly, in Ethiopia, the Ministry of Agriculture coordinates disaster risk management and
                            food security related activities including its flagship Productive Safety Net Programme
                            (PSNP). Different directorates under the Ministry have linkages to the early warning system,
                            humanitarian response, and emergency relief and to the Ministry of Finance and Economic
                            Development for management and disbursement of cash resources. Using the Productive
                            Safety Net Program risk financing facility, the Government of Ethiopia rapidly extended
                            support to an additional 3.1 million people in response to the 2011 drought.

                            Source: World Bank (2013b), Hobson and Campbell (2012).




                         4.3 Administration
                         There is growing interest and investment in consolidated and harmonized database systems to
                         managing information on potential beneficiaries of social protection programs. This section sets out
                         basic concepts and emerging experiences in the realm, particularly around “social registries.”24

                         Several costs are associated with keeping multiple “parallel” databases of potential beneficiaries
                         for different social protection programs. Multiple and fragmented registries may present several
                         disadvantages. First, it may increase the cost to both governments and households due to multiple data
                         collection and enrolment efforts. Second, it may introduce inconsistencies across programs in how they
                         define “poverty” and related concepts. Third, it may result in multiple and incompatible programs that
                         “don’t talk to each other.” Given these shortcomings, a number of countries are working to consolidate
                         or harmonize some of their registries into common social registries. For example, Brazil did so in the
                         context of Cadastro Unico to serve as the entry point for social assistance policies (see Box 6).

                         Social registries are physical or virtual databases of potential beneficiaries that include a series of
                         individual and household level characteristics needed to determine eligibility for social protection
                         programs. Social registries can provide updated information on potential beneficiaries and contain
                         a minimum set of information required to allow one or more program administrators to determine
                         eligibility for their programs (e.g., date of birth, gender, contributory records, income, household
                         size and composition). In some cases, registration in the social registry is a condition to become a
                         beneficiary; but it does not guarantee that the registered individual or household would participate in
                                                                                    POLICY, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION   27



   BOX 6. Social Registries as a Backbone for Program Integration:
   The Cadastro in Brazil

   In 2003, the Government of Brazil initiated a set of reforms to improve its social safety
   net system. The reforms integrated several federal programs, including Bolsa Escola, Bolsa
   Alimentação, Cartão Alimentação, and Auxílio-Gás into a single conditional cash transfer
   program, the Bolsa Família Program. The Cadastro Unico became the data and information
   backbone for the reform. The Cadastro registers all families in Brazil whose income per capita
   is less than half a minimum salary (R$724/month) so as to facilitate their access to federal
   social programs. The registry serves federal, state and municipal public agencies and contains
   information on 27.3 million families, more than half of which are Bolsa Familia beneficiaries,
   and serves as a platform for 10 programs.




any program. Generally, countries that implement social registries have different design parameters,
that is, registries can differ in terms of the amount of individual data required, the frequency at which
the data must be collected, and percentage of total population included in the database.

Robust social registries can be used to link programs across sectors. This for example may include
programs on health (e.g., Ghana and the Philippines’ experiences of linking, respectively, LEAP and the
Pantawid conditional cash transfers to health insurance programs), education (e.g., Brazil’s experience
that provide tertiary education quotas for Bolsa Família beneficiaries) and agriculture (e.g., again,
Brazil’s experience with productive inclusion activities in the rural areas for Bolsa Família beneficiaries).

As of 2013, social registries were present in at least 23 countries and were planned in other 10.
Table 5 below provides an overview of the countries for which a single registry is institutionalized
or in progress, as well as the number of households contained in the database and programs they
connect. In other 10 countries, efforts to introduce a social registry are planned or underway, including
Benin, Djibouti, Haiti, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Mozambique, Senegal, Tajikistan, and Tunisia.

However, there are also reasons for why programs may maintain different registries. These may
include the frequency of updating information and nature of eligibility determination. For instance,
sometimes large-scale programs such as India’s NREGS may maintain a separate registry with more
detailed information specific for their program (although information should be, if possible, cross-
verified with other databases as the social registry). In other words, not all the information contained
in a common registry would be useful or necessary for all social programs. It may be important,
therefore, to identify programs that have sufficient overlap to make it beneficial in cost-benefit terms
to generate the consolidated database.

The social registry is one element of the larger delivery system. The whole delivery system includes
components such as identification of beneficiaries, their eligibility determination and enrolment, benefit
payments, and other delivery processes. Therefore, social registries should be interpreted as only one
of such components. Instead, a “management information system” (MIS) defines required information
flows from multiple social registries, and consolidates and cross-checks the data in order to provide
a holistic picture of the overall system (see Box 7 for an example from Colombia). Therefore, an MIS
facilitates evidence-based decision-making, including working as a warehouse of data required for
monitoring and evaluation.
28          POLICY, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION

TABLE 5: Selected Examples of Social Registries, Latest Available Data

                                                                                                                             N. of Households in          N. of Programs
     Country                  Social Registry                          State                  Managing Institution            Database (’000)                 Served
 Armenia              Family Benefit System                 Institutionalized               Ministry of Labor and                      94.9                        1
                                                                                            Social Affairs

 Azerbaijan           MIS of Ministry of Labour             Institutionalized               Ministry of Labor and                     127.2                        3
                      and Social Protection of                                              Social Protection of the
                      Population (MLSPP)                                                    Population
 Bangladesh           Poverty Database                      In progress                     Ministry of Planning
 Belize               Single Information System of          In progress                     Ministry of Economic
                      Beneficiaries                                                         Development

 Bolivia              Beneficiary Registry of Social        In progress                     Ministry of Development
                      Programs                                                              Planning

 Brazil               Cadastro Unico                        Institutionalized               Ministry of Social                       23,900                       10
                                                                                            Development and Fight
                                                                                            against Hunger
 Cabo Verde           Unique Registry                       Institutionalized                                                                                      2
 Chile                The Integrated System of              Institutionalized               Ministry of Social                        2,500                        3
                      Social Information (SIIS)                                             Development

 Colombia             The Integrated Information            Institutionalized               Ministry of Health and                    3,000                       31
                      System of Social Protection                                           Social Protection
                      (SISPRO)
 Costa Rica           Sistema de Identificación de la       Institutionalized               IMAS (Agency for Social                   1,420*                       3
                      Problación Objectivo (SIPO)                                           Benefits)
 Dominican            Sistema Unico de Beneficiaros         Institutionalized               Cabinet of Social Policy                  6,059                       10
 Republic             (SIUBEN)                                                              Coordination
 Georgia              System of Social Assistance           Institutionalized               Minister of Labor, Health                  450                         3
                                                                                            and Social Affairs, and
                                                                                            Social Service Agency
 Ghana                National Targeting System             In progress                     Ministry of Gender,                                                    2
                                                                                            Children and Social
                                                                                            Protection
 Kenya                Integrated Registry of                In progress                     Ministry of Labor, Social         220 (500 planned)           2 (5 are planned)
                      Beneficiaries                                                         Security and Services
 Lebanon              National Poverty Targeting            In progress                     Ministry of Social Affairs         93 (160 planned)
                      Program
 Lesotho              National Information System           In progress                     Ministry of Social                40 (as of July 2013)        4 (planned), 1 (as
                      for Social Assistance (NISSA)                                         Development                                                     of July 2013)
 Macedonia,           Cash Benefits Management              In progress                                                                                            1
 FYR                  Information System (CBMIS)
 Mauritius            Social Register                       Institutionalized               Various Ministries               41 ( as of June 2013)                 4
 Panama               Unified Registry of                   Institutionalized               Secretaria Técnica                        178.3*                       11
                      Beneficiaries (RUB)                                                   del Gabinete Social
 Philippines          Listahanan                            Institutionalized               Department of Social                     10,909                        2
                                                                                            Welfare and Development
 Turkey               Social Assistance Information         Institutionalized               General Directorate of                    4,100                       17
                      System (SAIS)                                                         Social Assistance
 Romania              Integrated Information System         Institutionalized               National Agency for                      6,000*                       14
                      for Administration of Social                                          Social Benefits
                      Benefits (SAFIR)
 Seychelles           Integrated MIS                        In progress                     Agency for Social                                                      5
                                                                                            Protection

Source: Author’s compilation based on Leite et al. (2011); Ortakaya (2012); Lokshin (2012); Sultanov (2012); Minasyan (2012); GoCR (2012); World Bank (2011m); http://
go.worldbank.org/WZ5OPUEF40. *Refers to individuals
                                                                            POLICY, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION   29



BOX 7. The Management Information System in Colombia, RUAF

The Registro Unico de Afiliados (RUAF) was enacted in 2003 under the Ministry of Social
Protection. RUAF was initially envisioned as a solution to end the recurrent issues created by
the decentralization and disarticulation of SPS beneficiary information. RUAF is the central
repository that integrates data from different institutions dealing with social programs delivery
(in 2009 it consolidated information from 10 institutions and 49 programs, including SISBEN
data), where each program has to upload their beneficiary caseload information periodically
to RUAF. This requires the coordination and commitment of the institutions given that the data
upload is not conducted automatically or simultaneously by all stakeholders.
All database integration is done through the Sistema Integral de Informacion de la Proteccion
Social (SISPRO), which is an IT platform that manages information of program beneficiaries
and service providers. In total SISPRO includes 6 databases: NADE (Online information of births
and deaths), PAI (Immunization Program), SIHO (Information System of Public Hospitals),
RIPS (Information System of Health Providers), PILA, and most importantly, RUAF. Therefore,
SISPRO validates and reconciles beneficiary records to ensure that data of individuals match
and that a unique record of benefits per beneficiary is generated. This is needed because as
of today, applicants still register in different program offices at different times, and SISPRO
consolidates the information.
                                                                                                                         31




                                                                                                         S E C T I O N


Results and Evidence
                                                                                                                   5
T
      his section discusses the performance of social safety nets on a range of dimensions as captured
      by the Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity database. Although the
      impacts of social safety nets are multi-dimensional, we discuss primarily those related to poverty.
The section also provides a snapshot of empirical evidence on social safety nets drawing from recent
rigorous impact evaluation studies available in the public domain and published in economic journals
and in the form of working paper series.



5.1 Performance of Social Safety Net Programs
On average, the adequacy (or transfer size) of social safety nets in developing countries could be
enhanced. In order to assess the adequacy of social safety nets, Annex 5 presents data on the value
of transfers as a share of total consumption or income of the poor. The average level of benefits
across countries is 23 percent of the poor’s income or consumption. According to the World Bank
data on global poverty, average level of consumption among the poor in the developing world is 34.8
percent below the 1.25/day poverty line. Hence, the average size of social safety nets do not close
the poverty gap (Figure 19).

Yet, there are marked differences in the adequacy of transfers. The share of social safety nets in
beneficiaries’ consumption ranges from a low 5 percent in Middle East and North Africa and Sub-
Saharan Africa to 20–30 percent in Europe and Central Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean.
There is a negative relationship with the size of needs: poverty is relatively shallow in Europe and
Central Asia (on average, the poor need a 20–25 percent boost in consumption to raise it above the
poverty line). For countries in Africa, such increase should be in the order of 40–50 percent on average.


FIGURE 19 The Average Size of Transfers Does Not Fill the Poverty Gap


                                                                   $1.25/day poverty line
Level of Income
or consumption                           Average
                                        poverty gap                               Average size of safety net transfers
                                                                               (23% of income/consumption of the poor)

                         Average level of consumption by the poor
                         (34.8% below the poverty line)




Source: Devised by authors based on Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity database.
32   RESULTS AND EVIDENCE



                            BOX 8. Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity Indicators
                            Based on Household Surveys
                            The Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity database, accessible online,
                            includes key country and program level indicators for social protection and labor programs,
                            including social safety nets, social insurance and labor market programs. These are calculated
                            using national representative household surveys, and are the result of a careful process of
                            quality assurance, identification of programs in each country, grouping of different programs
                            into standard categories, and harmonization of core indicators. When interpreting Atlas of
                            Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity indicators, it is important to bear in mind
                            that the extent to which information on specific transfers and programs is captured in the
                            household surveys can vary considerably across countries. Moreover, household surveys do
                            not capture the entire universe of social protection programs in the country, but often mainly
                            the largest programs. As a consequence, Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and
                            Equity indicators are not fully comparable across program categories and countries; however,
                            they provide approximate measures of social protection systems performance.
                            The database includes over 100 harmonized surveys for the 1999–2012 period, covering
                            69  countries with data on social protection in the most recent period. The 2005–2012
                            period presented in Annex 5 contains information on almost 5 million individuals (1.3 million
                            households), representing over 3 billion people in developing countries.25
                            Existing Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity indicators track total
                            transfers or benefits, coverage, adequacy, and targeting performance (the latter measured
                            by benefit or beneficiary incidence). Importantly, Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators
                            of Resilience and Equity includes simulated impacts of social safety nets on poverty and
                            inequality reduction. In order to compare countries, poverty is defined in relative terms: in
                            each country, the bottom 20 percent of population in terms of consumption or income (post-
                            transfer) is defined as poor. Coverage, targeting and impacts on poverty are then assessed
                            focusing on that group as a target for social safety nets. According to World Bank data, the
                            rate for extreme poverty in the world is 20.6 percent in 2010. Hence, focusing on the bottom
                            20 percent globally is consistent with the objective of eliminating absolute poverty; but not all
                            countries have poverty rates equal or close to 20 percent of the population.

                            Source: www.worldbank.org/aspire




                        Globally, the targeting of social safety nets is pro-poor, although room for improvement exists. The
                        benefit incidence column in Annex 5 presents the proportion of the transfers received by the poorest
                        quintile as a percentage of total transfers. If this indicator is above 20 percent, the distribution tends to
                        be pro-poor or progressive; instead, if it is below 20 percent, the distribution is regressive. Globally, 30
                        percent of all social safety nets go to households in the poorest quintile. While this is progressive, it is
                        notable in Annex 5 that some countries have much better targeting outcome, including top performers
                        such as Argentina, Panama, Peru, Romania, and West Bank and Gaza. These countries transfer more
                        than 50 percent of social safety net budgets to the poorest quintile.

                        Progressive impacts can lead to reduction in inequality. When considering the Gini index,26 simulations
                        show that average inequality would be 3 percent higher in the absence of social safety net transfers.
                        This effect varies across regions and income, and it is most pronounced in Europe and Central Asia
                        and Latin America and Caribbean. For example, Romania reduced its inequality by 14 percent, followed
                        closely by Belarus, Poland, Serbia and Montenegro. In Latin America and Caribbean, the strongest
                        progressive effect is in Mexico (5 percent), followed by Chile, Brazil and Uruguay.
                                                                                                         RESULTS AND EVIDENCE   33

Social protection achieves visible results in terms of reducing poverty. Annex 7 presents the simulated
impact of programs on poverty.27 Across the countries in Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of
Resilience and Equity, social safety nets reduce the poverty headcount on average by 8 percent and
the poverty gap by 17 percent. In absolute terms, 23 million people are lifted out of the lowest quintile,
representing 7 percent of the population in such income group. Extrapolating those results for the
developing world population, 78 million people would be in the bottom of income distribution in the
absence of social safety nets.28

Similarly, social safety nets have strong effects in reducing extreme poverty, as defined using the
international absolute poverty line of $1.25 a day. Across countries in the Atlas of Social Protection:
Indicators of Resilience and Equity database, social safety nets reduce global extreme poverty by 3
percent and help move 50 million people above the poverty line.29

The poverty-reducing effects are greater where coverage is higher and more generous trans-
fers are provided. In Eastern Europe and Central Asia, the combined effect of all social safety
nets helps to reduce poverty incidence by 12 percent (with 6 million people moving out of the
bottom quintile). In Latin America and the Caribbean, in the absence of social safety nets
poverty would be 8 percent higher and affect an additional 9 million people. Yet, in Sub-
Saharan Africa only 375,000 people are moved out of the bottom quintile, and only slightly more
than 2 million in all low-income countries (the extrapolation to all low-income countries not yet
included in Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity would produce an estimate
of 3.2 million). This is due to a combination of limited capacities, low coverage, low benefit levels,
and challenges in targeting.

In several countries, Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity has started to
trace indicators over time. Some of these cases show increase in coverage, improved targeting or
enhanced efficiency of social safety nets. For example, in Brazil, between 2006 and 2009 the targeting
of its flagship conditional cash transfer has improved: while 48 percent of the poorest quintile were
participating in the program, the rate subsequently increased to 51 percent. More remarkably, in El
Salvador about 57 percent among the poorest quintile of the population were benefiting from social
protection programs in 2007; by 2009 this share increased to 83 percent.



5.2 Evidence from Impact Evaluations
Social safety nets have been thoroughly evaluated in the past decade. The first systematic review
by the World Bank’s Independent Evaluation Group in 2011 identified 92 impact evaluations of social
safety nets in developing countries over 1999–2009. The review concluded that evidence on social
safety nets is “richer than most other areas of social policy” and that “each intervention has positive
impacts on the original objectives set out in the programs.” Most of the work was focused on Latin
America (63 percent of all studies) and conditional cash transfers. A forthcoming update of the IEG
database has identified 53 new evaluations completed in 3 years, many of which in Africa (24 new
impact evaluations).30 Such speed of building up rigorous evidence is impressive and offers great
insights into the transformational role of such programs.

The first generation of evaluations established that social safety nets have both short- and long-term
benefits ranging across different dimensions of well-being. The strongest effects were observed
34        RESULTS AND EVIDENCE

                                       for poverty reduction and human capital (education, health and nutrition). Impact evaluations found
                                       limited evidence of labor market disincentives.31 They also generally dispelled the myth that partic-
                                       ipation in transfer program may encourage greater fertility among the poor; on the contrary, they
                                       often increased women’s control of child bearing choices.

                                       New evaluations continue to show positive short-term results on household consumption, school
                                       attendance, children’s health and labor supply, and provide new evidence on local economy effects
                                       and long-term sustainability. New studies have examined long-term impacts of social safety nets
                                       on job prospects and earning, including 14 impact evaluations on the matter covering countries as
                                       different as Mexico, Ethiopia, Colombia and Pakistan, and new results on local economy impacts
                                       are now available, many of which are documented by the initiative “From Protection to Production
                                       Project.”32 The examples of new evidence is summarized across 8 channels of impact and presented
                                       in Table 6 below.


TABLE 6: Examples of Recent Impact Evaluations of Social Safety Net Programs, by Channels of Impact

     Channel of                           Social Safety
      Impact           Country                Nets                                     Main Findings                                    Year/Authors
Investing in      Brazil, Mexico and      Conditional      Positive and significant impact on grade promotion and cumulative        Glewwe and Kassouf
Human Capital:    Colombia                cash transfers   years of schooling.                                                      (2011)
Education,
                  Pakistan                Conditional      Beneficiary girls were more likely to complete secondary school by       Alam et al. (2010)
Health and
                                          cash transfer    4 to 7 percentage points.
Nutrition
                  Tanzania                Conditional      Significant increase in the number of children completing primary        Evans et al. (2014)
                                          cash transfer    school and moving to higher education;
                                                           Increase of health insurance expenditures among program
                                                           participants; effects were larger among the poorest
                  Malawi                  Conditional      The impacts of the conditional cash transfer arm increased               Baird et al. (2011)
                                          cash transfer/   attendance by 13.9 percentage points versus 6.3 in the
                                          Unconditional    unconditional cash transfer arm
                                          cash transfer
                  Colombia                Conditional      Children exposed to program in early ages are 4 to 8 percentage          Baez and Camacho
                                          cash transfer    points more likely to finish high school, particularly girls in rural    (2011)
                                                           areas.
                  Nicaragua               Conditional      Being exposed to the program in utero or early days of                   Barham et al (2013);
                                          cash transfer    life improves cognitive development in subsequent years;                 Macours (2012)
                                                           improvement of cognitive outcomes (language and memory at
                                                           age of 36 month), do not fade-out of impacts two years after the
                                                           program was ended and transfers were discontinued.
                  Burkina Faso            School           Positive effect on attendance; reduced the number of days absent         Alderman et al.
                                          feeding          by 1.4 days. Girls were 9 percentage points less likely to participate   (2009)
                                                           in farm-based and market-based labor.
Promoting         Guatemala               Unconditional    Children under two years of age who benefited from a nutritional         Behrman et al. (2008)
Better Job                                in-kind          social safety net earned wages 46 percent higher as adults
Prospects                                 transfer         compared to those who did not benefit from the intervention.
                  Jamaica                 ECD              Children participating in early childhood development programs           Gertler et al. (2013)
                                                           showed, as adults, average monthly lifetime earnings 60 percent
                                                           higher than non-participants
                  Uganda                  Grants           Monthly real earnings increase by 49% and 41% after 2 and 4 years.       Blattman et al. (2013)
                                                                                                                         RESULTS AND EVIDENCE                   35


    Channel of                                 Social Safety
     Impact                    Country             Nets                                      Main Findings                                  Year/Authors
 Improving Food       Bangladesh              Unconditional      Participation in food and cash-based programs increased                Ahmed et al. (2010)
 Security and                                 in-kind            household per capita food consumption between 23–66
 Nutrition                                    transfer, PWs,     kilocalories per person per day per 1 taka transferred.
                                              Conditional
                                              in-kind
                                              transfer
                      Ecuador                 Conditional        Food, cash and voucher transfers show significant improvements in      Hidrobo et al. (2014)
                                              in-kind            per capita caloric intake between 6–16 percent.
                                              transfer,
                                              Conditional
                                              cash transfer
                      Mexico                  Unconditional      Food transfers increased the intake of higher-quality foods (e.g.,     Le Roy et al. (2010)
                                              in-kind            meat) and proteins by 13.4 percent
                                              transfer
                      Uganda                  Conditional        Anemia among girls enrolled in the school feeding program was 20       Adelman et al. (2008)
                                              in-kind            percentage points lower compared to girls not participating in the
                                              transfer,          program.
                                              Uncondtional
                                              cash transfer
                      Indonesia               Unconditional      Food supplements reduced stunting for infants by 3.6 percentage        World Bank (2011v)
                                              in-kind            points, while that for the oldest age group by 2.8 percentage
                                              transfer           points.
 Using Transfers      Mexico                  Conditional        Participation of beneficiaries in non-agricultural activities          Gertler et al. (2012)
 for Productive                               cash transfer      increased by 3.3 percentage points; beneficiary households are
 Investments                                                     17.1 percent more likely to own production animals. After 5 years
                                                                 and a half, thanks to investment paying off, households increased
                                                                 consumption by 41.9 pesos per capita per month.
                      Malawi                  Uncondtional       Significant increases in the ownership of farm tools (hoes, sickles,   Boone et al. (2013);
                                              cash transfer      axes) and livestock, up by about 50 percent points.                    Covarrubias et al.
                                                                                                                                        (2012)
 Stimulating          Malawi                  Uncondtional       A cash transfer program generated up to US$2.45 in local               Davies and Davy
 Local                                        cash transfer      communities for every dollar provided to beneficiaries.                (2008)
 Economies
                      Lesotho                 Uncondtional       Multiplier effect of US$2.23 in local economy increased incomes        Taylor et al. (2012)
                                              cash transfer      from each $1 transferred to beneficiaries.

                      Multi-country study     Conditional        In Ghana, it is estimated that the LEAP program generated up           Davis (2013)
                                              cash transfer,     to $2.50 for every dollar provided to beneficiaries. Similarly, the
                                              Uncondtional       multiplicative effects of social safety nets were found in Ethiopia
                                              cash transfer      ($2.50), Zambia ($1.79) and Kenya ($1.34).
 Risk Resilience      Zambia                  Uncondtional       Beneficiary households in drought-prone areas are more likely to       Seidenfeld (2013)
                                              cash transfer      be selling crops and are 17 percentage points more likely to own
                                                                 non-farm enterprises.
                      Ethiopia                PW and assets Improved food security; participants 20 percentage points more              Hoddinott (2012)
                                                            likely to use fertilizers and invest in land improvements

 Enhancing            Chile                   Conditional        Beneficiaries have greater self-esteem and higher perceived self-      Carneiro et al. (2010)
 Agency and                                   cash transfer      efficacy in the labor market as well as greater optimism towards
 Self-Esteem                                                     the future
                      Malawi                  Conditional        Participation makes adolescent girls less likely to get involved in    Baird et al. (2011)
                                              cash transfer/     risky relationships and better control their fertility decisions
                                              Uncondtional
                                              cash transfer
 Improved Social      Brazil                  Conditional        Coverage of schools by the Bolsa program leads to a strong and         Chioda et al. 2012
 Cohesion                                     cash transfer      significant reduction on crime in the respective neighborhoods.

                      Tanzania                Conditional        Positive effects on social cohesion and civil like participation       Evans et al. (2014)
                                              cash transfer
                      Liberia                 Grants             An employment program for rural ex-fighters in Liberia reduced         Blattman and Annan
                                                                 the likelihood of engaging in criminal activities. After 14 months,    (2012)
                                                                 treated men shifted hours of illicit resource extraction to
                                                                 agriculture by 20 percent.

Source: Adapted from World Bank (2013a) and Andrews et al. (forthcoming).
36   RESULTS AND EVIDENCE

                        Yet more research is needed in a number of areas. Increasingly, experimental studies are shedding
                        light on the performance of alternative design and implementation options. In this regard, more
                        research may be needed on the selection of transfer modalities (e.g., cash or in-kind), appropriateness
                        of program timing, the level of benefits, whether and what type of conditionalities work in a given
                        context, the frequency and size of payments, and intra-community and household dynamics. A range
                        of matters around the political economy of social safety nets may deserve further research, including
                        their role in decision-making processes. There is also growing interest in the “graduation” agenda, or
                        notably how to help social safety nets beneficiaries move out of extreme poverty and into sustainable
                        livelihoods and more productive jobs. Yet much remains to be explored on linking social safety nets
                        with complementary programs and services such as asset transfers, financial inclusion, skills training,
                        job search assistance and the effects on beneficiaries’ jobs prospects and earnings. The adaptation
                        of social safety nets to urban areas is an issue of growing relevance in a number of countries, and so
                        is the customization of safety nets in fragile and disaster-prone contexts.
              A N N E X        1

CO U N T R I E S I N C L U D E D
         IN THE REPORT
38               COUNTRIES INCLUDED IN THE REPORT

          Country Name             Code      Region                            Income Classification   Population (millions)
      1   Afghanistan              AFG       South Asia                        Low income                    29.8
     2    Albania                  ALB       Eastern Europe and Central Asia   Upper middle income             3.2
     3    Algeria                  DZA       Middle East and North Africa      Upper middle income           38.5
     4    Angola                   AGO       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Upper middle income           20.8
     5 Antigua and Barbuda         ATG       Latin America and the Caribbean   High income                    0.1
     6 Argentina                   ARG       Latin America and the Caribbean   Upper middle income            41.1
     7    Armenia                  ARM       Eastern Europe and Central Asia   Lower middle income             3.0
     8    Azerbaijan               AZE       Eastern Europe and Central Asia   Upper middle income            9.3
     9    Bahrain                  BHR       Middle East and North Africa      High income                     1.3
 10       Bangladesh               BGD       South Asia                        Low income                   154.7
     11   Belarus                  BLR       Eastern Europe and Central Asia   Upper middle income            9.5
     12 Belize                     BLZ       Latin America and the Caribbean   Upper middle income            0.3
     13   Benin                    BEN       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                    10.1
     14   Bhutan                   BTN       South Asia                        Lower middle income            0.7
     15 Bolivia                    BOL       Latin America and the Caribbean   Lower middle income           10.5
     16   Bosnia & Herz.           BIH       Eastern Europe and Central Asia   Upper middle income             3.8
     17   Botswana                 BWA       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Upper middle income             2.0
     18 Brazil                     BRA       Latin America and the Caribbean   Upper middle income          198.7
     19   Bulgaria                 BGR       Eastern Europe and Central Asia   Upper middle income             7.3
 20       Burkina Faso             BFA       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                     16.5
     21   Burundi                  BDI       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                     9.8
 22       Cambodia                 KHM       East Asia & Pacific               Low income                     14.9
 23       Cameroon                 CMR       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Lower middle income            21.7
 24       Cabo Verde               CPV       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Lower middle income            0.5
 25       Central Afr. Rep.        CAF       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                     4.5
 26       Chad                     TCD       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                     12.4
 27 Chile                          CHL       Latin America and the Caribbean   High income                    17.5
 28 China                          CHN       East Asia & Pacific               Upper middle income         1350.7
 29 Colombia                       COL       Latin America and the Caribbean   Upper middle income           47.7
 30       Comoros                  COM       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                     0.7
     31   Congo, Dem. Rep.         ZAR       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                    65.7
 32       Congo, Rep               COG       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Lower middle income            4.3
 33 Costa Rica                     CRI       Latin America and the Caribbean   Upper middle income            4.8
 34       Côte d’Ivoire            CIV       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Lower middle income            19.8
 35 Croatia                        HRV       Eastern Europe and Central Asia   High income                    4.3
 36       Czech Republic           CZE       Eastern Europe and Central Asia   High income                   10.5
 37       Djibouti                 DJI       Middle East and North Africa      Lower middle income            0.9
 38 Dominica                       DMA       Latin America and the Caribbean   Upper middle income            0.1
 39 Dominican Rep.                 DOM       Latin America and the Caribbean   Upper middle income           10.3
 40 Ecuador                        ECU       Latin America and the Caribbean   Upper middle income            15.5
     41 Egypt                      EGY       Middle East and North Africa      Lower middle income           80.7
 42       El Salvador              SLV       Latin America and the Caribbean   Lower middle income            6.3
 43 Equatorial Guinea              GNQ       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              High income                    0.7
 44       Eritrea                  ERI       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                     6.1
 45       Estonia                  EST       Eastern Europe and Central Asia   High income                     1.3
 46 Ethiopia                       ETH       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                     91.7
 47       Fiji                     FJI       East Asia & Pacific               Upper middle income            0.9
 48       Gabon                    GAB       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Upper middle income             1.6
 49       Gambia, The              GMB       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                      1.8
 50 Georgia                        GEO       Eastern Europe and Central Asia   Lower middle income            4.5
     51 Ghana                      GHA       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Lower middle income           25.4
 52 Grenada                        GRD       Latin America and the Caribbean   Upper middle income            0.1
 53 Guatemala                      GTM       Latin America and the Caribbean   Lower middle income            15.1
 54       Guinea                   GIN       Africa (Sub-Saharan)              Low income                     11.5
                                                                  COUNTRIES INCLUDED IN THE REPORT             39

      Country Name       Code   Region                               Income Classification   Population (millions)
55 Guinea-Bissau         GNB    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Low income                      1.7
56    Guyana             GUY    Latin America and the Caribbean      Lower middle income            0.8
 57   Haiti              HTI    Latin America and the Caribbean      Low income                     10.2
58 Honduras              HND    Latin America and the Caribbean      Lower middle income             7.9
59 Hungary               HUN    Eastern Europe and Central Asia      Upper middle income            9.9
60    India              IND    South Asia                           Lower middle income         1236.7
 61   Indonesia          IDN    East Asia & Pacific                  Lower middle income          246.9
62    Iran               IRN    Middle East and North Africa         Upper middle income           76.4
63 Iraq                  IRQ    Middle East and North Africa         Upper middle income           32.6
64 Jamaica               JAM    Latin America and the Caribbean      Upper middle income            2.7
65    Jordan             JOR    Middle East and North Africa         Upper middle income            6.3
66 Kazakhstan            KAZ    Eastern Europe and Central Asia      Upper middle income            16.8
67    Kenya              KEN    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Low income                    43.2
68 Kiribati              KIR    East Asia & Pacific                  Lower middle income            0.1
69    Kosovo             KSV    Eastern Europe and Central Asia      Lower middle income             1.8
70    Kuwait             KWT    Middle East and North Africa         High income                    3.3
 71 Kyrgyz Rep.          KGZ    Eastern Europe and Central Asia      Low income                     5.6
 72 Lao, PDR             LAO    East Asia & Pacific                  Lower middle income            6.6
 73 Latvia               LVA    Eastern Europe and Central Asia      High income                     2.0
 74   Lebanon            LBN    Middle East and North Africa         Upper middle income            4.4
 75   Lesotho            LSO    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Lower middle income             2.1
76    Liberia            LBR    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Low income                     4.2
 77   Libya              LBY    Middle East and North Africa         Upper middle income            6.2
78    Lithuania          LTU    Eastern Europe and Central Asia      High income                    3.0
79    Macedonia, FYR     MKD    Eastern Europe and Central Asia      Upper middle income             2.1
80    Madagascar         MDG    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Low income                    22.3
 81   Malawi             MWI    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Low income                     15.9
82    Malaysia           MYS    East Asia & Pacific                  Upper middle income           29.2
83    Maldives           MDV    South Asia                           Upper middle income            0.3
84    Mali               MLI    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Low income                     14.9
85 Marshall Islands      MHL    East Asia & Pacific                  Upper middle income            0.1
86    Mauritania         MRT    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Lower middle income            3.8
87    Mauritius          MUS    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Upper middle income             1.3
88 Mexico                MEX    Latin America and the Caribbean      Upper middle income          120.8
89 Micronesia, FS        FSM    East Asia & Pacific                  Lower middle income            0.1
90 Moldova               MDA    Eastern Europe and Central Asia      Lower middle income            3.6
 91   Mongolia           MNG    East Asia & Pacific                  Lower middle income            2.8
92 Montenegro            MNE    Eastern Europe and Central Asia      Upper middle income            0.6
93    Morocco            MAR    Middle East and North Africa         Lower middle income           32.5
94    Mozambique         MOZ    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Low income                    25.2
95 Namibia               NAM    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Upper middle income            2.3
96    Nepal              NPL    South Asia                           Low income                     27.5
97 Nicaragua             NIC    Latin America and the Caribbean      Lower middle income            6.0
98    Niger              NER    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Low income                     17.2
99    Nigeria            NGA    Africa (Sub-Saharan)                 Lower middle income          168.8
100   Oman               OMN    Middle East and North Africa         High income                    3.3
101   Pakistan           PAK    South Asia                           Lower middle income           179.2
102 Panama               PAN    Latin America and the Caribbean      Upper middle income            3.8
103   Papua New Guinea   PNG    East Asia & Pacific                  Lower middle income             7.2
104 Paraguay             PRY    Latin America and the Caribbean      Lower middle income            6.7
105 Peru                 PER    Latin America and the Caribbean      Upper middle income           30.0
106   Philippines        PHL    East Asia & Pacific                  Lower middle income           96.7
107   Poland             POL    Eastern Europe and Central Asia      High income                   38.5
108 Qatar                QAT    Middle East and North Africa         High income                    2.1
40         COUNTRIES INCLUDED IN THE REPORT

        Country Name                     Code           Region                                                   Income Classification           Population (millions)
109     Romania                          ROM            Eastern Europe and Central Asia                          Upper middle income                     20.1
 110    Russia                           RUS            Eastern Europe and Central Asia                          High income                            143.5
  111   Rwanda                           RWA            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Low income                               11.5
 112    S. Sudan                         SSD            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Low income                               0.2
 113    Samoa                            WSM            East Asia & Pacific                                      Lower middle income                      0.2
 114    Sao Tome and Pr.                 STP            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Lower middle income                     28.3
 115    Saudi Arabia                     SAU            Middle East and North Africa                             High income                              13.7
 116    Senegal                          SEN            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Lower middle income                       7.2
 117    Serbia                           SRB            Eastern Europe and Central Asia                          Upper middle income                      0.1
 118    Seychelles                       SYC            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Upper middle income                      6.0
 119    Sierra Leone                     SLE            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Low income                                5.4
 120    Slovakia                         SVK            Eastern Europe and Central Asia                          High income                               2.1
 121    Slovenia                         SVN            Eastern Europe and Central Asia                          High income                              0.5
 122    Solomon Islands                  SLB             East Asia & Pacific                                     Lower middle income                      10.2
 123    Somalia                          SOM             Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                    Low income                              52.3
 124    South Africa                     ZAF            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Upper middle income                      10.8
 125    Sri Lanka                        LKA             South Asia                                              Lower middle income                     20.3
 126 St. Kitts and Nev.                  KNA            Latin America and the Caribbean                          High income                              0.1
 127 St. Lucia                           LCA            Latin America and the Caribbean                          Upper middle income                      0.2
 128 St. Vincent                         VCT            Latin America and the Caribbean                          Upper middle income                      0.1
 129    Sudan                            SDN            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Lower middle income                      37.2
 130 Suriname                            SUR            Latin America and the Caribbean                          Upper middle income                      0.5
 131    Swaziland                        SWZ            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Lower middle income                       1.2
 132    Syria                            SYR            Middle East and North Africa                             Lower middle income                     22.4
 133    Tajikistan                       TJK            Eastern Europe and Central Asia                          Low income                                8.0
 134    Tanzania                         TZA            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Low income                              47.8
 135 Thailand                            THA            East Asia & Pacific                                      Upper middle income                     66.8
 136    Timor-Leste                      TMP            East Asia & Pacific                                      Lower middle income                       1.2
 137    Togo                             TGO            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Low income                               6.6
 138    Tonga                            TON            East Asia & Pacific                                      Upper middle income                      0.1
 139 Trinidad and Tob.                   TTO            Latin America and the Caribbean                          High income                               1.3
140     Tunisia                          TUN            Middle East and North Africa                             Upper middle income                      10.8
 141    Turkey                           TUR            Eastern Europe and Central Asia                          Upper middle income                     74.0
 142    Turkmenistan                     TKM            Eastern Europe and Central Asia                          Upper middle income                       5.2
 143 Tuvalu                              TUV            East Asia & Pacific                                      Upper middle income                      0.0
144     UAE                              ARE            Middle East and North Africa                             High income                              9.2
 145    Uganda                           UGA            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Low income                              36.3
 146 Ukraine                             UKR            Eastern Europe and Central Asia                          Lower middle income                     45.6
 147 Uruguay                             URY            Latin America and the Caribbean                          High income                               3.4
 148 Uzbekistan                          UZB            Eastern Europe and Central Asia                          Lower middle income                     29.8
 149 Vanuatu                             VUT            East Asia & Pacific                                      Lower middle income                      0.2
150 Venezuela                            VEN            Latin America and the Caribbean                          Upper middle income                     30.0
 151 Vietnam                             VNM            East Asia & Pacific                                      Lower middle income                     88.8
 152    West Bank & Gaza                 WBG            Middle East and North Africa                             Lower middle income                      4.0
 153    Yemen, Rep.                      YEM            Middle East and North Africa                             Lower middle income                     23.9
 154    Zambia                           ZMB            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Lower middle income                      14.1
 155 Zimbabwe                            ZWE            Africa (Sub-Saharan)                                     Low income                               13.7

Note. The following countries were not included in the report and may be added in the next issues of The State of Safety Nets: American Samoa, Andorra, Aruba, Australia,
Austria, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Bermuda, Brunei, Darussalam, Canada, Cayman Islands, Channel Islands, Cuba, Curaçao, Cyprus, Denmark, Faeroe Islands,
Finland, France, French Polynesia, Germany, Greece, Greenland, Guam, Hong Kong SAR, Iceland, Ireland, Isle of Man, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Dem. Rep., Korea, Rep.,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Macao SAR, Malta, Monaco, Myanmar, Nauru, Netherlands, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Northern Mariana Islands, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Puerto Rico, San Marino, Sint Maarten (Dutch part), Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States, Virgin Islands (U.S.).
            A N N E X      2

P R O G R A M I N V E N TO RY
42   PROGRAM INVENTORY

                         The table below presents an inventory of social safety net programs by region, country and program
                         type. Social safety nets are non-contributory transfers designed to provide regular and predictable
                         support to targeted poor and vulnerable people. These are also referred to as “social assistance” or
                         “social transfers.”



                         Methodology
                         Programs are classified by benefit modality, including programs in cash and in-kind (including vouchers
                         and targeted subsidies). Then the report divides programs by conditionality of transfers. Conditional
                         transfers are provided upon fulfillment of a set of conditions or co-responsibilities by beneficiaries
                         (e.g., ensuring a minimum level of school attendance by children, regular visits to health facilities, etc.).
                         Unconditional transfers are provided without particular co-responsibilities, while public works engage
                         participants in manual, labor-oriented activities such as building or rehabilitating community assets
                         and public infrastructure. By combining these criteria, the following 5 program types are generated:
                         conditional in-kind transfers, conditional cash transfers, unconditional in-kind transfers, unconditional
                         cash transfers, and public works.33

                         For each of the five categories, the table reports some of the most significant (if not the largest)
                         program in terms of number of beneficiaries based on most recent data and available information, the
                         number of beneficiaries and the data source. When beneficiaries are reported in terms of household
                         these are labelled as “hh,” otherwise they refer to individuals. The time period across programs may
                         differ (ranging from 2008 to 2013) as the table reports only the most recent year.



                         Sources
                         The main source of information was the World Bank Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience
                         and Equity SPL global database, which includes program data collected through World Bank social
                         protection country assessment reports, public expenditure reviews, poverty assessment report, project
                         documents, country policy notes, regional reports and social safety net reviews. The report also
                         draws from extensive analysis of data available in official websites of governments and international
                         development agencies engaged in social protection. These include the Economic Commission for
                         Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), Helpage International (in particular the “Social Pensions
                         Database”), the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the International Labor
                         Office (ILO), the Standing Committee for Economic and Commercial Cooperation of the Organization
                         of Islamic Cooperation (COMCEC), the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
                         the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and the World Food Programme. The World Food
                         Programme “State of School feeding Worldwide” (WFP 2013a) and “Public Works as a Safety Net:
                         Design, Evidence, and Implementation” (Subbarao et al., 2013) were key sources for the number of
                         beneficiaries of conditional in-kind transfers (school feeding) and public works programs respectively
                         (see Annex 6 for full references and resources). Specific sources are reported next to each beneficiary
                         number for every program and country.
                                                      Condidtional                                                                                  Unconditional                                                                 Public Works
                  Food and    Beneficiaries                Conditional Cash   Beneficiaries                    Food and       Beneficiaries                    Unconditional   Beneficiaries                                       Beneficiaries
    Country       Near Cash      (’000)           Source       Transfer          (’000)           Source       Near Cash         (’000)           Source       Cash Transfer      (’000)           Source              PW             (’000)           Source
Afghanistan   School              1841        WFP                                                          Emergency             1800         WFP                                                               Food-for-Work         1500         WFP (2014j)
              feeding                         (2013a)                                                      Food Assistance                    (2014j)
Albania       School               111        WFP                                                          Energy benefit          57         World        Ndihme                  102         World Bank       Employment              2          World Bank
              feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                         Bank         Ekonomike                           (2011n)          program                            (2010e)
                                                                                                                                              (2011n)
Algeria       School               31         WFP                                                                                                                                                                                                   
              feeding                         (2013a)
Angola        School              221         WFP     Angola                      900         World        Angola nutrition       800         World        Angola social          1000         World Bank                                           
              feeding                         (2013a) Conditional                             Bank         program                            Bank         pension                             (2012o)
                                                      Cash Transfer                           (2012o)                                         (2012o)      program
                                                      School Progam
Antigua and   School               7          WFP                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Barbuda       feeding                         (2013a)
Argentina     Comedores          3002         WFP     Asignación                  3541        ECLAC        Plan nacional         1954         GoA          Pensión no              576         Cerutti et al.   Trabajadores            10         Subbarao
              escolares                       (2013a) Universal por                           (2012)       de sugeridad                       (2007)       contributiva                        (2014)           Constructores                      (2013)
                                                      Hijo para la                                         alimentaria                                     por
                                                      Protección                                                                                           discapacidad
                                                      Social
Armenia       School               38         WFP                                                                                                          Family                   76         World Bank       Paid public             5          Subbarao
              feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                      Benefits                            (2011o)          works                              et al. (2013)
                                                                                                                                                           Program
Azerbaijana                                                                                                                                                Targeted                180         Tesliuc et al.                                       
                                                                                                                                                           social                              (2014)
                                                                                                                                                           assistance
Bahrain       School               58         WFP                                                                                                          Large-scale                                                                              
              feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                      temporary
                                                                                                                                                           Cash Transfer
                                                                                                                                                           Program
                                                                                                                                                           (CTP)
Bangladesh    School             1930         WFP     Primary                    7800         UNICEF       Public Food           2100         WB           Social                 2475         Helpage          Employment            1200         Subbarao
              feeding                         (2013a) Education                               (2013)       Distribution                       (2010f)      pensions                            International    Generation                         (2013)
                                                      Stipend Project                                      System                                                                              (2014)           Program for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Poorest
Belarusa      School              228         WFP                                                          Subsidies for         1490         World        Last-resort             166         World Bank                                           
              feeding                         (2013a)                                                      housing and                        Bank         social                              (2011r)
                                                                                                           utilities                          (2011r)      assistance,
                                                                                                                                                           GASP
Belize        School               26         WFP     Building                     9          ECLAC        Women’s Iron            9          WB           Social pension           4          Helpage                                              
              feeding                         (2013a) Opportunities                           (2012)       and Folic Acid                     (2010a)                                          International
                                                      for Our Social                                       Distribution                                                                        (2014)
                                                      Transformation                                       Program
                                                      (BOOST)
Benin         School              324         WFP     Program for                             WB           Le programme            22         WB           Universal                                            PGUD                   1470        WB (2011f)
              feeding                         (2013a) girls education                         (2011f)      d’appui                            (2011f)      Social Pension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PROGRAM INVENTORY




                                                                                                           nutritionnel
                                                                                                           aux ménages
                                                                                                           affectés par le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   43




                                                                                                           VIH/SID
                                                 Condidtional                                                                                 Unconditional                                                                 Public Works
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             44

                 Food and    Beneficiaries            Conditional Cash   Beneficiaries                    Food and      Beneficiaries                    Unconditional   Beneficiaries                                       Beneficiaries
    Country     Near Cash       (’000)       Source       Transfer          (’000)           Source       Near Cash        (’000)           Source       Cash Transfer      (’000)           Source             PW              (’000)           Source
Bhutan         School             82         WFP                                                                                                                                                                                              
               feeding                       (2013a)
Bolivia        School           1906         WFP     Bono Juacinto          1750         ECLAC        Nutrition              4          WFP          Renta                   835         Helpage                                              
               feeding                       (2013a) Pinto                               (2012)       program                           (2013i)      Dignidad                            International
                                                                                                                                                     Social pension                      (2014)
Bosnia &       School             112        WFP                                                                                                     Family                  181         World Bank                                           
Herzegovina    feeding                       (2013a)                                                                                                 assistance                          (2010e)
                                                                                                                                                     benefits
Botswana       School            330         WFP                                                      Vulnerable            231         WB           The Old-Age             90          WB (2011b)       Alternative                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PROGRAM INVENTORY




               feeding                       (2013a)                                                  Group Feeding                     (2011b)      Pension (OAP)                                        Packages
                                                                                                      Program                                                                                             Program (APP)
Brazil         Programa         47271        WFP     Bolsa Familia          57753        ECLAC        Segurança               -                      Previdência            5852         Cerutti et al.   Programa                 -          
               nacional de                   (2013a)                                     (2012)       Alimentar e                                    Rural and                           (2014)           economia
               alimentacao                                                                            Nutricional dos                                Benefício de                                         solidaria
               escolar                                                                                Povos Indígenas                                Prestação
                                                                                                                                                     Continuada
                                                                                                                                                     and Renda
                                                                                                                                                     Mensal
                                                                                                                                                     Vitalícia
Bulgaria       School            166         WFP                                                      Energy Benefit        259         World        Child benefits          817         World Bank                                           
               feeding                       (2013a)                                                                                    Bank                                             (2009e)
                                                                                                                                        (2009e)
Burkina Faso   School           2209         WFP                                                      Urban voucher         339         WB           CT to OVC               6.5         WB (2011c)       Food security                       
               feeding                       (2013a)                                                  program                           (2011c)                                                           support
                                                                                                                                                                                                          program
Burundi        School            190         WFP                                                      Support to            252         USAID                                                             Public Works                        
               feeding                       (2013a)                                                  refugees and                      (2014)                                                            and Urban
                                                                                                      returnees                                                                                           management
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Project
Cambodia       School            756         WFP                                                      Mother and            114         GoC                                                               Emergency              1.3h        Subbarao
               feeding                       (2013a)                                                  Child Health                      (2009)                                                            Food                               et al. (2013)
                                                                                                      program                                                                                             Asssistance
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Project
Cameroonc      School             43         WFP                                                      Nutrition              20         WB           Cash Transfer          20 hh        World Bank       Public Work s          10h         World Bank
               feeding                       (2013a)                                                  program                           (2011d)      Pilot                               (2013k)          Pilot                              (2013k)
Cape Verde     School             86         WFP                                                      Apoio                  1.9        ILO          Social                   23         ILO (2012)       Frentes de Alta                     
               feeding                       (2013a)                                                  nutricional                       (2012)       Pensions                                             Intensidade de
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mão de Obra
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (FAIMOs)
Central Afr.   School            284         WFP                                                      General Food           33         WFP                                                               Food for assets         89         CAR (2013)
Rep.           feeding                       (2013a)                                                  Distribution                      (2014c)
                                                                                                      to IDPs and
                                                                                                      returnees
Chad           School            255         WFP     Conditional                          UNHCR       General Food          757         WFP                                                               Food for assets        325         WFP (2012d)
               feeding                       (2013a) cash grants in                      (2011)       Distribution                      (2012d)
                                                     refugee camps                                    to IDPs and
                                                                                                      returnees
Chile           Junta        2263    WFP                                       Programa            -               Chile Solidario   1148    ECLAC            ProEmpleo        19.9   GoCh (2013)
                nacional             (2013a)                                   nacional de                                                   (2012)
                de auxilio                                                     alimentacion
                escolar y                                                      complementaria
                becas
China           School       26000   WFP     Educational                       Wubao             5500   World      Di Bao            74800   Umapathi                                  
                feeding              (2013a) Subsidies and                                              Bank                                 et al. (2013)
                program                      free education                                             (2010g)
Colombia        School       3334    WFP     Familias en      11719   ECLAC    Red de            4137   Perfetti   Programa de        718    Helpage          Programa de      14.3   GoC (2013)
                feeding              (2013a) Acción                   (2012)   seguridad                et al.     Protección                International    empleo de
                                                                               alimentaria              (2010)     Social al                 (2014)           emergencia
                                                                                                                   Adulto Mayor
Comoros         School        20     WFP                                                                                                                      Community        3.8    Subbarao
                feeding              (2013a)                                                                                                                  Development             et al. (2013)
                                                                                                                                                              Support Fund
                                                                                                                                                              (FADC in
                                                                                                                                                              French)
Congo, Dem.     School        1176   WFP                                       Voucher            112   WFP        Support to         92     WFP              Social           14     Subbarao
Rep.            feeding              (2013a)                                   program                  (2014e)    vulnerable                (2014e)          Emergency               et al. (2013)
                                                                                                                   households                                 Action Program
                                                                                                                                                              (PASU)
Congo, Rep      School        223    WFP                                       Food assistance    70    WFP        Cash transfer             Hodges           Public Works             
                feeding              (2013a)                                   to refugees              (2014f)    program in                and O’Brien      project
                                                                                                                   Brazzaville               (2012)
                                                                                                                   and
                                                                                                                   Point-Noire
Costa Rica      School        603    WFP     Avancemos        185     ECLAC    Cen-cinai         125    WB         Social pension     84     Helpage          Programa          2     WB (2008b)
                feeding              (2013a)                          (2012)                            (2008b)                              International    Nacional de
                                                                                                                                             (2014)           Empleo
Cote D’ivoire   School        374    WFP                                       General Food      379    WFP        Cash Transfer      54     WFP              Post-Conflict     3     Subbarao
                feeding              (2013a)                                   Distribution to          (2014g)    Project in                (2014g)          Assistance              et al. (2013)
                                                                               IDPs                                Abidjan                                    Project
Croatia         School        152    WFP                                                                           Child              213    World Bank                                
                feeding              (2013a)                                                                       Allowance                 (2011t)
Czech Republic                                                                                                     Benefit in         71     Tesliuc et al.                            
                                                                                                                   material need             (2014)
Djibouti        School        28     WFP                                       Peri-urban         29    WFP        Assistance                                 Social           75     Subbarao
                feeding              (2013a)                                   voucher                  (2012d)    for the                                    Assistance              et al. (2013)
                                                                               program                             demobilized                                Pilot Program
                                                                                                                                                              on Labor and
                                                                                                                                                              Human Capital
                                                                                                                                                              (75)
Dominica        School         5     WFP                                                                                                                                               
                feeding              (2013a)
Dominican       School       1372    WFP     Programa         2947    ECLAC    Comer es          2071   GoDR       Ageing in                                                           
Rep.            feeding              (2013a) solidaridad              (2011)   Primero                  (2012)     Extreme
                                                                                                                   Poverty
                                                                                                                                                                                                      PROGRAM INVENTORY




                                                                                                                   Protection
                                                                                                                   Programme
Ecuador         School       1789    WFP     Bono de          6418    ECLAC    Alimentate                          Pension            584    Helpage          Mi primer                
                feeding              (2013a) Desarrollo               (2012)   Ecuador                             para Adultos              International    empleo
                                                                                                                                                                                                      45




                                             Humano                                                                Mayores                   (2014)
                                                         Condidtional                                                                                   Unconditional                                                                 Public Works
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       46

                     Food and    Beneficiaries                Conditional Cash   Beneficiaries                    Food and        Beneficiaries                    Unconditional   Beneficiaries                                       Beneficiaries
       Country       Near Cash      (’000)           Source       Transfer          (’000)           Source       Near Cash          (’000)           Source       Cash Transfer      (’000)           Source            PW               (’000)           Source
Egyptc           School             7002         WFP                                                          Support to               15         WFP          Social                 82 hh        GoE (2008)      FFA support for          8          WFP (2013g)
                 feeding                         (2013a)                                                      nutrition                           (2013g)      solidarity                                          vulnerable rural
                                                                                                                                                               pension                                             communities
El Salvador      School              1,313       WFP     Comunidades                 412         ECLAC                                                         Basic Social             29         GoES (2013)     Program for             63.7        GoES (2013)
                 feeding                         (2013a) Solidarias                              (2012)                                                        Pension                                             Temporary
                                                         Rurales                                                                                                                                                   Income Support
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (PATI)
Equatorial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Guineaf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PROGRAM INVENTORY




Eritrea                                                                                                       Blanket feeding         187         UNICEF                                                           Public Works                         
                                                                                                              for under 5                         (2012)                                                           program
Estonia          School               47         WFP                                                                                                           Subsistence              38         Statistics                                           
                 feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                       benefit                             Estonia
                                                                                                                                                               (means-tested                       (2014)
                                                                                                                                                               benefit)
Ethiopia         School              681         WFP                                                          Food Assistance        3400         WFP          Productive            242 hh        GoE (2009)      Productive             7600         Subbarao
                 feeding                         (2013a)                                                      under Joint                         (2014h)      Safety Nets                                         Safety Net                          et al. (2013)
                                                                                                              Emergency                                        Program*                                            Program*
                                                                                                              Operation
                                                                                                              Programme
Fiji                                                          Care and                8          ADB          Food Voucher                        ADB          Family                   25         ADB                                                  
                                                              Protection                         (2009j)      Program (na)                        (2009j)      Assistance                          (2009j)
                                                              Allowance                                                                                        Program
Gabonf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Gambia, The      School              159         WFP     Family                      130         COMCEC       Blanket                 200         WFP          Emergency                20         WFP (2014i)                                          
                 feeding                         (2013a) Strengthening                           (2013)       supplementary                       (2014i)      Food Security
                                                         Program                                              feeding for                                      Response
                                                                                                              children under 5
Georgia                                                                                                       Electricity             78.5        UNICEF       Targeted                900         World Bank                                           
                                                                                                              vouchers                            (2010)       social                              (2012l)
                                                                                                                                                               assistance
Ghana            School              352         WFP     Livelihood                 73 hh        ILO          Targeted                480         WFP          Social                              ILO (2013)      Labor Intensive          54         World Bank
                 feeding                         (2013a) Empowerment                             (2013a)      supplementary                       (2013f)      Inclusion                                           Public Works                        (2014b)
                                                         Against                                              feeding for                                      Transfer
                                                         Poverty (LEAP)                                       malnourished
                                                                                                              children
Grenada          School               9          WFP                                                          Food Security             1         UN           Public                   4          UN Women/       Debushing               0.4         Subbarao
                 feeding                         (2013a)                                                      Program                             Women/       Assistance                          WB (2009)       Program                             (2013)
                                                                                                                                                  WB
                                                                                                                                                  (2009)
Guatemala        School             3052         WFP     Mi Bono                    4168         ECLAC        Bolsas Solidarias        70         WB           Programa del            103         Helpage                                              
                 feeding                         (2013a) Seguro                                  (2012)                                           (2010d)      Adult Mayor                         International
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (2014)
Guinea           School              553         WFP                                                          Food and                 6          WFP          Cash Transfer                                       Productive                           
                 feeding                         (2013a)                                                      nutritional                         (2014k)      for nutrition                                       Social Safety
                                                                                                              assistance to                                    and for girl’s                                      Net Program
                                                                                                              Ivoirian refugees                                education
Guinea-Bissau   School        126     WFP                                                                                   Social pension     2     GoGB                                            
                feeding               (2013a)                                                                                                        (2007)
Guyana          School         17     WFP                                                                                   Social pension    43     Helpage                                         
                feeding               (2013a)                                                                                                        International
                                                                                                                                                     (2014)
Haiti           School        2155    WFP     Ti Manman          111    ECLAC         Unconditional       300     WFP                                                 National Project     450      Subbarao
                feeding               (2013a) Cheri                     (2012)        food transfer               (2014d)                                             of Community                  (2013)
                                                                                      relief assistance                                                               Participation
                                                                                                                                                                      Development
                                                                                                                                                                      (PRODEP in
                                                                                                                                                                      French)
Honduras        Programa     1460     WFP     Bono 10,000      200 hh   WB            Nutrition            39     WFP       Bono de la        61     Cerutti et al.   Agro-Forestry         13      WFP (2012f)
                Escuela               (2013a)                           (2012n)       Support for                 (2012f)   Tercera Edad             (2014)           and Watershed
                Saludables                                                            Vulnerable                                                                      Project
                                                                                      Groups
Hungary         School        249     WFP     For the road      26      Friedman                                            Regular social   269     Tesliuc et al.                                  
                feeding               (2013a)                           et al.                                              assistance               (2014)
                                                                        (2009)
Indiae          School       113600   WFP     Janani           9500     Lim (et al.   Integrated Child                      Indira Gandhi    19200   Helpage          Mahatma            38600 hh   Ministry
                feeding               (2013a) Suraksha                  (2010)        Development                           National Old             International    Gandhi                        of Rural
                                              Yojana                                  Services                              Age Pension              (2014)           National Rural                Development
                                                                                                                            Scheme                                    Employment
                                                                                                                                                                      Guarantee
                                                                                                                                                                      Scheme
Indonesia       School        125     WFP     Program          2,906    ADB           Raskin              18500   Wolrd     Bantuan          15500   ILO (2013b)      National                      Subbarao
                feeding               (2013a) Keluarga                  (2009k)                                   Bank      Langsung                                  Community                     et al. (2013)
                                              Harapan                                                             (2012t)   Sementara                                 Empowerment
                                                                                                                            Masyarakat                                Program (PNPM
                                                                                                                                                                      Mandiri)
Iran            School         3      WFP                                                                                   Compensatory     6100    World Bank                                      
                feeding               (2013a)                                                                               Cash Transfer            (2010i)
Iraqc           School        555     WFP                                                                                                                                                            
                feeding               (2013a)
Jamaica         School        311     WFP     Programme of      307     ECLAC         Rural feeding        4      WB        Social pension    52     Helpage                                         
                feeding               (2013a) Advancement               (2012)        Programme                   (2011o)                            International
                                              through Health                                                                                         (2014)
                                              and Education
                                              (PATH)
Jordanc         School        115     WFP                                             Urban TFA            115    WFP       National Aid     250     WFP              Rural FFA             42      WFP (2013h)
                feeding               (2013a)                                                                     (2013h)   Fund                     (2013h)
Kazakhstana     School        629     WFP     BOTA              135     World                                               Targeted          134    World Bank       Road Map             247      World Bank
                feeding               (2013a)                           Bank                                                social                   (2011p)                                        (2011p)
                                                                        (2011p)                                             assistance
Kenya           School        1991    WFP     Cash transfer     412     WB            General             2180    WB        Hunger Safety    290     WB (2012d)       Kazi Kwa             300      Subbarao
                feeding               (2013a) for OVC                   (2012d)       relief food                 (2012d)   net program                               Viajana                       et al. (2013)
                                              (CT-OVC)                                distribution                          (HSNP)                                    Program
                                                                                                                                                                      (KKVP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PROGRAM INVENTORY




Kiribati                                                                                                                    Elderly            2                                                     
                                                                                                                            Pension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    47
                                                       Condidtional                                                                                   Unconditional                                                            Public Works
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                48

                   Food and    Beneficiaries                Conditional Cash   Beneficiaries                    Food and        Beneficiaries                    Unconditional   Beneficiaries                                  Beneficiaries
    Country        Near Cash      (’000)           Source       Transfer          (’000)           Source       Near Cash          (’000)           Source       Cash Transfer      (’000)           Source         PW             (’000)           Source
Kosovo                                                                                                                                                       Social welfare          426         World Bank   Kosovo Public          2h         Subbarao
                                                                                                                                                             benefits                            (2010e)      Works Program                     et al. (2013)
Kuwait         School              136         WFP     Families of                                                                                           Disability                                                                          
               feeding                         (2013a) Students grant                                                                                        grant
Kyrgyz Rep.a   School              301         WFP                                                          Electricity             516         World        Monthly                 377         World Bank   Public Works                       
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                      compensation                        Bank         benefit for                         (2014e)
                                                                                                                                                (2014e)      poor Families
                                                                                                                                                             with Children
                                                                                                                                                             (MBPF)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PROGRAM INVENTORY




Lao, PDR       School              177         WFP                                                                                                                                                            Poverty                118        Subbarao
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                                                                        Reduction Fund                    et al. (2013)
Latvia         School               73         WFP                                                                                                           Guaranteed              120         World Bank   Workplaces             82         World Bank
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                       minimum                             (2012r)      with Stipend                      (2012r)
                                                                                                                                                             income                                           Emergency
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Public Works
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Program
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (WWS)
Lebanon        School              295         WFP                                                                                                           Family and                                                                          
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                       education
                                                                                                                                                             allowances
Lesotho        School              445         WFP                                                          Nutrition               134         WB           Old age social           83         WB (2012e)   Public works                       
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                      Support for                         (2012e)      pension
                                                                                                            Malnourished
                                                                                                            Children and
                                                                                                            other Vulnerable
                                                                                                            Groups
Liberia        School              648         WFP                                                          Supplementary           152         WB           Social Cash             2 hh        WB (2011a)   Liberia                153        WB (2011a)
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                      feeding                             (2011a)      Transfer                                         Emergency
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Program/
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Liberia
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Action Program
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (LEEP/LEAP)
Libyaf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Lithuania                                                                                                                                                    Social benefit           68         GoL (2009)   Temporary               6         GoL (2009)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Promotion
Macedonia,                                                  Conditional             19         World                                                         Social financial        52.7        World Bank   Organizing              5         Subbarao
FYR                                                         cash transfer-                     Bank                                                          assistance                          (2010e)      Public Works                      et al. (2013)
                                                            increased child                    (2011t)
                                                            allowance
Madagascar     School              237         WFP     Conditional                             WB           Nutrition-               52         WB           Family                              WB (2012f)   Cash-for-work         50h         Subbarao
               feeding                         (2013a) cash transfer                           (2012f)      related transfers                   (2012f)      allowance                                        component of                      et al. (2013)
                                                                                                            in-kind                                                                                           the Emergency
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Food
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Security and
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Reconstruction
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Project
Malawib         School    790    WFP                                       Targeted in-kind   1709     WFP       Social Cash                              Public works     223h   Subbarao
                Feeding          (2013a)                                   transfer                    (2013e)   Transfer                                 program                 et al. (2013)
                                                                                                                 Scheme
                                                                                                                 (SCTS)
Malaysiac       School    1916   WFP                                                                             MWFCDs           420    World Bank                                
                feeding          (2013a)                                                                         financial               (2014d)
                                                                                                                 assistance
                                                                                                                 programs*
Maldives                                                                                                         Old Age           15    Helpage                                   
                                                                                                                 Pension                 International
                                                                                                                 Scheme                  (2014)
Mali            School    354    WFP     Maternal          5     WB        Government          450     WB        Unconditional     7     World Bank       Public Works      1h    Subbarao
                feeding          (2013a) Grants for              (2011g)   nutrition                   (2011g)   cash transfer           (2011g)          Porgram                 et al. (2013)
                                         Education                         program                               program
                                         (Bourses                                                                in Gao and
                                         Maman)                                                                  Sikasso
Marshall        School     4     WFP                                                                                                                                               
Islands         feeding          (2013a)
Mauritaniad     School    186    WFP     Cash for         15     WFP       Program for         73      WFP                                                Asset Creation   100    WFP (2013d)
                feeding          (2013a) Training                (2013d)   Prevention                  (2013d)                                            Program
                                         Program                           of Acute
                                                                           Malnutrition
Mauritius       School    75     WFP                                       Food stamps                           Old age social   160    Helpage          Public works             
                feeding          (2013a)                                   and vouchers                          pension                 International
                                                                                                                                         (2014)
Mexico          School    5164   WFP     Oportunidades   32340   ECLAC     Programa           674 hh   Sedesol   Programa de      5100   Helpage          Programa         506    ILO (2009)
                feeding          (2013a)                         (2012)    de apoyo                    (2012)    Atención a              International    de empleo
                                                                           alomentario                           los Adultos             (2014)           temporal
                                                                                                                 Mayores de 70                            Ampliado
                                                                                                                 años y más en
                                                                                                                 Zonas Rurales
Micronesia, FSf                                                                                                                                                                    
Moldovaa        School    70     WFP                                                                             Ajutor Social     27    Tesliuc et al.   Moldova Social    112   Subbarao
                feeding          (2013a)                                                                                                 (2014)           Investment              et al. (2013)
                                                                                                                                                          Fund
Mongolia        School    135    WFP                                       Food Stamp          97      ADB       Child Money      932    ADB                                       
                feeding          (2013a)                                   Program                     (2009f)   Program                 (2009f)
Montenegro                                                                                                       Family            13    Tesliuc et al.                            
                                                                                                                 material                (2014)
                                                                                                                 support and
                                                                                                                 benefits based
                                                                                                                 on social care
Moroccoc        School    1423   WFP     Tayssir          80     World     Villes Sans        324 hh   World     Family           538    World Bank       Promotion         45    World Bank
                feeding          (2013a)                         Bank      Bidonvilles                 Bank      allowances              (2011s)          Nationale               (2011s)
                                                                 (2011s)                               (2011s)
Mozambique      School    427    WFP                                       Food for OVC        125     WFP       Programa         217    WB (2011i)       Programa de       10    GoM (2013)
                feeding          (2013a)                                   program                     (2013j)   Subsidio                                 Accao Social
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PROGRAM INVENTORY




                                                                                                                 Social Basico                            Produtiva
                                                                                                                                                                                                  49
                                                      Condidtional                                                                                Unconditional                                                               Public Works
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50

                  Food and    Beneficiaries                Conditional Cash   Beneficiaries                    Food and     Beneficiaries                    Unconditional   Beneficiaries                                     Beneficiaries
    Country       Near Cash      (’000)           Source       Transfer          (’000)           Source       Near Cash       (’000)           Source       Cash Transfer      (’000)           Source            PW             (’000)           Source
Namibia       School              225         WFP                                                                                                        Old Age                 141          Banerji &                                         
              feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                    Pension                             Gentilini
                                                                                                                                                                                             (2013)
Nepal         School              471         WFP     Scholarships               2616         ODI                                                        Old Age                 636         Helpage         Rural                 494         ODI (2012)
              feeding                         (2013a)                                         (2012)                                                     Pension                             International   Community
                                                                                                                                                         Scheme                              (2014)          Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Works program
Nicaragua     School              967         WFP                                                          Productive          11 hh        WB                                                               Food for Work           6         World Bank
              lunches                         (2013a)                                                      Voucher (Bono                    (2008)                                                                                             (2008)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PROGRAM INVENTORY




                                                                                                           productivo)
Niger         School              168         WFP                                                          Récupération                     WB           Family                                              Public works                       
              feeding                         (2013a)                                                      Nutritionnelle                   (2009a)      allowance
Nigeria       School              155         WFP     Kano                         12         Garcia                                                                                                         Community              35         World Bank
              feeding                         (2013a) Conditional                             & Moore                                                                                                        Services,                         (2013i)
                                                      Cash Transfer                           (2012)                                                                                                         Women
                                                      for Girls’                                                                                                                                             and Youth
                                                      Education                                                                                                                                              Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Scheme
Omanf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Pakistanc     School             2078         WFP     Benazir Income                -                                                                    Benazir                1760         WB (2013l)                                         
              feeding                         (2013a) Support                                                                                            Income
              program                                 Program-                                                                                           Support
                                                      Conditional                                                                                        Program
                                                      cash transfer
                                                      component
                                                      (3 provinces)
Panama        School              461         WFP     Red de                      327         ECLAC        Bono Familiar         41         ECLAC        Social pension           86         Helpage                                            
              feeding                         (2013a) Oportunidades                           (2012)       para la compra                   (2012)                                           International
                                                      (na)                                                 de alimentos                                                                      (2014)
Papua New                                                                                                                                                                                                    Public Works                      Subbarao
Guinea                                                                                                                                                                                                       Program                           et al. (2013)
Paraguay      School               10         WFP     Tekoporâ                    555         ECLAC                                                      Social pension           32         Helpage                                            
              feeding                         (2013a)                                         (2012)                                                                                         International
                                                                                                                                                                                             (2014)
Peru          School             3000         WFP     Juntos                     3573         ECLAC        Vaso de Leche        3215        Lavigne      Social pension          126         Helpage                                            
              feeding                         (2013a)                                         (2012)                                        (2013)                                           International
                                                                                                                                                                                             (2014)
Philippines   School               92         WFP     Pantawid                 3,995 hh       World        Pantawid             743         ADB          Tulong Para                         ADB             Food-for-                          
              feeding                         (2013a)                                         Bank         Kuryente                         (2009n)      Kay Lolo and                        (2009n)         Work for the
                                                                                              (2013m)                                                    Lola                                                Internally
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Displaced
Poland        School              730         WFP                                                                                                        Temporary               445         Kozek et al.                                       
              feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                    social                              (2012)
                                                                                                                                                         assistance
                                                                                                                                                         benefits
                                                                                                                                                         (Pomoc
                                                                                                                                                         Spoleczna)
Qatar         School               57         WFP                                                                                                                                                                                               
              feeding                         (2013a)
Romania         School      538    WFP     Money for High    140     Friedman   Heating           201    Grigoras   State Child       4013    World Bank                                
                feeding            (2013a) School                    et al.     Allowance                and        Allowance                 (2011m)
                                                                     (2009)                              Tesliuc
                                                                                                         (2012)
Russiaa         School      2647   WFP                                          Housing           9076   GoR        Child             10524   Russian         Regional public   1521   World Bank
                feeding            (2013a)                                      and heating              (2010)     Allowances                Federal         works program            (2010h)
                                                                                subsidies                                                     State
                                                                                                                                              Statistics
                                                                                                                                              Service
                                                                                                                                              (2010)
Rwanda          School      541    WFP                                          Food stamps                         The Fond                                  Vision 2020       24h    Subbarao
                feeding            (2013a)                                      and vouchers                        d’Assistance                              Umurenge                 et al. (2013)
                                                                                                                    aux Rescapees                             (VUP)
                                                                                                                    du Genocide
                                                                                                                    (FARG)
S. Sudan        School      400    WFP                                          Supplementary     692    WB                                                   Food for Assets   942    WB (2013c)
                feeding**          (2013a)                                      Feeding                  (2013c)
                                                                                Program
Samoa                                                                                                               Senior Citizens    9      ADB                                       
                                                                                                                    Benefit                   (2009b)
Sao Tome        School      40     WFP     Maes             1.2 hh   WB                                             Old Age Social     3      WB (2014c)                                
and Pr.         feeding            (2013a) Carenciadas               (2014c)                                        Pension
Saudi Arabiac   School      2121   WFP     Support          428      World                                          Regular            371    World Bank                                
                feeding            (2013a) Assistance:               Bank                                           Assistance:               (2012q)
                                           School Bags               (2012q)                                        Divorced,
                                           and Uniforms                                                             Widowed
                                                                                                                    Women
Senegalc        School      764    WFP     Conditional        5      WB         Commissariat      3600   World      Child Nutrition   26.3    Garcia                                    
                feeding            (2013a) Cash Transfer             (2013d)    à la Sécurité            Bank       Program,                  & Moore
                                           for Orphans                          Alimentaire,             (2013d)    NETS                      (2012)
                                           and Vulnerable                       CSA
                                           Children
Serbia          School      181    WFP                                                                              Child             203     World Bank                                
                feeding            (2013a)                                                                          Allowance                 (2011t)
Seychelles      School       6     WFP                                                                              Universal Old      7.6    Social                                    
                feeding            (2013a)                                                                          Age Social                Pension
                                                                                                                    Pension                   Database
Sierra Leone    School      530    WFP                                          Food Assistance    12    WB         OVC benefits                              The Rural         814    WB (2012i)
                feeding            (2013a)                                      to Refugee               (2012i)                                              Public Works
                                                                                and Returnee-                                                                 and Shelter
                                                                                Affected Areas                                                                Programme,
                                                                                of Sierra Leone                                                               National Social
                                                                                                                                                              Action Project
Slovakia        School      136    WFP     Motivation        31      Sundaram                                       Material need      111    Sundaram                                  
                feeding            (2013a) allowance                 et al.                                         benefit                   et al. (2012)
                                                                     (2012)
Slovenia        School      68     WFP                                          Housing           4.5    GoS        Child Benefits     371    GoS (2008)                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PROGRAM INVENTORY




                feeding            (2013a)                                      Subsidy                  (2008)
Solomon                                                                                                                                                       Rapid                    ADB (2009q)
Islands                                                                                                                                                       Employment
                                                                                                                                                              Program (na)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       51
                                                       Condidtional                                                                                   Unconditional                                                                Public Works
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  52

                   Food and    Beneficiaries                Conditional Cash   Beneficiaries                    Food and        Beneficiaries                    Unconditional   Beneficiaries                                      Beneficiaries
    Country        Near Cash      (’000)           Source       Transfer          (’000)           Source       Near Cash          (’000)           Source       Cash Transfer      (’000)           Source            PW              (’000)           Source
Somalia        School               76         WFP                                                          Targeted                718         WFP          CWMG                    96.7        Dunn et al.     Cash-for-Work          780         FAO (2013)
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                      Supplementary                       (2012a)      Program**                           (2013)          Programme
                                                                                                            Feeding
                                                                                                            Program
South Africa   School              8821        WFP                                                                                                           Child Support          10790        GoSA et al.     Expanded               550         GoSA (2011)
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                       Grant                               (2012)          Public
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Program
Sri Lanka      School             1264         WFP     Free                         45         WB           Samurdhi**            1541 hh       WB           Monthly                  11         WB (2012p)      Emergency                -          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PROGRAM INVENTORY




               feeding                         (2013a) scholarship                             (2012p)                                          (2012p)      Allowance for                                       Northern
                                                       programs for                                                                                          disable                                             Recovery
                                                       school children—                                                                                                                                          Project (ENReP)
                                                       Grade 5
St. Kitts      School               4          WFP                                                          Uniforms and             2          WB           Assistance                1         WB (2009c)                                          
and Nev.       feeding                         (2013a)                                                      Shoes                               (2009c)      Pensions
St. Lucia      School               12         WFP                                                          Education                3          WB           Public                22.5 hh       WB (2009b)                                          
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                      Assistance                          (2009b)      assistance
                                                                                                                                                             program
St. Vincent    School               9          WFP                                                          Nutrition                 1         WB           Public                   6          WB (2010b)      Road Cleaning           3          WB (2010b)
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                      Support                             (2010b)      Assistance                                          Program
                                                                                                            Program                                          Relief
Sudan          School             1630         WFP                                                          General Food            5127        WFP                                                              Food for Assets        952         WFP (2012c)
               feeding                         (2012a)                                                      Distribution                        (2012c)
                                                                                                            Program
Suriname                                                                                                                                                     Social pension          44.7        Helpage                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                 International
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (2014)
Swaziland      National            328         WFP                                                          WFP- Relief              70         WB           Old Age Grant            44         WB (2012j)      Public works                        
               School Meal                     (2013a)                                                      food distribution                   (2012j)
               Program
Syria          School               46         WFP                                                                                                                                                               Public Works                        
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                                                                           Program
Tajikistan     School              330         WFP                                                          Food for TB              45         WFP          Targeted                 7          World bank                                          
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                      patients                            (2014)       social                              (2013o)
                                                                                                                                                             assistance
                                                                                                                                                             (pilot)
Tanzania       Food for            1275        WFP     Tanzania                     6          WB           Nutritional                                      Most                                                Tanzania Social         22         WB (2011k)
               Education                       (2013a) Social Action                           (2011k)      program                                          Vulnerable                                          Action Fund
                                                       Fund—Pilot                                                                                            Children
                                                       Conditional                                                                                           (MVC)
                                                       Cash Transfer                                                                                         Program
Thailand       School              1677        WFP                                                                                                           Old Age                5700         ADB             Income                              
               feeding                         (2013a)                                                                                                       Allowance                           (2009d)         generation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 program (na)
Timor-Leste    School              288         WFP     Bolsa da Mae                 11         ADB          Food Security                                    Transfers for           86.9        ADB             Cash for work           55         ADB (2009a)
               feeding                         (2013a)                                         (2009a)      Fund                                             the elderly                         (2009a)
Togo            School          40     WFP                                           Nutrition           26      WB         Cash transfer                             Public Works      25     Subbarao
                feeding                (2013a)                                       program by                  (2012k)    to children                               with High Labor          et al. (2013)
                                                                                     UNICEF                                                                           Instensity
Tonga           School          8      WFP                                                                                                                                                      
                feeding                (2013a)
Trinidad        School          84     WFP     Targeted         36     ECLAC                                                                                                                    
and Tob.        feeding                (2013a) conditional             (2011)
                                               cash transfer
                                               program
Tunisiac        School         240     WFP                                                                                  Programme        235hh    World Bank                                
                feeding                (2013a)                                                                              National                  (2013p)
                                                                                                                            d’Aide aux
                                                                                                                            Familles
                                                                                                                            Nécessiteuses
                                                                                                                            (PNAFN)—
                                                                                                                            Cash transfers
Turkey          School         4209    WFP     Conditional     2,130   Emir et al.                                                                                    Active Labor      64     GoT (2012)
                feeding                (2013a) Cash Transfer           (2013)                                                                                         market
                                               Şartlı Nakit                                                                                                           Programs
                                               Transferi
Turkmenistanf                                                                                                                                                                                   
Tuvaluf                                                                                                                                                                                         
UAEf                                                                                                                                                                                            
Uganda          School          94     WFP                                           Mother and          76      WFP        Direct Income     113     GoU (2014)      Northern          300    Subbarao
                feeding                (2013a)                                       Child Health                (2013c)    Support                                   Uganda Social            et al. (2013)
                                                                                     program                                                                          Action Fund 2
Ukrainea        School         758     WFP                                           Housing             684     World      Child Care       1800     World Bank                                
                feeding                (2013a)                                       and utility                 Bank       Benefit                   (2011t)
                                                                                     allowances                  (2012s)
Uruguay         Programa de    256     WFP     Asignaciones    528     ECLAC         Tarjeta Uruguay    75 hh    GoU        Social pension     31     Helpage         Uruguay trabaja    3     MIDES (2013)
                alimentacion           (2013a) Familiares              (2012)        social                      (2013)                               International
                escolar                                                                                                                               (2014)
Uzbekistana     School         959     WFP                                           YICF—support        475     UNICEF     Social            600     CER (2014)      Public Works      0.1h   Subbarao
                feeding                (2013a)                                       to breastfeeding            (2009)     assistance to                             Employment               et al. (2013)
                                                                                                                            poor families                             Program
Vanuatuf                                                                                                                                                                                        
Venezuela       School         4031    WFP                                                                                  Social pension    675     Helpage                                   
                feeding                (2013a)                                                                                                        International
                                                                                                                                                      (2014)
Vietnam         School         3,409   WFP     Decree 49 and                         Housing support    500 hh   Castel     Social            1100    Helpage         Public Works              
                feeding                (2013a) its revision                          for the poor                (2010)     pensions                  International   Program
                                               Decree                                                                                                 (2014)          for Poor
                                               74/2013/ND-CP                                                                                                          Unemployed or
                                                                                                                                                                      Underemployed
                                                                                                                                                                      Labours
West Bank &                                                                          Urban voucher       46      Galluzi et Cash Transfers   100 hh   Hillis et al.                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PROGRAM INVENTORY




Gaza                                                                                 program                     al. (2010) CTP                       (2013)
                                                                                                                                                                                                               53
                                                      Condidtional                                                                               Unconditional                                                          Public Works
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         54

                    Food and     Beneficiaries            Conditional Cash   Beneficiaries                    Food and     Beneficiaries                 Unconditional   Beneficiaries                                   Beneficiaries
    Country         Near Cash       (’000)       Source       Transfer          (’000)           Source       Near Cash       (’000)           Source    Cash Transfer      (’000)           Source         PW              (’000)           Source
Yemen, Rep.c      School              65         WFP                                                                                                    Social Welfare                                Labor Intensive        574         Subbarao
                  feeding                        (2013a)                                                                                                Fund                                          Works (LIW)                        (2013)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Program—
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Social Fund for
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Development
Zambia            School             2,112       WFP                                                      Food stamps                                   Social Cash                                   C-SAFE Zambia           23         WB (2012c)
                  feeding                        (2013a)                                                  and vouchers                                  Transfer                                      Project
                                                                                                                                                        Scheme
Zimbabwe          SPLASH            7.2 hh       CaLP                                                     DRR Seasonal         630         WFP          Harmozied            32.5        OPM (2013)   Public works          400h         Subbarao
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PROGRAM INVENTORY




                  voucher                        (2011)                                                   Targeted                         (2014b)      Social Cash                                   program                            et al. (2013)
                  program                                                                                 Assistance                                    Transfer
                                                                                                                                                        Program

aIncludes other interventions not considered in the report, such as special privileges that provide access to subsidies.
bIncludes other interventions not considered in the report, such as agricultural input subsidies.
cIncludes other interventions not considered in the report, such as a number of subsidy programs.
dIncludes other interventions not considered in the report, such as subwsidized food shops.
eIncludes other interventions not considered in the report, such as the targeted public distribution system.
fInformation on safety net programs not available.

*May include more than one intervention or program type.
**Data refers to both Sudan and South Sudan.
A N N E X   3

  SPENDING
56         SPENDING


                           Income         Social Safety
Country Name    Code    Classification   Net as % of GDP   Latest Year           Source                              Note
Afghanistan     AFG    Low income             0.02           2009        ADB (2009s)             Own calculations based on ADB data
Albania         ALB    Upper middle            1.54           2011       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                       income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Algeria         DZA
Angola          AGO
Antigua and      ATG
Barbuda
Argentina       ARG    Upper middle            1.86           2010       Cerutti et al. (2014)   Own calculations based on Cerutti et al.
                       income                                                                    (2014)
Armenia         ARM    Lower middle            1.43           2012       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                       income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Azerbaijan      AZE    Upper middle           0.97            2011       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                       income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Bahrain         BHR    High income             1.45          2009        Silva et al. (2013)
Bangladesh      BGD    Low income             0.28           2009        ADB (2009i)             Own calculations based on ADB data
Belarus          BLR   Upper middle            1.28           2011       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                       income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Belize           BLZ   Upper middle           2.9            2009        World Bank (2010a)      Public works expenditures may not be
                       income                                                                    included.
Benin           BEN    Low income             0.1            2009        World Bank (2011f)
Bhutan          BTN    Lower middle           0.33           2009        ADB (2009c)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                       income
Bolivia         BOL
Bosnia &         BIH   Upper middle           3.33            2010       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
Herzegovina            income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Botswana        BWA    Upper middle           3.2            2008        World Bank (2011b)
                       income
Brazil          BRA    Upper middle           2.49            2010       Cerutti et al. (2014)
                       income
Bulgaria        BGR    Upper middle            1.07          2008        World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                       income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Burkina Faso     BFA   Low income             0.90           2009        World Bank (2011c)
Burundi          BDI
Cambodia        KHM    Low income             0.72           2009        ADB (2009u)             Own calculations based on ADB data
Cameroon        CMR    Lower middle           0.23           2009        World Bank (2011d)
                       income
Cape Verde      CPV
Central Afr.    CAF
Rep.
Chad             TCD
Chile            CHL   High income             1.96           2010       Cerutti et al. (2014)   Own calculations based on Cerutti et al.
                                                                                                 (2014)
China           CHN    Upper middle           0.7            2009        ADB (2009w)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                       income
Colombia        COL    Upper middle           0.83            2010       Cerutti et al. (2014)   Own calculations based on Cerutti et al.
                       income                                                                    (2014)
Comoros         COM
Congo, Dem.     ZAR
Rep.
Congo, Rep      COG
Costa Rica       CRI
                                                                                                                         SPENDING              57


                           Income         Social Safety
Country Name    Code    Classification   Net as % of GDP   Latest Year           Source                              Note
Cote D’ivoire   CIV
Croatia         HRV    High income            3.79            2011       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                                                                                                 not included in safety nets expenditure.
Czech           CZE
Republic
Djibouti        DJI
Dominica        DMA
Dominican       DOM
Rep.
Ecuador         ECU    Upper middle            1.79           2010       Cerutti et al. (2014)   Own calculations based on Cerutti et al.
                       income                                                                    (2014)
Egypt           EGY    Lower middle           0.16            2010       Silva et al. (2013)
                       income
El Salvador     SLV    Lower middle           0.86            2010       Cerutti et al. (2014)
                       income
Equatorial      GNQ
Guinea
Eritrea         ERI    Low income             2.5            2008        WB Policy
                                                                         monitoring and
                                                                         reporting tools
Estonia         EST    High income            2.63            2011       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                                                                                                 not included in safety nets expenditure.
Ethiopia        ETH
Fiji            FJI    Upper middle           0.78           2009        ADB (2009j)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                       income
Gabon           GAB
Gambia, The     GMB    Low income              1              2010       WB Policy
                                                                         monitoring and
                                                                         reporting tools
Georgia         GEO    Lower middle           6.09            2012       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                       income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Ghana           GHA    Lower middle           0.20            2012       ILO (2013)
                       income
Grenada         GRD
Guatemala       GTM
Guinea          GIN
Guinea-Bissau   GNB
Guyana          GUY
Haiti           HTI
Honduras        HND    Lower middle           0.54            2010       Cerutti et al. (2014)
                       income
Hungary         HUN    Upper middle           3.4             2011       ESSPROS                 The number is calculated by aggregating the
                       income                                                                    child/family, housing and social exclusion
                                                                                                 social protection functions.
India           IND    Lower middle           0.24           2009        ADB (2009y)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                       income
Indonesia       IDN    Lower middle           0.76           2009        ADB (2009k)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                       income
Iran            IRN
Iraq            IRQ    Upper middle            1.22          2009        Silva et al. (2013)
                       income
Jamaica         JAM    Upper middle            1.8            2010       World Bank (2011o)
                       income
58         SPENDING


                            Income         Social Safety
Country Name     Code    Classification   Net as % of GDP   Latest Year           Source                              Note
Jordan           JOR    Upper middle            1.19          2009        Silva et al. (2013)
                        income
Kazakhstan       KAZ    Upper middle            1.04           2012       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                        income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Kenya            KEN    Low income             0.8             2010       World Bank (2012d)
Kiribati         KIR    Lower middle           3.73            2010       WB Policy
                        income                                            monitoring and
                                                                          reporting tools
Kosovo           KSV    Lower middle            1.47           2012       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                        income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Kuwait           KWT    High income            0.84            2010       Silva et al. (2013)
Kyrgyz Rep.      KGZ    Low income             3.39            2011       World Bank (2014e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                                                                                                  not included in safety nets expenditure.
Lao, PDR         LAO    Lower middle           0.33           2009        ADB (2009v)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                        income
Latvia           LVA    High income            0.88            2012       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                                                                                                  not included in safety nets expenditure.
Lebanon          LBN    Upper middle            1              2010       Silva et al. (2013)
                        income
Lesotho          LSO    Lower middle           4.6             2010       World Bank (2012e)
                        income
Liberia          LBR    Low income              1.5            2011       World Bank (2011e)
Libya            LBY
Lithuania        LTU    High income            2.12           2009        World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                                                                                                  not included in safety nets expenditure.
Macedonia,       MKD    Upper middle            1.08           2011       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
FYR                     income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Madagascar       MDG    Low income              1.10           2010       World Bank (2012f)
Malawi           MWI
Malaysia         MYS    Upper middle           0.29           2009        ADB (2009e)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                        income
Maldives         MDV    Upper middle            1.55          2009        ADB (2009l)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                        income
Mali             MLI    Low income             0.5            2009        World Bank (2011g)
Marshall         MHL    Upper middle            1.05          2009        ADB (2009x)             Own calculations based on ADB data
Islands                 income
Mauritania       MRT    Lower middle            1.3          average      World Bank (2013f)
                        income                              2008–2013
Mauritius        MUS    Upper middle           4.4            2008        World Bank (2011h)
                        income
Mexico           MEX    Upper middle           0.78            2010       Cerutti et al. (2014)   Own calculations based on Cerutti et al.
                        income                                                                    (2014)
Micronesia, FS   FSM
Moldova          MDA    Lower middle           2.28            2010       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                        income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Mongolia         MNG    Lower middle           3.02           2009        ADB (2009f)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                        income
Montenegro       MNE    Upper middle            1.43           2010       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                        income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Morocco          MAR    Lower middle           0.87           2008        Silva et al. (2013)
                        income
Mozambique       MOZ    Low income              1.7            2010       World Bank (2011i)
                                                                                                                       SPENDING           59


                          Income         Social Safety
Country Name   Code    Classification   Net as % of GDP   Latest Year           Source                             Note
Myanmar        MMR    Low income
Namibia        NAM    Upper middle           2.8             2011       Namibia Ministry of
                      income                                            Finance (2011)
Nepal          NPL    Low income              1.2           2009        ADB (2009g)             Own calculations based on ADB data
Nicaragua      NIC    Lower middle           2.9             2007       World Bank(2008)
                      income
Niger          NER    Low income             0.4            2009        World Bank (2009a)
Nigeria        NGA
Oman           OMN
Pakistan       PAK    Lower middle            1.02          2009        ADB (2009t)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                      income
Panama         PAN    Upper middle           2.8            2009        World Bank (2012g)
                      income
Papua New      PNG    Lower middle           0.01           2009        ADB (2009h)             Own calculations based on ADB data
Guinea                income
Paraguay       PRY
Peru           PER    Upper middle           0.47            2010       Cerutti et al. (2014)
                      income
Philippines    PHL    Lower middle           0.34           2009        ADB (2009n)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                      income
Poland         POL    High income             1.6            2011       ESSPROS                 The number is calculated by aggregating the
                                                                                                child/family, housing and social exclusion
                                                                                                social protection functions.
Qatar          QAT
Romania        ROM    Upper middle           3.38            2010       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                      income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Russia         RUS    High income            3.3             2010       Russian Statistics      Public works programs included, school
                                                                        Service                 feeding excluded.
Rwanda         RWA    Low income              1.1            2010       World Bank (2012h)
S. Sudan       SSD
Samoa          WSM    Lower middle           0.67           2009        ADB (2009b)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                      income
Sao Tome       STP
and Pr.
Saudi Arabia   SAU    High income            0.95           2009        Silva et al. (2013)
Senegal        SEN
Serbia         SRB    Upper middle           2.08            2010       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                      income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Seychelles     SYC    Upper middle           3.35            2012       World Bank (2013h)
                      income
Sierra Leone   SLE    Low income             3.5             2011       World Bank (2012i)
Slovakia       SVK    High income            2.2             2011       ESSPROS                 The number is calculated by aggregating the
                                                                                                child/family, housing and social exclusion
                                                                                                social protection functions.
Slovenia       SVN    High income            2.8             2011       ESSPROS                 The number is calculated by aggregating the
                                                                                                child/family, housing and social exclusion
                                                                                                social protection functions.
Solomon        SLB    Lower middle           0.26           2009        ADB (2009q)             Own calculations based on ADB data
Islands               income
Somalia        SOM
60          SPENDING


                            Income         Social Safety
Country Name     Code    Classification   Net as % of GDP   Latest Year           Source                               Note
South Africa     ZAF    Upper middle           3.4             2012       WB Policy
                        income                                            monitoring and
                                                                          reporting tools
Sri Lanka        LKA    Lower middle           2.64           2009        ADB (2009r)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                        income
St. Kitts and    KNA    High income             1.6           2008        World Bank (2009c)
Nev.
St. Lucia         LCA   Upper middle            1.3           2008        World Bank (2009b)
                        income
St. Vincent       VCT   Upper middle           2.2            2008        World Bank (2010b)
                        income
Sudan            SDN
Suriname         SUN
Swaziland        SWZ    Lower middle           2.2             2010       World Bank (2012j)
                        income
Syria             SYR   Lower middle            1              2010       Silva et al. (2013)
                        income
Tajikistan        TJK   Low income             0.58            2011       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                                                                                                  not included in safety nets expenditure.
Tanzania          TZA   Low income             0.3             2011       World Bank (2011k)
Thailand         THA    Upper middle           0.72           2009        ADB (2009d)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                        income
Timor-Leste      TMP    Lower middle           5.91           2009        ADB (2009a)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                        income
Togo             TGO    Low income             0.5            2009        World Bank (2012k)
Tonga            TON
Trinidad          TTO
and Tob.
Tunisia          TUN    Upper middle           0.67            2011       Silva et al. (2013)
                        income
Turkey           TUR    Upper middle            1.33           2010       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                        income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Turkmenistan     TKM
Tuvalu           TUV
UAE              ARE
Uganda           UGA
Ukraine          UKR    Lower middle           2.33            2011       World Bank (2013e)      Public works and school feeding programs are
                        income                                                                    not included in safety nets expenditure.
Uruguay          URY    High income             1.01           2010       Cerutti et al. (2014)   Own calculations based on Cerutti et al. (2014)
Uzbekistan       UZB
Vanuatu          VUT    Lower middle           0.28           2009        ADB (2009o)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                        income
Venezuela        VEN
Vietnam          VNM    Lower middle           0.6            2009        ADB (2009p)             Own calculations based on ADB data
                        income
West Bank &      WBG    Lower middle           0.81            2010       Silva et al. (2013)
Gaza                    income
Yemen, Rep.      YEM    Lower middle            1.44          2008        Silva et al. (2013)
                        income
Zambia           ZMB    Lower middle           0.2             2011       World Bank (2012c)
                        income
Zimbabwe         ZWE
                 A N N E X        4

POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS,
  A N D   A D M I N I S T R AT I O N
62          POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION

The following table is based on internal World Bank monitoring and reporting tools and refers to latest available information as of 2013.
                                            Policy and Strategy                                   Institutions                 Administration
           Country      Y/N/P       Strategy Name        Year          Comment                     Comment                        Comment
 Afghanistan              Y     Afghanistan          2008       In 2010 the government     A high level Inter-
                                National                        has started prioritizing   Ministerial committee
                                Development                     the ANDS. The process      on Social Protection was
                                Strategy (ANDS)                 resulted in 22 National    formed under the ANDS.
                                                                priority programs
                                                                (NPPs).
 Albania                  Y     Inter-sectorial      2007       The Social Assistance                                   Statistical monitoring
                                Strategy on Social              Framework Law                                           information exists for all
                                Inclusion                       was amended in                                          programs.
                                                                2011 enabling social
                                                                assitance reforms. The
                                                                Government is currently
                                                                working towards their
                                                                implementation. It took
                                                                initial steps with the
                                                                approval of secondary
                                                                legislation for the
                                                                implementation of
                                                                poverty-targeted social
                                                                assistance program
                                                                reforms.
 Algeria                  Y     Government’s         2009       There are plans to         The Ministry of national     Algera has an M&E for social
                                Plan of                         revise the sector          solidarity is in charge      assistance programs.
                                Action for the                  strategy by the Ministry   of social assistance
                                Implementation                  of National Solidarity,    programs for most
                                of the President’s              in charge of social        vulnerable groups.
                                Program                         assistance programs
                                                                for most vulnerable
                                                                groups.
 Angola                   P                                     The GOA has made           The Bases of Social           
                                                                progress in developing     Protection law states
                                                                a general framework for    that the basic SP scheme
                                                                social protection.         is under responsibility
                                                                                           of the Ministério da
                                                                                           Assistência e Reinserção
                                                                                           Social (MINARS).
 Antigua and Barbuda
 Argentina                N                                                                ANSES, the national          ANSES began to publish
                                                                                           Social Security              a quarterly report on its
                                                                                           Administration, has the      main social assistance
                                                                                           core role of coordination.   program, the Universal Child
                                                                                           Efforts have been            Allowance.
                                                                                           made to formalize links
                                                                                           between national and
                                                                                           provincial governments.
 Armenia                  Y     Poverty Reduction    2011                                                               A new MIS will be developed
                                Strategy                                                                                as part of the SPAP 2
                                                                                                                        project which will allow for
                                                                                                                        the delivery of integrated
                                                                                                                        monitoring of beneficiaires.
 Azerbaijan               Y     Poverty Reduction    2005       The SP system consists                                  MLSPP had commissioned
                                Strategy                        of both targeted and                                    technical assistance to build a
                                                                categorical programs.                                   comprehensive M&E system
                                                                Recently, there has                                     and build internal staff
                                                                been a slight shift                                     capacity. A list of 100 social
                                                                towards non-means-                                      protection indicators has
                                                                tested programs.                                        been developed based on the
                                                                                                                        review of international best
                                                                                                                        practices. The project’s next
                                                                                                                        phase (after January 2014)
                                                                                                                        will focus on TSA and social
                                                                                                                        housing policy.
 Bahrain
                                                                               POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION                          63


                                        Policy and Strategy                                   Institutions                  Administration
          Country   Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year          Comment                      Comment                         Comment
Bangladesh           P      National Social                                            The National Social           The Poverty Database, led by
                            Protection                                                 Protection Strategy           the Statistics and Informatics
                            Strategy                                                   (NSPS) development            Division, will allow safety
                                                                                       is led by the Planning        net programs and any
                                                                                       Commission. It will           other targeted programs to
                                                                                       provide a framework for       adopt a more coordinated
                                                                                       coordinating the existing     approach to targeting of
                                                                                       95 safety net programs.       beneficiaries. A reform of the
                                                                                                                     largest safety net programs
                                                                                                                     is underway to improve their
                                                                                                                     targeting, payments and
                                                                                                                     grievance redress systems,
                                                                                                                     as well as better monitoring
                                                                                                                     and evaluation.
Belarus              Y      Social and          2006       The Government has                                        Evaluations are available for
                            Economic                       clearly formulated an                                     some programs based on
                            Development                    objective of reducing                                     HBS data.
                            of Belarus for                 poverty that was
                            2006–2015                      translated into their
                                                           overall strategy for
                                                           social and economic
                                                           development
Belize               P                                     Belize has begun            The GoB has begun a           A new monitoring/
                                                           to develop the              process of rationalization    evaluation system in Belize
                                                           building blocks of an       and reorientation of          was launched, i.e. the
                                                           SP Strategy.                existing programs,            Inter-Agency Public Safety
                                                                                       and reorganization            management information
                                                                                       of institutional              system (IPSMIS). The
                                                                                       arrangements. The             IPSMIS is a database that
                                                                                       Ministry of Human             tracks institutional and
                                                                                       Development, Social           social indicators across
                                                                                       Transformation and            the Statistical Institute
                                                                                       Poverty Alleviation           of Belize, the Ministry of
                                                                                       (MHD) and the Ministry        Education, the Ministry
                                                                                       of Education (MOE)            of Health, the Ministry of
                                                                                       will be in charge of          Human Development and
                                                                                       implementing social           the Ministry of Economic
                                                                                       protection programs.          Development. They are now
                                                                                                                     also sharing a common
                                                                                                                     targeting tool to identify the
                                                                                                                     poorest families. The MOE
                                                                                                                     and MHD are now using the
                                                                                                                     Single Identification System
                                                                                                                     of Beneficiaries Beneficiary
                                                                                                                     (SISB).
Benin                P      Holistic Social                The draft Holistic Social   Coordination of social        A national unified beneficiary
                            Protection Paper               Protection Paper has        protection intervention       database is underway,
                                                           been validated, and         will better materialize       tentatively to be housed in
                                                           transmitted to the          when the Holistic Social      the Ministry of Family and
                                                           Council of Ministers for    Protection Policy Paper       Social Affairs. In 2013, a draft
                                                           adoption.                   will fully be implemented.    monitoring and evaluation
                                                                                       The Comité Socle de           system of social protection
                                                                                       Protection Sociale has        and gender has been
                                                                                       undertaken a number           developed. The household
                                                                                       of activities in 2013,        survey program may resume
                                                                                       including the validation      in 2014.
                                                                                       of a harmonized
                                                                                       methodology for
                                                                                       targeting beneficiaries
                                                                                       of social protection
                                                                                       programs. A new pilot
                                                                                       community-based safety
                                                                                       net program is underway
                                                                                       with first transfers
                                                                                       foreseen for the first half
                                                                                       of 2014.
64         POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION


                                           Policy and Strategy                                    Institutions                 Administration
          Country      Y/N/P       Strategy Name         Year         Comment                     Comment                        Comment
Bhutan                   Y     National Social       2013       The Royal Government                                     
                               Protection Policy                of Bhutan has drafted
                               for Workers in                   a national social
                               Bhutan                           protection. The strategy
                                                                expands benefits to
                                                                those in the formal
                                                                sector outside of civil
                                                                service, as well as
                                                                benefits for senior
                                                                citizens outside of the
                                                                formal sector.
Bolivia                  Y     Red de Protección     2007                                  UDAPE have                   UDAPE completed the
                               Social y                                                    responsibility for           design of a Beneficiary
                               Desarrollo Integral                                         the monitoring and           Registry of Social Programs
                               Comunitario                                                 coordination of the Social   and initiated the use of a new
                               (RPS-DIC)                                                   Protection Network.          Monitoring System for social
                                                                                                                        programs. It completed the
                                                                                                                        impact evaluations of BJA.
Bosnia and               N                                                                                               
Herzegovina
Botswana                 Y     Social                2011       In 2011 Botswana,                                       Botswana made important
                               Development                      through Department                                      progress in establishing
                               Framework                        of Social Services,                                     an overall M&E system for
                                                                has adopted a                                           public policies and programs,
                                                                Social Development                                      and some progress has
                                                                Framework that covers                                   been made in developing
                                                                the SP aspects.                                         information systems for
                                                                                                                        specific social assistance
                                                                                                                        programs within the Ministry
                                                                                                                        of Local Government.
Brazil                   Y     Brasil Sem Miseria    2011                                  The Ministry for Social      A secretariat (SAGI) is
                               Plan (BSM)                                                  Development and Fight        dedicated to M&E functions.
                                                                                           Against Hunger (MDS)         MDS has promoted the
                                                                                           leads the BSM.               use of the Single Registry
                                                                                                                        (Cadastro Único) as a
                                                                                                                        platform and targeting
                                                                                                                        mechanism for all social
                                                                                                                        programs.
Bulgaria                 N
Burkina Faso             Y     Strategy for          2011       In 2011 the Government     In 2013 the government       In 2013/14, the government
                               Growth and                       has developed with         put in place the Conseil     started a project to develop
                               Sustainable                      the support of the         National de la Protection    an M&E system for the
                               Development                      development partners       Sociale (CNPS) to serve      new cash transfer program
                                                                an action plan for the     as an inter-ministerial      and to undertake impact
                                                                implementation of          coordination mechanisms      evaluations.
                                                                the SP strategy and        for social protection and
                                                                which still needs to be    social safety nets.
                                                                operationalized.
Burundi                  Y     National Social       2011       A National Social          A technical working
                               Protection Policy                Protection Policy          group that brings
                                                                (PNPS) was adopted in      together donors and
                                                                April 2011. A National     Government was
                                                                Social Protection          recently established and
                                                                Commission (CNPS)          has started to meet to
                                                                was set up by a            discuss social protection
                                                                Presidential decree        issues.
                                                                in August 2012. This
                                                                commission is chaired
                                                                by the President
                                                                himself.
                                                                                  POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION                   65


                                      Policy and Strategy                                      Institutions                Administration
        Country   Y/N/P       Strategy Name         Year          Comment                      Comment                        Comment
Cambodia           Y      National              2010       The Action Plan for          Mandate was expanded         The Monitoring Framework
                          Protection                       NSPS implementation          for the Council for          of the National Social
                          Strategy (NSPS,                  (2012–2015) assigned         Agricultural and             Protection Strategy has been
                          2009–2013)                       responsibilities,            Rural Development            developed.
                                                           timeframes and               to coordinate the
                                                           budgets. Some                development and
                                                           progress has                 implementation of the
                                                           been made in                 NSPS, including ensuring
                                                           operationalizing the         that effective inter-
                                                           NSPS, although it is still   ministerial coordination
                                                           limited.                     mechanisms are in place.
Cameroon           P                                       The government
                                                           is in the process of
                                                           preparing a social
                                                           protection strategy.
Cape Verde         Y      Second Growth         2009       The government has           The Ministry of Youth,       To monitor the performance
                          and Poverty                      developed a National         Employment and Human         of the system, the MoYEHRD
                          Reduction                        Strategy of Social           Resources Development        Government has developed
                          Strategy                         Protection which is well     (MoYEHRD) is                 a M&E system (Sistema de
                                                           articulated with the         responsible for              Seguimento e Avaliacao
                                                           pillar of Social Cohesion    coordination and             SISA). The system integrates
                                                           of the country’s Third       implementation.              financial and implementation
                                                           Growth and Poverty                                        information. A unique
                                                           Reduction Strategy                                        registry was recently
                                                           (GPRSP III, 2012).                                        introduced.
Central African    N                                                                    Programs are
Republic                                                                                implemented under the
                                                                                        leadership of the Ministry
                                                                                        of Planning.
Chad               P                                       The Government is            The Ministry of Social        
                                                           following a roadmap          Action, National
                                                           to elaborate a national      Solidarity and
                                                           social protection            Family performs the
                                                           strategy.                    coordination and
                                                                                        monitoring of programs
                                                                                        in partnership with other
                                                                                        departments.
Chile              Y      Social Protection     2012       In 2012, the Congress        A variety of specific
                          System                           established the Ingreso      mechanisms and
                                                           Etico as a subsystem of      arrangements have been
                                                           the Intersectoral Social     developed to promote
                                                           Protection System.           coordination, including
                                                                                        inter-institutional
                                                                                        agreements, national
                                                                                        budgeting procedures
                                                                                        and an integrated social
                                                                                        information system.
China              Y      12th Five Year Plan   2011       Its 12th Five Year Plan      In 2012, a leading group      
                          (2011–2015)                      includes an overall          composed of MOHRSS,
                                                           strategy for a set of SP     MOF, NDRC, ACFTU and
                                                           programs. In November,       NSSF was formed to
                                                           the CCP 18th third           take various measures to
                                                           plenum outlined a            coordinate within social
                                                           reform proposal to           assistance programs
                                                           deepen reforms so as         and between social
                                                           to address the second        assistance and insurance
                                                           generation issues of         programs.
                                                           social protection and
                                                           labor.
66         POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION


                                          Policy and Strategy                                    Institutions                   Administration
          Country      Y/N/P    Strategy Name          Year          Comment                      Comment                          Comment
Colombia                 Y     National            2010                                   The Ministry of Social         The government is working
                               Development Plan                                           Protection operated            to better align two major
                                                                                          form 2002 to 2012. It was      information systems,
                                                                                          subsequently divided           namely RUAF (registry of
                                                                                          into the Ministry of Labor     beneficiaries) and SISBEN
                                                                                          and Ministry of Health         (targeting identification
                                                                                          and Social Protection.         system).
Comoros                  Y     Social Protection   2007       A SP strategy had been                                      
                               Strategy                       drafted by the Ministry
                                                              of Labor in 2007 but
                                                              it is limited in scope to
                                                              private sector workers.
Congo, Dem. Rep.         P                                    Efforts are underway        A Social Protection
                                                              to develop a Social         Thematic Group has
                                                              Protection Note as          been established and
                                                              an initial building         meets regularly under the
                                                              block toward a              leadership of the Ministry
                                                              comprehensive policy.       of Social Affairs and the
                                                                                          Ministry of Employment.
Congo, Rep.              Y     National Social     2012                                   Ministry of Social Affairs     In line with the PNAS, a
                               Protection Action                                          provides the core              framework for monitoring
                               Plan (PNAS)                                                institutional home for SP.     and evaluation of programs
                               2012–2016                                                                                 performance is in place.
Costa Rica               Y     Plan Nacional       2010                                   SP programs are mainly         Beneficiaries are all captured
                               de Desarrollo                                              implemented by IMAS            by a unique registry (SIPO).
                               2010–2014                                                  (Instituto Mixto de Ayuda
                                                                                          Social) for the social
                                                                                          assistance component,
                                                                                          and Caja del Seguro
                                                                                          Social for social insurance.
Cote d’lvoire            P                                    The SP strategy has                                         
                                                              been finalized but
                                                              is still waiting to be
                                                              adopted in the Council
                                                              of Ministers. Currently,
                                                              the Strategy is being
                                                              reviewed by the
                                                              Ministry of Economics
                                                              and Finance, the last
                                                              step before the Council.
Croatia                  Y     Strategy of         2011                                   The Department of              The contributory and
                               Social Welfare                                             Social Policy is leading       non-contributory programs
                               Development                                                the SP coordination and        have separate beneficiary
                                                                                          proposing policy reforms.      registries. Significant benefits
                                                                                                                         have been availed with
                                                                                                                         their interconnection at the
                                                                                                                         national level.
Czech Republic
Djibouti                 Y     Social Protection   2012       In 2012 the Government      Given the cross-sectorial      MIS not yet fully operational,
                               Strategy                       formulated a Social         nature of the programs,        data entry is slow due to
                                                              Protection Strategy.        the Djiboutian Social          internet connectivity and
                                                              The Government is           Development Agency             limited staff, computerized
                                                              currently working           (ADDS ) coordinates            MIS in rural areas is more
                                                              on scaling-up the           with other partners,           challenging. The social
                                                              existing social safety      including the Ministry of      registry will rely on biometric
                                                              net through ADDS            Health and Ministry of         information to reduce double
                                                              and on designing new        Education.                     counting and misuse of
                                                              programs based on a                                        resources. M&E systems at the
                                                              forthcoming Poverty                                        program level have recently
                                                              and Social Impact                                          collected a vast number of
                                                              Analysis.                                                  different household data. A
                                                                                                                         new social assistance project
                                                                                                                         includes an MIS and a rigorous
                                                                                                                         impact evaluation.
                                                                                POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION                       67


                                         Policy and Strategy                                   Institutions                Administration
       Country       Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year          Comment                     Comment                        Comment
Dominica              Y      Growth and          2012       The GSPS lacks              There are limited           The National Beneficiary
                             Social Protection              comprehensiveness           mechanisms for              Information System (NBIS)
                             Strategy (GSPS)                and attention to            coordination across         still provides the Ministry of
                                                            improvements in             ministries, although        Social Services, Community
                                                            the SP system. This         there are some efforts      Development and Gender
                                                            is being partially          to address this through     Affairs with an internal tool
                                                            addressed through           the ISPS currently being    for program monitoring. The
                                                            the development of          worked on.                  ISPS seeks to address these
                                                            an Integrated Social                                    challenges by laying out a
                                                            Protection Strategy                                     framework for revising and
                                                            (ISPS).                                                 rolling out the NBIS and for
                                                                                                                    developing M&E systems
                                                                                                                    for main social assistance
                                                                                                                    programs.
Dominican Republic    P                                     The current                 In 2009–2010,               Intra-sectoral coordination
                                                            administration is           important institutional     mechanisms between the
                                                            calling for a new social    improvements were           conditional cash transfer, the
                                                            protection strategy         made in terms of            targeting system SIUBEN,
                                                            in order to accelerate      creating new cross-         and the Transfers Institution
                                                            results in terms of         sectoral coordination       ADESS were established.
                                                            poverty reduction,          mechanisms with             Rigorous evaluations have
                                                            coordination, coverage,     education and health        been completed for the
                                                            and results-orientation.    services to help identify   conditional cash transfer
                                                            The process for             and monitor the             and youth employment
                                                            designing such strategy     reduction of supply-side    programs. 2014 should
                                                            is beginning.               gaps in basic social        see the development of
                                                                                        services.                   expected results and targets
                                                                                                                    for the Agreements between
                                                                                                                    the Social Cabinet and other
                                                                                                                    Institutions.
Ecuador               Y      National Plan       2013       The Constitution and        The Ministry Coordinator    The MCDS is leading the
                             2013–2017                      the new National            of Social Development       monitoring process through
                                                            Plan for the second         (MCDS) is who lead the      two main Information
                                                            period of the current       institutional framework     Systems: the Social Registry
                                                            administration,             in charge of the Social     (proxy mean test); and
                                                            reinforces access to        Protection Policy, and      the Registry of the Social
                                                            social security without     jointly with the National   Programs (RIPS). In terms
                                                            discrimination and          Secretary for Planning      of evaluation the MCDS
                                                            extends its coverage        (SENPLADES) leads the       and SENPLADES share the
                                                            to additional groups.       National Strategy for       responsibility to evaluate
                                                            Such extensions have        Poverty Reduction.          the main programs and the
                                                            served to underline                                     second impact evaluation of
                                                            the needed reform to                                    the BDH.
                                                            establish a coherent
                                                            and sustainable
                                                            contributory and
                                                            noncontributory social
                                                            insurance system.
Egypt, Arab Rep.      N                           
El Salvador           Y      Universal Social    2013       As part of the National     Technical Secretariat of    The STP is also strengthening
                             Protection System              Development Plan            the Presidency (STP)        its M&E system: the
                                                            2010–2014, the              oversees the SP system      conditional cash transfer
                                                            Government has                                          already has an impact
                                                            set up the Universal                                    evaluation, as well as the
                                                            Social Protection                                       Temporary Income Support
                                                            System (SPSU) as the                                    Program (PATI).
                                                            cornerstone of its social
                                                            policy strategy. A new
                                                            legislation is currently
                                                            being discussed in
                                                            Congress, the Ley de
                                                            Desarrollo y Proteccion
                                                            Social.
68         POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION


                                          Policy and Strategy                               Institutions                  Administration
          Country      Y/N/P    Strategy Name      Year          Comment                     Comment                        Comment
Equatorial Guinea        Y     Horizon 2020        2011   The National Economic
                                                          Development Plan:
                                                          Horizon 2020 seeks
                                                          to reduce poverty and
                                                          diversify the economy.
                                                          The Plan includes three
                                                          strategic objectives
                                                          related to social
                                                          protection (no. 21–23).
Eritrea                  N
Ethiopia                 Y     Social Protection   2013   The Social Protection      MoARD and Food                In the design of the next
                               Policy                     Policy was submitted       Security Bureau have          safety nets, significant work
                                                          to parliament in           a range of institutional      is undertaken to develop
                                                          November 2013. This        mechanisms to ensure          Management Information
                                                          Strategy will translate    coordination and              Systems for social protection
                                                          the commitments            scale-up in case of crises.   and safety nets in Ethiopia.
                                                          documented in the
                                                          Policy into a concrete
                                                          road map that will
                                                          guide the design
                                                          and implementation
                                                          of social protection
                                                          programs.
Fiji                     N                                                           In 2013, a Poverty Benefit    The monitoring
                                                                                     Scheme (PBS) replaced         arrangements are in place
                                                                                     the Family Assistance         to track the number and
                                                                                     Program and the Food          type (category) of programs
                                                                                     Voucher Programme.            beneficiaries and budgets.
                                                                                     Conditions for the PBS        The Government has been
                                                                                     include that able bodied      taking steps in modernizing
                                                                                     individuals in the family     the system, including the
                                                                                     undergo skills training,      transition from the E-Welfare
                                                                                     search for employment         to E-Gov system.
                                                                                     or engage in income
                                                                                     generating activities.
                                                                                     Trainings are provided
                                                                                     by the Ministry of Social
                                                                                     Welfare.
Gabon                    Y     National Social     2013   The government             The NSPP is a framework       The Monitoring and
                               Protection Policy          is implementing            for harmonization and         Evaluation systems are able
                                                          the National Social        consolidation of the          to track, collect and collate
                                                          Protection Policy,         main cash transfer            basic data. However, the
                                                          approved in 2012. In       programs. The NSPP will       capacity for the systems
                                                          2013 a Social Assistance   form the basis for fully      to do this consistently and
                                                          Bill was submitted to      coordinated SP system.        comprehensively is still
                                                          the National Assembly.                                   lacking. Recent evaluations
                                                          There now exists a                                       exist for programs in the
                                                          Social Assistance                                        health insurance, social
                                                          Law. The draft Social                                    security, labor market
                                                          Protection Sessional                                     and social assistance sub
                                                          Paper and Social                                         sectors. The NSPP programs
                                                          Protection Council Bill                                  have recently developed
                                                          will further provide                                     a broad M&E framework
                                                          a legal and policy                                       for the main cash transfer
                                                          framework for SP,                                        programs. This will provide
                                                          and are scheduled                                        regular and comprehensive
                                                          for discussion in the                                    administrative data, and will
                                                          National Assembly.                                       include quasi-experimental
                                                                                                                   impact evaluations for some
                                                                                                                   programs.
Gambia                   N
                                                                              POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION                       69


                                       Policy and Strategy                                   Institutions                 Administration
         Country   Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year          Comment                     Comment                        Comment
Georgia             Y      Poverty Reduction   2013       There has been                                           A new MIS is designed to
                           Strategy                       significant progress,                                    integrate Social Assistance
                                                          relative to many other                                   with the pension database.
                                                          countries in the region,                                 Georgia does periodic
                                                          in streamlining different                                monitoring and evaluations
                                                          social benefit schemes,                                  of its SP programs, and
                                                          targeting to the poor,                                   makes changes to the
                                                          and maintaining a                                        approach on a semi-regular
                                                          fiscally sustainable                                     basis.
                                                          family of SP programs.
Ghana               Y      National Social     2012       The government is           In 2013 the ministry         The new Ministry for Social
                           Protection                     laying the roadmap          in charge of social          Protection is also initiating
                           Strategy                       towards strengthening       protection in Ghana was      discussions on designing a
                                                          the coordination            created: the Ministry of     results framework and M&E
                                                          capabilities of the         Gender, Children and         system for SP in the country.
                                                          Ministry of Gender,         Social Protection is         It has adapted the Common
                                                          Children and Social         mandated to coordinate       Targeting Mechanism as a
                                                          Protection.                 and oversee social           basis to create a National
                                                                                      protection.                  Targeting System.
Grenada             Y      Social Safety Net   2013       This framework builds       The cross-sectoral           Monitoring and evaluation
                           Policy Framework               on the 2009 Social          technical coordination       systems are in the process
                                                          Safety Net Assessment.      committee for the SEED       of being developed. M&E
                                                          This framework has          Program has been             is a critical area stressed
                                                          been approved by the        revived. Its composition     under the new Social Safety
                                                          Governments cabinet in      includes officials from      Net Policy Framework, thus
                                                          August 2013.                health, education,           allowing policy makers
                                                                                      housing, finance and         to make more informed
                                                                                      social protection and        decisions about existing
                                                                                      taking an active role        programs.
                                                                                      in decision-making
                                                                                      about SEED and social
                                                                                      programs as well.
Guatemala           N
Guinea              N                                                                 The Ministry of Social
                                                                                      Affairs and Promotion of
                                                                                      Women and Children is
                                                                                      in charge of interventions
                                                                                      for the protection of poor
                                                                                      and vulnerable people.
Guinea-Bissau       N
Guyana              N                                                                                              The presence of an MIS
                                                                                                                   system enables data capture
                                                                                                                   for monitoring purposes.
Haiti               N                                                                 There is limited
                                                                                      coordination and
                                                                                      planning mechanisms
                                                                                      across programs to
                                                                                      ensure systematic
                                                                                      coverage of the poor and
                                                                                      vulnerable. The Ministry
                                                                                      with the institutional
                                                                                      mandate for social
                                                                                      protection is the Ministry
                                                                                      of Social Affairs (MAST).
Honduras            Y      National Social     2013       The Government                                           A Unique Registry of
                           Protection Policy              approved in March                                        Beneficiaries of social
                                                          2012 a comprehensive                                     programs will help rationalize
                                                          National Social                                          interventions and focus
                                                          Protection Policy.                                       targeting on priority groups.
Hungary
70          POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION


                                            Policy and Strategy                                 Institutions                 Administration
         Country        Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year          Comment                   Comment                        Comment
India                    N                                     India has a strong                                     Initiatives such as the Unique
                                                               legal framework,                                       Identification (UID) hold
                                                               including Right to                                     the potential of improving
                                                               Food and MGNREGS                                       coverage, implementation
                                                               acts. It also includes                                 and coordination across
                                                               Directive Principles of                                programs in the future. In
                                                               State Policy, although                                 addition, there are many
                                                               a coherent SP policy                                   state-level initiatives aimed
                                                               framework is lacking.                                  at increasing performance of
                                                                                                                      social protection programs
                                                                                                                      utilizing information
                                                                                                                      technology and innovations
                                                                                                                      in administration.
Indonesia                N                                                                                            The National Team for the
                                                                                                                      Acceleration of Poverty
                                                                                                                      Reduction (TNP2K)
                                                                                                                      Secretariat established
                                                                                                                      an M&E Working Group in
                                                                                                                      2010. This is responsible
                                                                                                                      for establishing a single
                                                                                                                      monitoring system with
                                                                                                                      data from poverty reduction
                                                                                                                      programs. It also created a
                                                                                                                      national registry.
Iraq                     Y      National            2013       The GoI began to          The Secretary General
                                Development Plan               reform the social         of the Cabinet oversees
                                                               protection policies in    coordination and
                                                               alignment with the        implementation of the
                                                               National Development      Poverty Reduction
                                                               Strategy and              Strategy (PRS) and
                                                               implementation of         works across several
                                                               these reforms through     ministries in coordination
                                                               ESPP project. The         with the Ministry of
                                                               reforms included          Planning.
                                                               expanding the Social
                                                               Safety Net programs.
Jamaica                  Y      Social Inclusion    2013       The Government of                                      Systems to monitor
                                Policy                         Jamaica developed                                      performance across all main
                                                               over the past year                                     SP programs are in place,
                                                               a social protection                                    including number and types
                                                               strategy.                                              of beneficiaries, budgets
                                                                                                                      and periodic progress, and
                                                                                                                      impact evaluations.
Jordan                   Y      National Agenda     2007       The GoJ has developed     Institutional mechanisms     There are systems to monitor
                                                               a comprehensive           are planned as part of       performance of safety nets
                                                               strategy for SP as part   the development of a         and labor market programs.
                                                               of its National Agenda,   National Unified Registry.   The GoJ is developing a
                                                               as well as subsequent                                  National Unified Registry
                                                               updates and strategies                                 which ultimately will be
                                                               including the recent                                   the main coordinating
                                                               Poverty Reduction                                      mechanism for SSNs and
                                                               Strategy (2013) and                                    subsidy reform in the
                                                               the adopted National                                   country.
                                                               Employment Strategy
                                                               (2012).
Kazakhstan               Y      Strategic           2010       The government has                                     Existing monitoring systems
                                Development Plan               a strategy for social                                  are able to track numbers,
                                2020                           protection integrated                                  types of beneficiaries,
                                                               in a set of documents                                  spending, average benefit,
                                                               covering employment,                                   etc. The Household
                                                               pensions, safety nets                                  Budget Survey is used for
                                                               and services.                                          analysis of SP programs.
                                                                                                                      An M&E framework for
                                                                                                                      SP was developed and is
                                                                                                                      reported on.
                                                                                POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION                         71


                                         Policy and Strategy                                  Institutions                Administration
           Country   Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year          Comment                    Comment                       Comment
Kenya                 Y      National Social     2012       The government             In the operationalization   NSNP programs have
                             Protection Policy              is implementing            of the policy there         recently developed a
                                                            the National Social        is a framework for          broad M&E framework for
                                                            Protection Policy which    harmonization and           the main CT programs.
                                                            was approved by            consolidation of main       This will provide regular
                                                            Cabinet in 2012.           cash transfer programs.     and comprehensive
                                                                                                                   administrative data, and will
                                                                                                                   include quasi-experimental
                                                                                                                   impact evaluations in some
                                                                                                                   programs.
Kiribati              N                                                                 
Kosovo                N                                     A White Paper (Social                                  Existing monitoring systems
                                                            Protection Strategy)                                   are able to track the number,
                                                            was developed in 2008,                                 types of beneficiaries
                                                            but never adopted                                      and budgets. New social
                                                            officially.                                            assistance and employment
                                                                                                                   registries were introduced in
                                                                                                                   early 2012.
Kyrgyz Republic       Y      National Social     2011       The Strategy lays down                                 Existing monitoring systems
                             Protection                     measures to strengthen                                 are able to track numbers,
                             Development                    the social safety net,                                 types of beneficiaries,
                             Strategy and                   reform the system of                                   spending, average benefit,
                             Action Plan                    social care, step up                                   etc. The Kyrgyz Integrated
                             2012–2014                      child protection and to                                Household Survey is used for
                                                            improve social security                                analysis of SP programs. The
                                                            for the elderly.                                       Government is in the process
                                                                                                                   of rolling out a registry
                                                                                                                   of beneficiaries of social
                                                                                                                   protection programs.
Latvia
Lao PDR               N                           
Lebanon               Y      National Social     2011       The government has
                             Development                    poverty reduction
                             Strategy                       among its declared
                                                            objectives and has
                                                            developed a Social
                                                            Sector Strategy and
                                                            certain policies have
                                                            been implemented
                                                            from the strategy
                                                            including its National
                                                            Poverty Targeting
                                                            Program (NPTP).
Lesotho               P      Social Protection              Building on the National   The Ministry of Social      The National Information
                             Strategy                       Social Development         Development will lead       System for Social Assistance
                                                            Policy, the Government     and coordinate the social   (NISSA) serves as a national
                                                            intends to prepare         protection agenda.          registry for beneficiaries of
                                                            a Social Protection                                    Social Safety Net programs.
                                                            Strategy.
Liberia               Y      Social Protection   2012       The Social Protection                                  In 2013, a single-set of
                             Strategy and                   Policy provides a                                      indicators for a common
                             Policy                         solid framework                                        MIS was developed and
                                                            for addressing                                         populated with beneficiary
                                                            vulnerabilities over the                               information from the
                                                            next years covered by                                  countrys largest social safety
                                                            the country’s long-term                                net programs (excluding
                                                            plan.                                                  school feeding).
72         POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION


                                           Policy and Strategy                                  Institutions                Administration
         Country       Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year          Comment                    Comment                        Comment
Macedonia, FYR           Y     National Strategy   2010       The Government has         The Inter Ministerial        A Cash Benefits
                               for Alleviation                developed the National     working group is             Management Information
                               of Poverty and                 Strategy for Alleviation   responsible for              System (CBMIS), a unique
                               Social Exclusion               of Poverty and Social      preparation of the annual    registry of social cash
                               (2010–2020)                    Exclusion, as an overall   programs, coordination       beneficiaries, was developed
                                                              strategy for social        and reporting on             and is an important tool in
                                                              protection, and a set      implementation of            defining policies to improve
                                                              of programs which aim      the Strategy to the          the functioning of the
                                                              to improve resilience,     Government. The              system.
                                                              opportunity and equity     infrastructure in the
                                                              for large groups of the    Ministry of Labor and
                                                              population.                Social Policy and the
                                                                                         Centers for Social Works
                                                                                         were upgraded to allow
                                                                                         more efficient workflow
                                                                                         in the sector.
Madagascar               N
Malawi                   Y     Social Support      2012       The Government             The coordination is          The Government has a
                               Policy                         approved the Social        under the Ministry of        central M&E Department in
                                                              Support Policy in July     Economic Planning and        the Ministry of Economic
                                                              2012, and by April 2013,   Development within its       Planning and Development
                                                              the National Social        Directorate of Poverty       which captures information
                                                              Support Programme          Reduction and Social         from the district level
                                                              was also endorsed          Protection.                  where the programs are
                                                              to operationalize the                                   implemented.
                                                              Policy.
Malaysia                 N                                                                                            Existing monitoring systems
                                                                                                                      are able to track the number,
                                                                                                                      types of beneficiaries
                                                                                                                      and budgets of individual
                                                                                                                      programs.
Maldives                 P     Social Protection              The government has         The major agencies           Most programs have
                               Act                            been codifying its         delivering social            functioning monitoring
                                                              overall strategy for       protection and               mechanisms to track the
                                                              the social protection      labor programs are           number and types of
                                                              sector through a Social    the National Social          beneficiaries as well as
                                                              Protection Act, which      Protection Agency            expenditure. There has been
                                                              following ratification     (NSPA), the Maldives         efforts to develop shared
                                                              provides a stronger        Pension Administration       administrative systems
                                                              legal framework for        Office (MPAO), and           including common and
                                                              building more coherent     Ministry of Youth and        improved targeting and
                                                              and better coordinated     Sports (MoYS). A             monitoring systems.
                                                              social protection          coordination mechanism
                                                              systems.                   are yet to be formalized.
Mali                     Y     National Action     2008       In August 2011, the
                               Plan for the                   Government of Mali
                               Extension of                   adopted a National
                               Social Protection              Action Plan for the
                                                              Extension of Social
                                                              Protection which aims
                                                              at improving resilience,
                                                              equity, and opportunity
                                                              for large groups of the
                                                              population.
Marshall Islands         N                          
Mauritania               Y     National Social     2013       The strategy was           The Government has
                               Protection                     adopted by the Council     also established a special
                               Strategy                       of Ministers in June       Technical Advisor for
                                                              2013.                      Social Protection in the
                                                                                         Ministry of Economic
                                                                                         Affairs and Development,
                                                                                         who is in charge of
                                                                                         leading the efforts to
                                                                                         implement the national
                                                                                         strategy.
                                                                                 POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION                       73


                                            Policy and Strategy                                 Institutions                 Administration
         Country        Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year         Comment                     Comment                       Comment
Mauritius                N                                                                                            The Government is rolling
                                                                                                                      out a single registry for
                                                                                                                      Mauritius (the Social Register
                                                                                                                      of Mauritius, SRM), which
                                                                                                                      started by integrating
                                                                                                                      databases for Social Aid
                                                                                                                      and NEF programming,
                                                                                                                      with the aim of improving
                                                                                                                      integrated service delivery
                                                                                                                      and coordination. The NEF
                                                                                                                      is currently developing a
                                                                                                                      comprehensive monitoring
                                                                                                                      and evaluation framework.
Mexico                   Y      National            2013       Mexico has a well-                                     Effective monitoring systems
                                Development Plan               defined national policy                                are in place for major
                                                               for social development,                                social protection programs
                                                               together with a                                        in Mexico. The National
                                                               comprehensive strategy                                 Council for the Evaluation
                                                               to reduce poverty.                                     of Social Development
                                                                                                                      Policy (CONEVAL) regularly
                                                                                                                      conducts an independent
                                                                                                                      evaluation of social
                                                                                                                      programs.
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.    N                           
Moldova                  N                                                                                            A management information
                                                                                                                      system is being developed
                                                                                                                      for the social assistance
                                                                                                                      benefits. Once completed,
                                                                                                                      it will be able to track
                                                                                                                      performance.
Mongolia                 N                                                               There are some               Monitoring arrangements
                                                                                         institutional                are in place to track the
                                                                                         arrangements that            number and type (category)
                                                                                         promote coordination         of programs beneficiaries,
                                                                                         of programs and              as well as budgets. An
                                                                                         policies within the social   intersectoral database of
                                                                                         protection system.           poor households and registry
                                                                                                                      of beneficiaries is being
                                                                                                                      developed.
Montenegro               Y      Strategy for        2008       Montenegro                                             Existing monitoring systems
                                Social and Child               implemented                                            are able to track the number,
                                Protection                     Strategy for Social                                    types of beneficiaries and
                                (2008–2012)                    and Child Protection                                   budgets. Evaluations are
                                                               (2008–2012), and is                                    available for some programs.
                                                               now implementing
                                                               a Strategy for
                                                               Integration of People
                                                               with Disabilities
                                                               (2008–2016), a National
                                                               Action Plan for Gender
                                                               Equality and a set of
                                                               programs which deliver
                                                               the basic elements of
                                                               prevention, protection
                                                               and promotion for
                                                               vulnerable population
                                                               groups.
Morocco                  N                           
74        POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION


                                          Policy and Strategy                                    Institutions                  Administration
        Country       Y/N/P       Strategy Name         Year          Comment                     Comment                         Comment
Mozambique              Y     National              2010       The National Strategy       A Council for                The Government is in the
                              Strategy for Social              for Social Protection       Coordination of Basic        process of developing a
                              Protection                       was initially defined       SP system is Chaired by      comprehensive management
                                                               for a 5-year period         the Ministry of Women        information system for social
                                                               (2010–2014). The            and includes the Ministry    safety net programs.
                                                               Government has              of Education, Ministry
                                                               already started an          of Planning, Ministry of
                                                               evaluation process          Agriculture, Ministry of
                                                               for the Strategy that       Public Works, Ministry
                                                               will facilitate the         of Labor, Ministry of
                                                               development of the          State Administration. A
                                                               Strategy for 2015–2019.     Support Group for SP
                                                                                           programs is chaired by
                                                                                           the National Institute
                                                                                           of Social Action and
                                                                                           includes WB, World
                                                                                           Food Programme,
                                                                                           UNICEF, International
                                                                                           Labour Organization,
                                                                                           Dutch Cooperation,
                                                                                           DFID. A Social Protection
                                                                                           Partners Group is chaired
                                                                                           by the Dutch Cooperation
                                                                                           (Co-chaired by UNICEF)
                                                                                           and includes UN
                                                                                           agencies, WB, USAID, EU,
                                                                                           DFID, Dutch Cooperation,
                                                                                           Swedish Cooperation,
                                                                                           Platform for Civil Society
                                                                                           and several NGOs.
Namibia                 Y     Vision 2030           2004       The government’s                                         Basic data are tracked (e.g.,
                              Strategy                         overall social                                           spending, services delivered,
                                                               protection strategy                                      numbers of beneficiaries).
                                                               is articulated in the                                    Evaluations are conducted
                                                               long-term Vision 2030                                    for some programs.
                                                               Strategy, which sets
                                                               goals for protecting
                                                               the vulnerable (e.g.,
                                                               orphans, elderly,
                                                               disabled) and
                                                               promoting welfare of
                                                               youth and women in
                                                               the context of poverty
                                                               reduction.
Nepal                   P                                      In 2011, the Government     Different government         In 2013, the Ministry of
                                                               prepared a ten              entities, are working        Federal Affairs and Local
                                                               year national social        together, under the          Development (MoFALD)
                                                               protection strategy/        auspices of the Ministry     established a Management
                                                               framework.                  of Finance, to ensure        Information System for its
                                                                                           the coordination of          cash transfer programs, which
                                                                                           social protection            was rolled out in 2 districts.
                                                                                           schemes across different     Work is underway to expand
                                                                                           ministries.                  it to an additional 12 districts.
Nicaragua               P                                      The government              The national welfare         The MIFAN continues
                                                               developed the National      system in Nicaragua is       to advance in creating
                                                               Human Development           overseen by the Social       interphases with the MIS
                                                               Plan 2009–2012 and          Cabinet for the Family       of the Minisry of Health to
                                                               created the National        and Solidarity consisting    share information about
                                                               Social Welfare System       of a coordinator and         beneficiaries.
                                                               in 2008. In 2013, the       the Ministers of Finance,
                                                               government undertook        Health, Education, and
                                                               a review for these two      the Family, Youth and
                                                               instruments to align        Children.
                                                               different approaches
                                                               into a systemic social
                                                               assistance strategy. This
                                                               strategy is expected for
                                                               mid-2014.
                                                                                POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION                       75


                                        Policy and Strategy                                   Institutions                Administration
          Country   Y/N/P    Strategy Name            Year         Comment                     Comment                       Comment
Niger                Y      National Social       2011       In October 2013, the      The consultative inter-      The system in place is able
                            Protection                       Government of Niger       ministerial committee        to monitor and evaluate the
                            Strategy                         held its first national   on social protection         impact of the main Social
                                                             social protection forum   was created in August        Safety Nets programs.
                                                             aimed to operationalize   2013 to coordinate SP
                                                             the national social       interventions and is still
                                                             protection strategy.      in place.
Nigeria              P      National Social                  The National Planning     The SP policy framework      There are M&E Systems for
                            Protection Policy                Commission is now         is expected to bring the     all targeted intervention
                            Framework (draft)                revisiting the Social     current Social Safety        of Government currently
                                                             Protection Policy         Nets interventions in the    instituted in the National
                                                             framework in Nigeria.     country into a better        Planning Commission.
                                                                                       coordinated system.          There is a planned
                                                                                                                    introduction of a National
                                                                                                                    Identity Card system also
                                                                                                                    expected to be coordinated
                                                                                                                    with the targeting and
                                                                                                                    identification system for
                                                                                                                    the SP administrative and
                                                                                                                    coordinating system.
Pakistan             Y      National Social       2007       In 2007, the                                           Most social protection
                            Protection                       Government of Pakistan                                 programs are able to track
                            Strategy                         approved its National                                  the number, types and
                                                             Social Protection                                      benefits received by their
                                                             Strategy.                                              beneficiaries.
Palau
Panama               N                                                                                              MIDES has implemented
                                                                                                                    a Unified Registry of
                                                                                                                    Beneficiaries (RUB) of MIDES
                                                                                                                    programs which is functional.
Papua New Guinea     P      Social Protection                 A first draft of                                      The GoPNG is currently
                            Policy                           the SP Policy has                                      implementing PNGInfo.
                                                             been submitted to                                      It is expected to improve
                                                             the Department                                         provincial database systems.
                                                             for Community                                          An integrated electronic
                                                             Development (DfCD)                                     system (like the EID Card
                                                             with the elderly and                                   Project) is currently being
                                                             disabled as the initial                                developed and may help
                                                             target beneficiaries.                                  with data collation.
                                                             As of November 2013,
                                                             the Prime Minister
                                                             announced that GoPNG
                                                             would implement the
                                                             Social Pension in 2015.
Paraguay             N
Peru                 Y      Crecer para Incluir   2011       Implementation of the     Ministry of Development
                            (Growth for                      strategy has continued    and Social Inclusion
                            Inclusion)                       with revisions of         (MIDIS) has been tasked
                                                             some programs and         with coordinating the
                                                             expansions of others.     implementation of the
                                                                                       5 most important social
                                                                                       protection programs.
                                                                                       MIDIS started the
                                                                                       development of a
                                                                                       National System for
                                                                                       Development and Social
                                                                                       Inclusion (SINADIS):
                                                                                       the country’s platform
                                                                                       for inter-sectorial and
                                                                                       inter-governmental
                                                                                       coordination on social
                                                                                       policy interventions.
76         POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION


                                            Policy and Strategy                                     Institutions                   Administration
         Country        Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year          Comment                        Comment                          Comment
Philippines              Y      Social Protection   2012       The Social Protection         In 2009, the Social            All major agencies
                                Operational                    strategy was approved         Development Committee          involved in the design and
                                Framework and                  by the National               (SDC) of the National          implementation of social
                                Strategy                       Economic and                  Economic and                   protection policies have
                                                               Development Authority         Development Authority          established monitoring
                                                               NEDA in 2012.                 (NEDA) approved the            systems. A new poverty
                                                                                             creation of a sub-committee    targeting assessment is
                                                                                             on social protection.          planned nationwide.
                                                                                             This sub-committee is
                                                                                             co-chaired by Department
                                                                                             of Social Welfare and
                                                                                             Development and NEDA.
Poland                   Y      Social Assistance   2004       The government has            The Ministry of Labor          The ministry has a
                                Law                            an overall strategy for       and Social Policy              sophisticated administrative
                                                               SP and a well-designed        is responsible for             system to administer its
                                                               set of programs, both         developing policy in           programs and track results of
                                                               on the contributory and       social assistance, social      the main programs.
                                                               the non-contributory          insurance and labor
                                                               side. In the last year, the   market policies
                                                               Ministry made a number
                                                               of important reforms.
Qatar
Romania                  Y      Social Assistance   2011       In early 2011, Romania        The Ministry of Labor          All the SP sectors have
                                Reform Strategy                approved a new Law on         coordinates effectively        well developed IT systems
                                                               Pensions, Labor Code,         the delivery of most of        which allow a good M&E
                                                               and Social Assistance.        the Social Safety net          (beneficiaries and funds). Tthe
                                                                                             programs, social services      performance indications started
                                                                                             and labor market policies.     being regularly monitored.
Russian Federation       N                           
Rwanda                   Y      National Social     2011       A national social             A sector working group         A basic MIS was completed
                                Protection                     protection strategy           (SWG) established              in 2012.
                                Strategy                       (NSPS) was developed          in 2008 has fostered
                                                               through a consultative        increased coordination of
                                                               process                       the SP sector.
S. Sudan
Samoa                    N                                                                   The Ministry of Women,
                                                                                             Community and Social
                                                                                             Development remains
                                                                                             as the main coordination
                                                                                             agency for social protection
                                                                                             programs in Samoa.
Sao Tome and Principe    P                                     The Government has
                                                               developed a first draft
                                                               of Social Protection
                                                               Strategy.
Senegal                  Y      National Social     2005       The government has            The Délégation Générale        In terms of Monitoring and
                                Protection                     developed an overall          à la Protection Sociale        Evaluation, the Délégation
                                Strategy                       strategy for social           et la Solidarité Nationale     Générale has been tasked
                                                               protection, which was         is responsible for the         with the overall monitoring
                                                               recently approved             coordination of the            and evaluation of the sector
                                                               and endorsed by the           sector.                        and a unique registry of
                                                               different sectors and                                        programs.
                                                               development partners.
Serbia                   Y      Social Welfare      2005       The Government of                                            Systems are in place to
                                Development                    Serbia has strategies                                        monitor performance across
                                Strategy                       and action plans for                                         all main SP programs,
                                                               the basic elements of                                        including number and types
                                                               social protections social                                    of beneficiaries and budgets.
                                                               insurance, labor market
                                                               policy, social assistance
                                                               and social services,
                                                               including the National
                                                               Strategy for Development
                                                               of Social Protection
                                                                                    POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION                       77


                                          Policy and Strategy                                   Institutions                 Administration
       Country        Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year          Comment                     Comment                         Comment
Seychelles             N                                     SP Strategy and Policy      The Agency for Social        The Government intends
                                                             Seychelles has a            Protection (ASP) was         to integrate other benefits
                                                             comprehensive social        created in 2012 by           into the MIS to improve the
                                                             protection system.          merging Social security      efficiency of the overall social
                                                                                         Fund and Social Welfare      assistance system and for
                                                                                         Agency to improve            more effective monitoring of
                                                                                         the efficiency and           programs.
                                                                                         governance of the social
                                                                                         protection system.
Sierra Leone           Y      National Social     2013       The Social Protection       In 2012, a National Social   The quality of M&E
                              Protection Policy              agenda in Sierra            Protection Authority was     systems continues to vary
                                                             Leone is detailed in        created by Parliament to     across programs, though
                                                             the country’s third         lead coordination in the     information on number
                                                             generation PRSP             sector.                      and types of beneficiaries
                                                             (2013–2018) dubbed                                       and budgets is generally
                                                             Agenda for Prosperity.                                   available. A growing number
                                                                                                                      of impact evaluations are
                                                                                                                      being carried out.
Solomon Islands        N                           
South Africa           Y      White Paper for     1997       South Africa has put in                                  A new electronic biometric
                              Social Welfare                 place a well-developed                                   card payment system
                                                             publicly provided social                                 successfully rolled out this
                                                             protections system                                       year to all social benefit
                                                             that consists of two                                     beneficiaries.
                                                             main pillars of social
                                                             assistance and social
                                                             insurance.
South Sudan            P      South Sudan                    The South Sudan             The government
                              Development Plan               Development Plan            has created a Social
                                                             (SSDP) 2011–2013            Protection Core Team
                                                             includes Social             led by the Ministry
                                                             Protection interventions    of Gender, Child and
                                                             under the Social and        Social Welfare to
                                                             Human Development           coordinate and facilitate
                                                             Pillar.                     the development of a
                                                                                         comprehensive social
                                                                                         protection policy.
Sri Lanka              P                                     The Government              The Government has           The existing programs
                                                             has embarked on             been interested in           are able to track basic
                                                             developing a Social         coordinating several         administrative information,
                                                             Protection strategy.        social assistance            including the number and
                                                                                         programs and schemes         types of beneficiaries and
                                                                                         using the Divineguma         payments.
                                                                                         program. The
                                                                                         Divineguma Act was
                                                                                         presented and debated
                                                                                         at the Parliament and
                                                                                         now certified into law.
St. Kitts and Nevis    Y      National Social     2011       SKN provides numerous       The recent approval          The SP strategy will facilitate
                              Protection                     social assistance, social   of the SP strategy           improved M&E through the
                              Strategy                       insurance benefits and      and a move to its            development of information
                                                             labor market programs,      implementation               systems and capacity
                                                             now guided by an            phase is expected to         building.
                                                             overall Social Protection   place coordination
                                                             Strategy that has been      mechanisms.
                                                             approved by Cabinet.
St. Lucia              P                                     The Social Protection                                    M&E of SPL programs will
                                                             Policy will be validated                                 also improve once the MIS
                                                             by Cabinet in October                                    for social programs has been
                                                             2013.                                                    developed under the current
                                                                                                                      reform. A proxy means
                                                                                                                      test, Saint Lucias National
                                                                                                                      Eligibility Test (SL-NET) has
                                                                                                                      been developed.
78           POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION


                                             Policy and Strategy                                     Institutions               Administration
        Country          Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year          Comment                        Comment                      Comment
St. Vincent and the        N                          
Grenadines
Sudan                      N                                                                  The Ministry of Welfare
                                                                                              and Social Security is
                                                                                              in charge of the overall
                                                                                              coordination of Social
                                                                                              Protection initiatives.
Suriname
Swaziland                  P                                    The Government                The Department of Social
                                                                intends to establish          Welfare has been housed
                                                                an inter-ministerial          in the Deputy Prime
                                                                committee to oversee          Ministers Office since
                                                                the development of a          2009, is responsible for
                                                                Safety Net Strategy.          Swazilands largest cash
                                                                                              transfer programs and
                                                                                              is also responsible for
                                                                                              overseeing social care
                                                                                              services.
Syria
Tajikistan                 P                                    While objectives of the       The Government             The new MIS Registry
                                                                reform in the sector          is establishing a          system when developed and
                                                                have been formulated,         consolidated Registry      implemented is expected
                                                                a broad and consistent        for social protection      to substantially improve
                                                                SP strategy is still in the   programs. It is expected   capacity of the Government
                                                                process of formulation.       that the system will be    to plan and monitor
                                                                                              launched in late 2014.     implementation of its key
                                                                                              The social protection      poverty related interventions.
                                                                                              function is being          The social protection
                                                                                              transfered to a new        function is being transfered
                                                                                              Ministry.                  to a new Ministry.
Tanzania                   P                                    The Government                                           A national monitoring
                                                                is finalizing a draft                                    system exists for capturing
                                                                of a National Social                                     performance of the National
                                                                Protection Framework                                     Strategy for Growth and
                                                                (NSPF) which aims to                                     Reduction of Poverty
                                                                improve coordination                                     (NSGRP II). Social protection
                                                                and speed up the                                         indicators have been
                                                                implementation of                                        developed and incorporated
                                                                social protection policies                               in the national monitoring
                                                                designed to improve                                      system. Most programs are
                                                                the lives of the poor and                                able to track budgets and
                                                                most vulnerable groups.                                  numbers of beneficiaries.
                                                                The process includes the
                                                                preparation of an Action
                                                                Plan for operationalizing
                                                                the Framework.
Thailand                   Y     Eleventh national   2012       The government has            The Ministry of Social     Existing monitoring
                                 economic                       an overall strategy for       Development and Human      systems track the number
                                 and social                     Social Protection and         Security (MOSDHS) is in    of beneficiaries, the type of
                                 development plan               a set of programs that        charge of coordinating     beneficiaries and budgets
                                                                deliver prevention,           the implementation of      devoted to programs.
                                                                protection and                the different schemes.
                                                                promotion services
                                                                for large groups of the
                                                                population. The Thai
                                                                government is working
                                                                toward developing
                                                                a universal social
                                                                protection system by
                                                                2017, called the Welfare
                                                                Society.
Timor-Leste                N                                                                                             The Ministry of Social
                                                                                                                         Solidarity will incorporate
                                                                                                                         a M&E module into its MIS,
                                                                                                                         which is currently under
                                                                                                                         development.
                                                                                POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION                        79


                                          Policy and Strategy                                 Institutions                  Administration
          Country     Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year         Comment                     Comment                         Comment
Togo                   P                                     A Social Protection       The National Social           Monitoring & Evaluation
                                                             strategy and a            Protection Promotion          systems exist for most of the
                                                             budgeted action plans     Committee provides            programs.
                                                             have been validated       directions and
                                                             in November 2013          coordinates all social
                                                             by main national          protection activities in
                                                             stakeholders. This        Togo. In October 2013,
                                                             strategy document is      the Government created
                                                             yet to be adopted by      a Ministry of Public Policy
                                                             the Government.           Evaluation to oversee
                                                                                       and assess the results of
                                                                                       public policies.
Tonga                  N                           
Trinidad and Tobago    P      National Poverty               For fiscal year                                         The main SP programs
                              Reduction                      2013–2014, the Ministry                                 have monitoring and
                              Strategy                       of the People and                                       information systems and
                                                             Social Development                                      collect main information.
                                                             has set as objectives                                   The country implements a
                                                             the Development of                                      Multiple Indicator Cluster
                                                             a National Poverty                                      Survey to monitor Millenium
                                                             Reduction Strategy.                                     Development Goals. It also
                                                                                                                     implements a periodical
                                                                                                                     Survey of Living Conditions.
                                                                                                                     The latest version was
                                                                                                                     conducted in 2013.
Tunisia                N                                                               Tunisia has taken steps       In 2012, while the
                                                                                       toward consolidating its      Government has launched
                                                                                       main social assistance        a new project to develop a
                                                                                       programs under a single       unified registry and improved
                                                                                       Directorate of Social         monitoring of beneficiaries.
                                                                                       Promotion, but a number
                                                                                       of programs are operated
                                                                                       by other ministries, and
                                                                                       greater coordination
                                                                                       is necessary to ensure
                                                                                       equitable distribution
                                                                                       of safety net programs
                                                                                       overall.
Turkey                 N                                                                                             The Social Security Institution
                                                                                                                     (SSI) and Ministry of Family
                                                                                                                     and Social Policies (MFSP)
                                                                                                                     established systems to
                                                                                                                     monitor performance across
                                                                                                                     all main SP programs. MFSP
                                                                                                                     established the integrated
                                                                                                                     Social Assistance Information
                                                                                                                     System (SAIS) to target SA
                                                                                                                     benefits more effectively.
Turkmenistan           Y      Social Protection   2012       The government has an                                    
                              of the Population              overall framework for
                              Code                           social protection (2012
                                                             Code)
Tuvalu                 N                                                               The Department of
                                                                                       Community Affairs in
                                                                                       the Ministry of Home
                                                                                       Affairs and Rural
                                                                                       Development (MHARD)
                                                                                       focuses on monitoring
                                                                                       and developing a
                                                                                       social policy to address
                                                                                       poverty and hardship.
                                                                                       The Department also
                                                                                       coordinates the activities
                                                                                       of other departments
                                                                                       within MHARD and other
                                                                                       stakeholders.
80        POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION


                                          Policy and Strategy                                  Institutions                  Administration
      Country         Y/N/P       Strategy Name       Year          Comment                     Comment                        Comment
UAE
Uganda                  Y     Social Protection   2012       The Ministry of             Social Assistance            The national monitoring
                              Strategy, within               Gender Labor and            Programs are                 system exists for capturing
                              the Uganda                     Social Development,         coordinated under the        performance of the National
                              National                       with support of             Ministry of Gender, Labor    Development Plan. Most of
                              Development Plan               development partners,       and Social Development       the programs are able to
                                                             has launched Social         with the exception of the    track budgets and numbers
                                                             Protection sector           Public Sector Pension        of beneficiaries. Evaluations
                                                             review to develop an        Fund and the Armed           are carried out in large
                                                             effective and efficient     Forces Pension Fund.         programs like NUSAF.
                                                             social protection
                                                             system and strengthen
                                                             the strategy.
Ukraine                 Y     National Poverty    2010
                              Reduction
                              Strategy
                              2010–2015 
Uruguay                 Y     The Social Equity   2007       The Social Cabinet          The National Social          The two main institutions,
                              Plan                           coordinates policies,       Policies Council unites      BPS and MIDES, have strong
                                                             within the framework of     the Ministries of            monitoring systems that
                                                             the “Social Equity Plan,”   Finance, Labor, Social       produce and disseminate
                                                             that aims at eliminating    Development, Health,         performance indicators on
                                                             extreme poverty and         Education, and the           a regular basis. MIDES also
                                                             increase equality           Banco de Previsión           oversees the implementation
                                                                                         Social. This council holds   of all social policies and
                                                                                         inter-ministerial meetings   produces impact evaluation
                                                                                         and also has operational     reports. The new SIIAS
                                                                                         committees that work on      system will also produce
                                                                                         implementation issues.       cross-sector monitoring
                                                                                                                      reports.
Uzbekistan              Y     Welfare             2012       The government has an                                    A lot of processes remain
                              Improvement                    overall policy for social                                decentralized and lack
                              Strategy for                   protection as part of                                    automation. Produced M&E
                              2012–2015                      its broader strategy to                                  information is basic and
                                                             improve well-being of                                    could improve to capture
                                                             the population.                                          standard performance
                                                                                                                      indicators such as coverage,
                                                                                                                      targeting, poverty
                                                                                                                      impact, etc.
Vanuatu                 N                          
Venezuela, RB           N
Vietnam                 Y     National Social     2011       In 2012, the GoV                                          
                              Protection                     adopted a resolution
                              Strategy                       on social protection.
                              (2011–2020)                    The resolution will
                                                             guide government
                                                             policy for the period
                                                             until 2020 and covers
                                                             labor market policy,
                                                             social insurance, social
                                                             assistance, social
                                                             services and poverty
                                                             reduction policy.
West Bank & Gaza
                                                                           POLICIES, INSTITUTIONS, AND ADMINISTRATION             81


                                   Policy and Strategy                               Institutions           Administration
      Country   Y/N/P    Strategy Name           Year         Comment                 Comment                  Comment
Yemen, Rep.      P                                      A new legal and                               The major safety net
                                                        policy framework is                           programs have a well-
                                                        being implemented.                            developed database and
                                                        The GoY has initiated                         MIS which are supporting
                                                        an overall social                             management processes
                                                        protection strategy                           and decision making. This
                                                        and accompanying                              information was instrumental
                                                        policies for protection                       in making the safety net
                                                        of the population and                         program more responsive
                                                        was able to deliver on                        to the recent political and
                                                        elements of prevention,                       economic crisis.
                                                        protection and
                                                        promotion during the
                                                        crisis.
Zambia           P      National Social                 In August, 2013,                              The National Social
                        Protection Policy,              government revised                            Protection Policy should
                        chapter in the                  the chapter on Social                         provide a basis for
                        Fifth National                  Protection in the draft                       harmonization of programs
                        Development Plan                RSNDP (2013–2016).                            and also a comprehensive
                                                        However, the chapter is                       Monitoring and Evaluation
                                                        yet to be aligned with                        system.
                                                        the National Social
                                                        Protection Policy being
                                                        prepared.
Zimbabwe         N
              A N N E X       5

 ASPIRE PERFORMANCE
I N D I C ATO R S B A S E D O N
  H O U S E H O L D S U R V E YS
84         ASPIRE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASED ON HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS



                                                      Benefit                                             Poverty
                                Coverage                            Adequacy
                                                     Incidence                        Gini Inequality    Headcount    Poverty Gap
                Survey                                (Poorest   (Poorest              Reduction %      Reduction %   Reduction %
     Country     Year    (Poorest 20%)     (Total)     20%)       20%)      (Total)       (all hh)        (all hh)      (all hh)
Afghanistan     2007        21.775         14.514      8.245      25.69     22.423        0.106            0.63          1.611
Albania         2008        22.526         9.656      19.514     18.303     25.66         2.253            6.399         18.541
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and
Barbuda
Argentina       2010        24.167         9.702       53.98      19.828    10.36         0.823            2.689         7.443
Armenia         2009        25.819         16.369     32.678      33.718    17.965         5.185          12.626          31.8
Azerbaijan      2008        40.071         31.133     27.166     37.645     16.729         7.801          20.146        42.518
Bahrain
Bangladesh      2010        27.382          17.95     22.888      6.959     5.436          1.391           5.586        10.953
Belarus         2010        66.937         58.279     28.912     22.259      8.77          9.219          22.267        40.907
Belize
Benin
Bhutan          2007        2.033           1.01       14.12      2.303      3.51         0.053            0.097         0.205
Bolivia         2007        10.346         13.717      8.893      37.178     8.26          1.072           8.795        10.024
Bosnia and      2007        11.424         6.489      30.586     16.858     7.762         0.618            1.338         4.742
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil          2009        53.189          21.131    33.159      24.12     14.544         1.992          10.073        22.077
Bulgaria        2007        56.928         38.384      29.33      2.175     1.066         0.579            2.05          3.323
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia        2008         0.171         0.523       0.128      0.702     13.101         –0.12             0          0.004
Cameroon
Cabo Verde
Central
African
Republic
Chad
Chile           2009        89.716         70.581     21.395      15.525    7.484         2.655            13.514       23.136
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo, Dem.
Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica      2009        67.813         44.279      n.a.        n.a.      n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.
Cote D’ivoire
Croatia         2008        44.813         25.226     40.554      21.826    10.385        4.289            11.105       25.585
Czech
Republic
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican       2009        35.222         23.746     25.732     10.932      4.96         0.963            5.681         8.724
Republic
                                                   ASPIRE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASED ON HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS                       85



                                                      Benefit                                             Poverty
                              Coverage                              Adequacy
                                                     Incidence                        Gini Inequality    Headcount    Poverty Gap
              Survey                                  (Poorest   (Poorest              Reduction %      Reduction %   Reduction %
   Country     Year    (Poorest 20%)     (Total)       20%)       20%)      (Total)       (all hh)        (all hh)      (all hh)
Ecuador       2010        84.247         61.406        28.17     24.622      11.131        3.03            13.124        23.38
Egypt, Arab   2008        54.861         44.878       17.578      4.996     3.555          1.354           5.778         11.689
Rep.
El Salvador   2009        78.613         66.575       47.758      9.075     4.905          0.178          0.404          1.725
Equatorial
Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Gabon
Gambia, The
Georgia       2007        21.043         13.832        41.71                65.012        8.462            17.184       46.871
Ghana         2005         2.214         4.929         1.565      13.177    16.802        –0.303           1.506         2.546
Grenada
Guatemala     2006        52.399         41.948       18.763      6.945     2.553         0.539            3.115         5.65
Guinea
Guinea-
Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India         2009        25.374         18.071         n.a.       n.a.      n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.
Indonesia     2009        65.814         42.436         n.a.       n.a.      n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.
Iran
Iraq          2006       99.948a         99.886a       17.931     3.557     2.149          1.861           8.601         14.118
Jamaica
Jordan
Kazakhstan    2007        42.162         29.123        22.9      16.488     10.893        4.349           15.068         27.94
Kenya         2005        30.46           16.64       16.921      3.864      2.99          0.123           1.387         2.399
Kiribati
Kosovo        2006        26.868         10.934       43.386      3.812     2.638         0.426            1.564         3.151
Kuwait
Kyrgyz        2006        27.931          17.156      34.911      10.139    5.826          1.427          4.004          11.583
Republic
Lao PDR       2008         n.a.            n.a.         n.a.       n.a.      n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.
Latvia        2008        65.942         54.173       20.605      15.275    7.219         5.008           15.295        28.712
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Macedonia,    2005        15.819          14.87       15.324     25.925     9.713          1.482           7.38          11.354
FYR
86         ASPIRE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASED ON HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS



                                                     Benefit                                             Poverty
                               Coverage                            Adequacy
                                                    Incidence                        Gini Inequality    Headcount    Poverty Gap
               Survey                                (Poorest   (Poorest              Reduction %      Reduction %   Reduction %
     Country    Year    (Poorest 20%)     (Total)     20%)       20%)      (Total)       (all hh)        (all hh)      (all hh)
Madagascar
Malawi          2010       21.233         20.671     6.444       7.077     5.608         –0.077           0.233         0.476
Malaysia        2008       19.569         8.753      20.183     14.764     12.738        0.799            3.677         8.41
Maldives
Mali            2009        n.a.           n.a.        n.a.       n.a.      n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.
Marshall
Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius       2006       37.083         38.238     11.907     30.255     17.253        5.966           24.163        38.497
Mexico          2010       54.935         32.409     28.881      42.186    17.807        5.066           18.573         36.12
Micronesia,
Fed. Sts.
Moldova         2010       41.908         32.274     21.493     26.386     15.264         6.317          16.606        37.229
Mongolia        2007       91.482         83.216     22.465      15.875    6.746         6.632           23.696        37.629
Montenegro      2007       43.438         26.455     24.545     37.497     25.918        8.944           21.296        44.552
Morocco
Mozambique      2008        7.676         5.655        2.6      254.216    144.17        0.368            1.172         3.628
Namibia
Nepal           2010       50.23          40.143     15.764      3.369     2.292         0.633            3.576         6.079
Nicaragua       2005       70.662         60.216      2.278     30.433     23.742         1.799          13.042         19.07
Niger
Nigeria         2010        1.688          1.752     12.727      4.504     2.159         0.009            0.115         0.313
Oman
Pakistan        2010        13.73          12.62      11.441     12.148    12.326         1.112           6.682         11.833
Panama          2008       79.126         52.021     52.466     16.967     4.521         0.589            2.656         8.065
Papua New
Guinea
Paraguay        2009       45.592         33.539       n.a.       n.a.      n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.
Peru            2009       85.024         56.955     56.423      17.078    11.402         0.751           3.373         9.026
Philippines     2006        n.a.           n.a.        n.a.       n.a.      n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.
Poland          2005       64.139         32.154     36.998     28.682     18.374        8.655            21.215        44.85
Qatar
Romania         2008        78.1          55.436     29.703     33.859      16.14        14.444          30.469        55.366
Russian         2007       46.793         28.095       n.a.       n.a.      n.a.          n.a.             n.a.          n.a.
Federation
Rwanda          2005       0.432           1.427     0.866       3.626      5.13         –0.021           0.069         0.048
S. Sudan
Samoa
Sao Tome
and Pr.
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia          2007       43.438         26.455     24.545     37.497     25.918        8.944           21.296        44.552
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Slovakia
                                                                   ASPIRE PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASED ON HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS                                                     87



                                                                        Benefit                                                              Poverty
                                          Coverage                                            Adequacy
                                                                       Incidence                                   Gini Inequality          Headcount           Poverty Gap
                    Survey                                              (Poorest         (Poorest                   Reduction %            Reduction %          Reduction %
    Country          Year        (Poorest 20%)          (Total)          20%)             20%)         (Total)         (all hh)              (all hh)             (all hh)
 Slovenia
 Solomon
 Islands
 Somalia
 South Africa
 Sri Lanka           2008             52.215            29.749           32.431           6.663         4.016            1.252                 5.888                 12.16
 St. Kitts and
 Nev.
 St. Lucia
 St. Vincent
 Sudan
 Suriname
 Swaziland
 Syria
 Tajikistan           2011            12.465             8.733           13.682             1.01        1.123           0.055                  0.354                 0.512
 Tanzania            2009            78.549b            77.441b          4.237             4.65         6.776           –0.119                 0.745                0.965
 Thailand            2009              82.6             63.913          23.607             7.842        2.539            1.091                 5.616                 11.185
 Timor-Leste         2007             26.84             26.269            1.391            1.725        11.941          2.912                   9.91                23.571
 Togo
 Tonga
 Trinidad and
 Tob.
 Tunisia
 Turkey              2008             55.529            37.052           42.338           0.847         0.22             0.117                 0.279                0.953
 Turkmenistan
 Tuvalu
 UAE
 Uganda              2010            75.242c           66.255c            n.a.              n.a.         n.a.            n.a.                   n.a.                  n.a.
 Ukraine             2006             46.317            39.454           25.071            18.187       7.99            4.788                  14.133               29.416
 Uruguay             2009             82.813             42.23           40.138           11.406         5.6            2.053                  7.838                16.683
 Uzbekistan
 Vanuatu
 Venezuela,          2006             4.996              4.739            n.a.              n.a.         n.a.            n.a.                   n.a.                  n.a.
 RB
 Vietnam             2006             37.016            18.062           13.798           20.519       16.481           1.839                  6.714                13.979
 West Bank           2007            30.352              11.49           63.66             7.609        3.154            0.4                   0.876                 3.732
 and Gaza
 Yemen, Rep.         2005             27.598            21.868           19.088            5.258        2.883           0.634                  3.887                 5.834
 Zambia              2010             0.801              0.571            n.a.              n.a.         n.a.            n.a.                   n.a.                  n.a.
 Zimbabwe

Note: Indicators are calculated using national representative household surveys and available at www.worldbank.org/aspire. When interpreting Atlas of Social Protection:
Indicators of Resilience and Equity indicators , it is important to note that the extent to which information on specific transfers and programs is captured in the household
surveys can vary a lot across countries. As a consequence, Atlas of Social Protection: Indicators of Resilience and Equity indicators are not fully comparable across program
categories and countries; however, they provide approximate measures of social protection systems performance.
Numbers in red represent increase in inequality due to all social safety nets transfers.
a The coverage number includes food ration cards.
b The coverage number mostly refers to school feeding program.
c The coverage number mostly refers scholarships and/or education benefits.
A N N E X   6

REFERENCES
90   REFERENCES

                  Adato, M., and J. Hoddinott, eds. 2010. Conditional Cash Transfers in Latin America. Baltimore,
                     Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.
                  African Union. 2008. “Social Policy Framework for Africa.” Report number CAMSD/EXP/4(I), First
                     Session of the AU Conference of Ministers in Charge of Social Development, Windhoek, Namibia,
                     October 27–31. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: African Union.
                  Ahmed, A., A. R. Quisumbing, M. Nasreen, and J. F. Hoddinott. 2010. Comparing Food and Cash
                     Transfers to the Ultra Poor in Bangladesh. Research Monograph 163. Washington, DC: International
                     Food Policy Research Institute.
                  Ahmed, S. 2013. “The Egyptian Experience about Subsidy and Its Distribution System.” Paper
                     presented at the Subsidy System in Egypt Workshop, Sustainable Development Day at the World
                     Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Alam, A., J. E. Baez, and X. Del Carpio. 2011. “Does Cash for School Influence Young Women’s
                     Behavior in the Longer Term? Evidence from Pakistan.” Discussion paper series/Forschungsinstitut
                     zur Zukunft der Arbeit. No. 5703, IZA, Bonn, Germany.
                  Alderman, H., and D. Bundy. 2011a. “School Feeding Programs and Development: Are We Framing the
                     Question Correctly?” World Bank Research Observer 27: 204–221, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Alderman, H., and R. Yemtsov. 2011b. “Productive Role of Safety Nets.” Background Paper for the
                     World Bank 2012–2022 Social Protection and Labor Strategy, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Alderman, H. and J. Hoddinott. 2009. “Growth-Promoting Social Safety Nets.” In The Poorest and
                     Hungry: Assessments, Analyses, and Action, edited by von Braun, J., R. Vargas Hill, and R. Pandya-
                     Lorch. Washington, DC: IFPRI.
                  Alderman, H., and T. Haque. 2006. “Countercyclical Safety Nets for the Poor and Vulnerable.” Food
                     Policy 31(4): 372–383.
                  Alderman, H., D. Gilligan, and K. Lehrer. 2013. “The Impact of Food for Education Programs on School
                     Participation in Northern Uganda.” Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Alderman, H., H. Kazianga, and D. de Walque. 2009. “Educational and Health Impacts of Two School
                     Feeding Schemes Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Rural Burkina Faso.” Policy Research
                     Working Paper 4976, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Andrews, C., A. Lopez, and J. Baez. 2014. “What Are We Learning on Safety Net Impacts? Reviewing
                     Evidence from 2010–2013.” Draft, Social Protection Discussion Paper Series, World Bank,
                     Washington, DC.
                  Andrews, C., M. Das, J. Elder, M. Ovadiya, and G. Zampaglione. 2012. “Social Protection in Low Income
                     Countries and Fragile Situations: Challenges and Future Directions.” Social Protection and Labor
                     Discussion Paper No. 1209, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2009a. “Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste: Updating and
                     Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
                  ———. 2009b. “Independent State of Samoa: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.”
                     Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
                  ———. 2009c. “Kingdom of Bhutan: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian
                     Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
                  ———. 2009d. “Kingdom of Thailand: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian
                     Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
                  ———. 2009e. “Malaysia: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian Development
                     Bank, Manila, Philippines.
                  ———. 2009f. “Mongolia: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian Development
                     Bank, Manila, Philippines.
                  ———. 2009g. “Nepal: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian Development Bank,
                     Manila, Philippines.
                  ———. 2009h. “Papua New Guinea: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian
                     Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
                  ———. 2009i. “People’s Republic of Bangladesh: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.”
                     Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
                                                                                                         REFERENCES   91

———. 2009j. “Republic of Fiji: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian
   Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009k. “Republic of Indonesia: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian
   Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009l. “Republic of Maldives: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian
   Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009m. “Republic of Palau: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian
   Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009n. “Republic of the Philippines: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.”
   Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009o. “Republic of Vanuatu: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian
   Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009p. “Socialist Republic of Viet Nam: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.”
   Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009q. “Solomon Islands: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian
   Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009r. “The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka: Updating and Improving the Social
   Protection Index.” Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009s. “The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan: Updating and Improving the Social Protection
   Index.” Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009t. “The Islamic Republic of Pakistan: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.”
   Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009u. “The Kingdom of Cambodia: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.”
   Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009v. “The Lao People’s Democratic Republic: Updating and Improving the Social Protection
   Index.” Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009w. “The People’s Republic of China: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.”
   Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009x. “The Republic of Marshall Islands: Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.”
   Asian Development Bank, Manila, Philippines.
———. 2009y. “India: “Updating and Improving the Social Protection Index.” Asian Development Bank,
   Manila, Philippines.
Baddini Curralero, C. 2012. “Technology for Implementation: Management Information System Unified
   Registry for Social Programs, Brazil.” Presentation at the South-South Learning Forum 2012,
   “Building Resilience and Opportunity,” Hyderabad, India, October 30–November 3.
Baez, J., and A. Camacho. 2011. “Assessing the Long-Term Effects of Conditional Cash Transfers
   on Human Capital: Evidence from Colombia.” Policy Research Paper No. 5681, World Bank,
   Washington, DC.
Baird, S., C. McIntosh, and B. Özler. 2011. “Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash Transfer
   Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4): 1709–1753.
Baird, S., F. Ferreiral, B. Ozler, and M. Woolcock. 2013. “Relative Effectiveness of Conditional and
   Unconditional Cash Transfer for Schooling Outcome in Developing Countries: Systematic Review.”
   Campbell Systematic Reviews 2013:8.
Banerji, A., and U. Gentilini. 2013. “Social Safety Nets: Lessons from Global Evidence and Practice.”
   World Bank, Washington, DC.
Barham, T., K. Macours, and J. Maluccio. 2013. “Boys’ Cognitive Skill Formation and Physical Growth:
   Long-Term Experimental Evidence on Critical Ages for Early Childhood Interventions.” American
   Economic Review 103(3): 467–71.
Barrett, C., M. Carter, and M. Ikegami. 2008. “Poverty Traps and Social Protection.” Social Protection
   Discussion Paper No. 0804, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Barrientos, A. 2013. Social Assistance in Developing Countries. Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
92   REFERENCES

                  Barrientos, A., and D. Hulme, eds. 2008. Social Protection for the Poor and Poorest. London: Palgrave.
                  Baulch, B., J. Wood, and A. Weber. 2006. “Developing a Social Protection Index for Asia.”
                     Development Policy Review 24(1): 5-29.
                  Behrman, J., J. Hoddinott, R. Flores, J. Maluccio, and R. Martorell. 2008. “Effect of a Nutrition
                     Intervention during Early Childhood on Economic Productivity in Guatemalan Adults.” The Lancet
                     371 (9610).
                  Berhane G., J. Hoddinott, N. Kumar, and A. Seyoum Taffesse. 2011. “The Impact of Ethiopia’s
                     Productive Safety Nets Programme and Household Asset Building Programme: 2006-2010.” IFPRI,
                     Washington, DC.
                  Bhutta, A. R. 2012. “Update of SSN Registry: Problems and Prospects, a Case of Pakistan.”
                     Presentation at the World Bank Core Course on Safety Nets 2012, “For Protection and Promotion:
                     Design and Implementation of Effective Social Safety Nets,” Washington, DC, December 3-14.
                  Blattman, C., and J. Annan. 2011. “Reintegrating and Employing High Risk Youth in Liberia: Lessons
                     from a Randomized Evaluation of a Landmine Action Agricultural Training Program for
                     Ex-Combatants.” Policy Report 2011.1, Innovations for Poverty Action, Washington, DC.
                  Blattman, C., N. Fiala, and S. Martinez. 2012 “Employment Generation in Rural Africa: Mid-Term
                     Results from an Experimental Evaluation of the Youth Opportunities Program in Northern
                     Uganda.” Discussion Paper No. 1201, DIW, Berlin.
                  Boone, R., K. Covarrubias, B. Davis, and P. Winters. 2013. “Cash Transfer Programs and Agricultural
                     Production: The Case of Malawi.” Agricultural Economics 44: 365–378
                  Bundy, D., C. Burbano, M. Grosh, A. Gelli, M. Jukes, and L. Drake. 2009. Rethinking School Feeding:
                     Social Safety Nets, Child Development and the Education Sector. Washington DC: World Bank.
                  CaLP (Cash Learning Partnership). 2011. “3W Review of Cash and Voucher Programs in Zimbabwe:
                     2011 Update Report.” Harare: CaLP.
                  Caneiro, P., E. Galasso, and R. Ginja. 2009. “The Impact of Providing Psycho-Social Support to
                     Indigent Families and Increasing Their Access to Social Services: Evaluating Chile Solidario.”
                     enGender Impact: the World Bank’s Gender Impact Evaluation Database, World Bank,
                     Washington, DC.
                  Castel, P. 2010. “Fiscal Space Social Protection Policies in Viet Nam.” Paper for the 3rd China-ASEAN
                     Forum on Social Development and Poverty Reduction, 4th ASEAN+3 High-Level Seminar
                     on Poverty Reduction, and Asia-wide Regional High-level Meeting on The Impact of the
                     Global Economic Slowdown on Poverty and Sustainable Development in Asia and the Pacific,
                     Department for International Development, Hanoi.
                  CER (Center for Economic Research). 2014. “Transformative Social Protection in a Transforming
                     Economy and Society.” Development Dialogue. http://transformation.cer.uz/2014/02/
                     transformative-social-protection-in-a-transforming-society-and-economy/
                  Cerutti, P., A. Fruttero, M. Grosh, S. Kostenbaum, M. L. Oliveri, C. Rodriguez-Alas, and V. Strokova.
                     2014. “Social Assistance and Labor Market Programs in Latin America.” Draft, World Bank,
                     Washington, DC.
                  Chioda, L., J. de Mello, and R. Soares. 2012. “Spillovers from Conditional Cash Transfer Programs:
                     Bolsa Familia and Crime in Urban Brazil.” Working Paper 024, Rede de Economia Aplicada, Sao
                     Paulo.
                  Chronic Poverty Research Centre. 2008. Chronic Poverty Report 2008-09: Escaping Poverty Traps.
                     Manchester: Chronic Poverty Research Centre.
                  Coady, D., M. Grosh, and J. Hoddinott. 2004. Targeting of Transfers in Developing Countries: Review of
                     Lessons and Experience. Washington, DC: IFPRI and World Bank.
                  Conway, T., and A. Norton. 2002. “Nets, Ropes, Ladders and Trampolines: The Place of Social
                     Protection within Current Debates on Poverty Reduction.” Development Policy Review 20(5):
                     533-540.
                  Covarrubias, K., B. Davis, and P. Winters. 2012. “From Protection to Production: Productive Impacts of
                     the Malawi Social Cash Transfer Scheme.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 4(1): 50-77.
                  Davies, M. 2009. “DFID Social Transfers Evaluation Summary Report.” Research Report No. 60, IDS,
                     Brighton.
                                                                                                         REFERENCES   93

Davies, M., and J. Leavy. 2009. “Connecting Social Protection and Climate Change Adaptation.” Focus
    Issue No.2. Brighton: IDS.
Davies, S., and J. Davey. 2008. “A Regional Multiplier Approach to Estimating the Impact of Cash
    Transfers on the Market: The Case Of Cash Transfers in Rural Malawi.” Development Policy Review
    26(1): 91-111.
Davis B., M. Gaarder, S. Handa, and J. Yablonski. 2012. “Evaluating the Impact of Cash Transfer
    Programmes in Africa (Sub-Saharan): An Introduction to the Special Issue.” Journal of
    Development Effectiveness 4(1): 1-8.
Davis, B. 2013. “From Protection to Production: Measuring the Impact of Social Cash Transfers on
    Local Economic Development in Africa.” Presentation at the Scoping Conference: The Links
    between Social Inclusion and Sustainable Growth in Africa, The Hague, October 30-31.
Davis, B., B. de la Brière, and A. Zezza. 2010. “The Impact of Social Cash Transfers on Household
    Economic Decision Making and Development in Eastern and Southern Africa.” African Economic
    Conference, pp. 27-29.
De Haan, A. 2013. “Social Policy of Emerging Economies: Growth and Welfare in China and India.”
    Working Paper No. 110, IPC-IG, Brasilia.
de la Briere, B., and K. Lindert. 2005. “Reforming Brazil’s Cadastro Unico to Improve the Targeting of
    Bolsa Familia Program.” Social Protection Discussion Paper 0527, World Bank, Washington, DC.
De Neubourg, C., J. Castonguay, and K. Roelen. 2007. “Social Safety Nets and Targeted Social
    Assistance: Lessons from the European Experience.” Social Protection Discussion Paper No.0718.
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
Devereux, S., W. Barth Eide, J. Hoddinott, N. Lustig, and K. Subbarao. 2012. “Social Protection for
    Food Security.” High Level Panel of Experts Report No. 4, Committee on World Food Security,
    Rome.
Devereux, S., and R. Sabates-Wheeler. 2007. “Editorial Introduction: Debating Social Protection.” IDS
    Bulletin 28(3): 1-7.
DSD, SASSA and UNICEF. 2012. The South African Child Support Grant Impact Assessment: Evidence
    from a Survey of Children, Adolescents and Their Households. Pretoria: UNICEF South Africa.
Dunn, S., M. Brewin, and A. Scek. 2013. Final Monitoring Report of the Somalia Cash and Voucher
    Transfer Programme, Phase 2: April 2012–March 2013. London: Overseas Development Institute.
Ellis, F., S. Devereux, and P. White. 2009. Social Protection in Africa. Cheltenham, United Kingdom:
    Elgar Publishing.
Evans, D., S. Hausladen, K. Kosec, and N. Reese. 2014. Community-Based Conditional Cash Transfers in
    Tanzania: Results from a Randomized Trial. World Bank Study. Washington, DC: World Bank.
FAO (Food and Agricultural Organization). 2013. “Cash-Based Transfers in FAO’s Humanitarian and
    Transition Programming.” Guidance Note, Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
    Nations, Rome.
Fiszbein, A., R. Kanbur, and R. Yemtsov. 2013. “Social Protection, Poverty and the Post-2015 Agenda.”
    Policy Research Working Paper No. 6469, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Fiszbein, A., and N. Schady. 2009. “Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty.”
    World Bank Policy Research Report, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Friemdan, E, E. Gallova, M. Herczog, and L Surdu. 2009. “Assessing Conditional Cash Transfers as a
    Tool for Reducing the Gap in Educational Outcomes between Roma and non-Roma.” REF Working
    Paper 4, Roma Education Fund, Budapest.
Galluzzi, C., and S. Natsheh. 2010. “Market-based Food Assistance in Protracted Crisis: Vouchers in
    the Occupied Palestinian Territory.” In Revolution: From Food Aid to Food Assistance, edited by
    S. Omamo, U. Gentilini and S. Sanstöm. Rome: World Food Programme.
Garcia, M., and C. Moore. 2012. The Cash Dividend: The Rise of Cash Transfer Programs in Africa (Sub-
    Saharan). Washington, DC: World Bank.
Gelb, A., and J. Clark. 2013. “Identification for Development: The Biometrics Revolution.” Working
    Paper No. 315, CGD, Washington, DC.
Gentilini, U. 2007. “Cash and Food Transfers: A Primer.” Occasional Paper No. 18, World Food
    Program, Rome.
94   REFERENCES

                  Gentilini, U., and S. W. Omamo. 2011. “Social Protection 2.0: Exploring Issues, Evidence and Debates in
                     a Globalizing World.” Food Policy 36(6): 329–340.
                  Gertler, P., J. Heckman, R. Pinto, A. Zanolini, C. Vermeersch, S. Walker, S. M. Chang, and S. Grantham-
                     McGregor. 2013. “Labor Market Returns to Early Childhood Stimulation: a 20-year Follow up to an
                     Experimental Intervention in Jamaica.” NBER Working Paper No. 19185, NBER, Cambrige, MA.
                  Gertler, P., S. Martinez, and M. Rubio-Codina. 2012. “Investing Cash Transfers to Raise Long-Term
                     Living Standards.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(1): 164-92.
                  Glewwe, P., and A. Kassouf. 2012. “The Impact of the Bolsa Escola/Familia Conditional Cash Transfer
                     Program on Enrollment, Dropout Rates and Grade Promotion in Brazil.” Journal of Development
                     Economics, 97(2): 505-517.
                  GoA (Government of Argentina). 2007. “Programa Plan Nacional de Seguridad Alimentaria.”
                     Ministerio de Desarrollo Social—Secretaría de Educación, Presidencia de la Nacion Argentina.
                     http://www.presidencia.gob.ar/sitios-de-gobierno/planes-de-gobierno/2669
                  GoC (Government of Cambodia), World Food Programme, and World Bank. 2009. “Safety Nets in
                     Cambodia: Concept Note and Inventory.” Policy Note, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  GoC (Government of Colombia). 2013. “Informe de Gestion 2013.” Ministerio de la Protección Social,
                     Bogota.
                  GoCH (Governemnt of Chile). 2013. “Logros y Cifras.” Subsecretaria del Trabajo. http://www.subtrab
                     .trabajo.gob.cl/?page_id=121
                  GoCR (Government of Costa Rica). 2012. “Total de personas registradas en SIPO.” Instituto Mixto de
                     Ayuda Social, Costa Rica, Estadisticas. http://www.imas.go.cr/biblioteca/estadisticas_sipo.html
                  GoDR (Government of Dominican Republic). 2012. “Country Profile Dominican Republic.” http://www
                     .pro-savings.org/sites/default/files/perfil_paises/2Dominican%20Republic.pdf.
                  GoE (Government of Egypt). 2008. “Ministry of Social Solidarity 2008.” In Central Agency for Public
                     Mobilization and Statistics, Statistical Yearbook 2008. Cairo: Government of Egypt.
                  GoE (Government of Ethiopia). 2009. “Food Security Programme 2010-2014: Productive Safety Net.”
                     Addis Ababa.
                  GoES (Government of El Salvador). 2013. “Sistema de Proteccion Social Universal,” San Salvador.
                  GoGB (Government of Guinea-Bissau). 2007. Guinea Bissau—Protecção Social. Presentation. VIII
                     Reuniao dos Ministros do TAS da CPLP-Conferencia de Peritos.
                  GoL (Government of Lithuania), UNDP, and European Commision. 2009. “Inclusive Lithuania: Though
                     Analysis-Based Policy Dialogue Towards Effective Decision Making.” Assessment Report, UNDP,
                     Vilnius.
                  GoM (Government of Mozambique). 2013. “Transfercias Sociais Para Populacoes Vulneraveis: Uma
                     reflexão sobre as modalidades de pagamento nos Programas de Segurança Social Básica.”
                     Maputo.
                  GoP (Government of Pakistan). 2013. “Alternate Payment Mechanisms and Targeted Subsidies–
                     International Experience.” Presentation, December 12.
                  GoT (Government of Turkey). 2012. “ALMP in Turkey.” Turkish Employment Agency Presentation, April
                     2012. http://www.iza.org/conference_files/ALMP2012/keskin_a7966.pdf
                  GoU (Government of Uganda). 2014. “Expanding Social Protection.” Ministry of Gender, Labour and
                     Social Development. http://www.socialprotection.go.ug/what%20we%20do.php
                  GoU (Government of Uruguay). 2013. “Informe MIDES: Seguimiento y Evaluacion de actividades y
                     programass 2011-2012.” Direccion nacional de Evaluation y Monitoreo, Ministerio de Desarrollo
                     Social.
                  Gourlay, D. 2011. 3W Review of Cash and Voucher Programs in Zimbabwe: 2011 Update Report.
                     Oxford: The Cash Learning Partnership.
                  Grigoras, V., and E. Tesliuc. 2012. “Staying Warm in a Cold Fiscal Climate: How Romania Used PSIA to
                     Eliminate Heating Subsidies.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Grosh, M., and C. Weigand. 2008. “Levels and Patterns of Safety Net Spending in Developing and
                     Transition Countries.” Social Protection Discussion Paper No. 0817, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Grosh, M., A. Fruttero, and M. Oliveri. 2013. Understanding the Poverty Impact of the Global Financial
                     Crisis in Latin America and the Caribbean. LCR Regional Study, “The Role of Social Protection.”
                     Washington, DC: World Bank.
                                                                                                              REFERENCES   95

Grosh, M., C. Del Ninno, E. Tesliuc, and A. Ouerghi. 2008. For Protection and Promotion: The Design
    and Implementation of Effective Social Safety Nets. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Handa, S., and B. Davis. 2006. “The Experience of Conditional Cash Transfers in Latin America and
    the Caribbean.” Development Policy Review 24(5): 513-536.
Hanlon, J., A. Barrientos, and D. Hume. 2010. Just Give Money to the Poor: The Development
    Revolution from the Global South. Sterling, VA: Kumarian Press.
Harvey, P., ed. 2009. “Making Economic Growth More Pro-Poor: The Role of Employment and Social
    Protection.” In Promoting Pro-Poor Growth: Social Protection. Paris: OECD.
Harvey, P., ed. 2009. “Social Protection in Fragile States: Lessons Learned.” In Promoting Pro-Poor
    Growth: Social Protection. Paris: OECD.
Hidrobo, M., J. Hoddinott, A. Peterman, A. Margolies, and V. Moreira. 2012. “Cash, Food, or Vouchers?
    Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Northern Ecuador.” Discussion Paper 01234,
    International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC.
Hobson, M., and L. Campbell. 2012. “How Ethiopia’s PSNP is Responding to the Current Humanitarian
    Crisis in the Horn.” Humanitarian Exchange 53: 9-11.
Hoddinott, J., G. Berhane, D. O. Gilligan, N. Kumar, and A. Taffesse. 2012. “The Impact of Ethiopia’s
    Productive Safety Net Programme and Related Transfers on Agricultural Productivity.” Journal of
    African Economies, 21(5): 761-786.
Holmes, R., and N. Jones. 2009. “Putting the ‘Social’ Back into Social Protection: A Framework for
    Understanding the Linkages between Economic and Social Risks for Poverty Reduction.” ODI
    Background Note, Overseas Development Institute, London.
Honorati, M., and L. Rodriguez. 2013. “What Do We Know about Social Protection and Labor Systems?
    Lessons from Country Assessments Reports.” Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
ILO (International Labour Office). 2009. “Mexico Extended Temporary Employment Programme
    Programa de Empleo Temporal Ampliado (PETA).” ILO Notes on the Crisis, International Labor
    Organization, Geneva.
ILO (International Labour Office). 2013a. “Rationalizing Social Protection Expenditure in Ghana.”
    Draft, International Labor Organization, Geneva.
ILO (International Labour Office). 2013b. Labour and Social Trends in Indonesia 2013: Reinforcing the
    Role of Decent Work in Equitable Growth. Geneva: International Labor Organization.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2011. Evidence and Lessons Learned from Impact Evaluations on
    Social Safety Nets. Washington, DC: World Bank.
International Monetary Fund. 2013. Energy Subsidy Reform: Lessons and Implications. Washington,
    DC: International Monetary Fund.
Isik-Dikmelik, A. 2012. “Do Social Benefits Respond to Crises? Evidence from Europe and Central Asia during
    the Global Crisis.” Social Protection and Labor Discussion Paper 1219, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Kanbur, R. 2009. “Systemic Crises and the Social Protection System: Three Proposals for World Bank
    Action.” Food and Nutrition Policy Working Paper No. 235, Cornell University, Ithaca.
Kozek, M., M. Zielenska, and J. Kubisa. 2012. National Report: Poland. Work Package 5: The National
    Arena for Combating Poverty, FP7 Project ‘Combating Poverty in Europe: Re-organising Active
    Inclusion through Participatory and Integrated Modes of Multilevel Governance,’ funded by the
    European Union under the 7th Framework Programme.
Larrañaga, O. 2005. “Focalizacion de Programas en Chile: El Sistema CAS.” Social Protection
    Discussion Paper 0528, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Lavigne, M. 2013. Social Protection Systems in Latin America and the Caribbean: Peru. Santiago: ECLAC.
Leite, P. 2013. “Stages in the Process and the Backbone: MIS.” Presentation at the World Bank Core
    Course on Social Safety Nets, “For Protection and Promotion: The Design and Implementation of
    Effective Social Safety Nets, December 2-13, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Leite, P., C. Costella, and R. Quintana. 2011. “Building Blocks of Social Safety Net Systems: Core
    Elements Registry and MIS.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
Leroy, J., P. Gadsden, S. Rodriguez-Ramirez, and T. G. de Cossio. 2010. “Cash and In-Kind Transfers
    in Poor Rural Communities in Mexico Increase Household Fruit, Vegetable, and Micronutrient
    Consumption but Also Lead to Excess Energy Consumption.” Journal of Nutrition 140: 612–617.
    International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC:
96   REFERENCES

                  Levy, S. 2007. Progress against Poverty: Sustaining Mexico’s PROGRESA-Oportunidades Program.
                      Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
                  Lim, S., L. Dandona, J. A. Hoisington, S. L. James, M. C. Hogan, and E. Gakidou. 2010. “India’s Janani
                      Suraksha Yojana, a Conditional Cash Transfer Programme to Increase Births in Health Facilities: an
                      Impact Evaluation.” The Lancet 2010(375): 2009-23, June 5, www.thelancet.com.
                  Lokshin. M. 2012. “Implementing the New System of Social Assistance in Georgia.” Presentation at the
                      ECA Communities of Practice Meeting, DECRG, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Macours, K., N. Schady, and R. Vakis. 2012. “Cash Transfers, Behavioral Changes, and Cognitive
                      Development in Early Childhood: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” American Economic
                      Journal: Applied Economics 4(2): 247-273.
                  McCord, A. 2009. “Cash Transfers: Affordability and Sustainability.” Project Briefing No. 30, Overseas
                      Development Institute, London.
                  McCord, A. 2013. “ODI Shockwatch: Review of the Literature on Social Protection Shock Responses
                      and Readiness.” Overseas Development Institute, London.
                  Minasyan, A. 2012. “Technology of Management of Information System of Armenia: Family Benefit
                      Program.” Presentation at the South-South Learning Forum 2012, “Building Resilience and
                      Opportunity,” Hyderabad, India, October 30-November 3.
                  ODI (Oversee Development Institute). 2012. “Livelihoods, Basic Services and Social Protection in
                      Nepal.” Secure Livelihoods Research Consortium, Working Paper 7, ODI, London.
                  OPM (Oxford Policy Management). 2013. “Qualitative Research and Analyses of the Economic
                      Impacts of Cash Transfer Programmes in Africa (Sub-Saharan): Zimbabwe Country Case Study
                      Report.” Paper prepared for FAO, Oxford Policy Management, Oxford.
                  Ortakaya, A. F. 2012. “Use of ICT in Macro Projects in Poverty Alleviation (Integrated Social Assistance
                      Services Project).” Presentation at the ECA Communities of Practice Meeting, Turkey’s General
                      Directorate of Social Assistances.
                  Pal, K., C. Behrendt, F. Leger, M. Cichon, and K. Hagemejer. 2005. “Can Low-Income Countries Afford
                      Basic Social Protection? First Results of a Modelling Exercise.” Social Protection Discussion Paper
                      No. 13, International Labor Organization, Geneva.
                  Perfetti, J. J., J. C. Gallego, and M. C. Perfetti. 2010. “Programa ReSA: Fortalecimiento de las Bases de
                      la Seguridad Alimentaria en el Sector Rural.” Cuadernos de Fedesarrollo 009283, Fedesarrollo,
                      Bogota.
                  Ravallion, M. 2006. “Transfers and Safety Nets in Poor Countries: Revisiting the Tradeoffs and Policy
                      Options.” In Understanding Poverty, edited by A. Banerjee, R. Benabou, and D. Mookerjee. Oxford:
                      Oxford University Press.
                  Ravallion, M. 2008. “Bailing out the World’s Poorest.” Policy Research Working Paper No. 4763, World
                      Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Ravallion, M. 2009. “Do Poorer Countries Have Less Capacity for Redistribution?” Policy Research
                      Working Paper No. 5046, World Bank, Washington, DC,
                  Ribe, H., D. Robalino, and I. Walker. 2010. From Rights to Reality: Achieving Effective Social Protection
                      for All in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                  Russian Federal State Statistics Service. 2010. “Social Status and Standard of Living of the Russian
                      Population.” http://pub.stat.ee/px-web.2001/I_Databas/Social_life/15Social_protection/
                      02Social_assistance/05Subsistence_benefits/05Subsistence_benefits.asp.
                  Seidenfeld, D., S. Handa, B. Davis, G. Tembo. 2013. “Zambia’s Child Grant Programme: 24-Month
                      Impact Report.” American Institute for Research, Washington, DC.
                  Silva, J., V. Levin, and M. Morgandi. 2013. Inclusion and Resilience: The Way Forward for Social Safety
                      Nets in the Middle East and North Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                  Silva, V., G. Blanco, and L. Bassett. 2010. “Management Information Systems for CCTs and Social
                      Protection Systems in Latin America: A Tool for Improved Program Management and Evidence-
                      Based Decision-Making.” Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  Slater, R., and A. McCord. 2009. “Social Protection, Rural Development and Food Security: Issues
                      Paper on the Role of Social Protection in Rural Development.” Overseas Development Institute,
                      London.
                                                                                                          REFERENCES   97

Subbarao, K., C. del Ninno, C. Andrews, and C. Rodríguez-Alas. 2013. Public Works as a Safety Net:
    Design, Evidence, and Implementation. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Sultanov, E. 2012. Management of the Information System. Presentation ECA Communities of Practice
    Meetings. Ministry of Labor and Social Protection of the Population of Azerbajan Republic.
Sundaram, R., V. Strokova, and B. Gotcheva. 2012. “Protecting the Poor and Promoting Employability:
    An Assessment of the Social Assistance System in the Slovak Republic.” World Bank, Washington,
    DC.
Taylor, J. Edward, Karen Thome, and Mateusz Filipski. 2013. Evaluating Local General Equilibrium
    Impacts Lesotho’s Child Grants Program. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization.
Tesliuc, E, L. Pop, M. Grosh, and R. Yemtsov (2014). Last-Resort Income Support for the Poorest:
    A Review of Experience in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. (Directions in Development).
    Washington, DC: World Bank.
Tirivayi, N., M. Knowles, B. Davis. 2013. The Interaction between Social Protection and Agriculture: A
    Review of Evidence. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Todd, J., P. Winters, and T. Hertz (2010). “Conditional Cash Transfers and Agricultural Production:
    Lessons from the Oportunidades Experience in Mexico.” Journal of Development Studies, 46(1):
    39-67.
Umapathi, N., D. Wang, and P. O’Keefe. 2013. “Eligibility Thresholds for Minimum Living Guarantee
    Programs: International Practices and Implications for China.” Social Protection & Labor Discussion
    Paper No. 1307, World Bank, Washington, DC.
UNICEF and USAID. 2010. “Survey of Barriers to Access to Social Services—Georgia.” Survey Report,
    UNICEF, Tbilisi.
UNICEF Bangladesh, Directorate of Primary Education (DPE), and Power and Participation Research
    Centre. 2013. Bangladesh Primary Education Stipends: A Qualitative Assessment. Dhaka: DPE,
    PPRC, UNICEF Bangladesh.
UNICEF. 2009. “Infant and Young Child Feeding Programme Review—Case Study: Uzbekistan.”
    Nutrition Section, UNICEF, New York.
USAID. 2014. “Food Assistance Fact Sheet—Burundi.” Agriculture and Food Security, USAID. http://
    www.usaid.gov/burundi/food-assistance.
Weigand, C., and M. Grosh. 2008. “Levels and Patterns of Safety Net Spending in Developing and
    Transition Countries.” Social Protection Discussion Paper No. 817, World Bank, Washington DC.
WFP (World Food Program). 2011. “The World Food Programme and Vulnerable Group Feeding in
    the Kyrgyz Republic.” World Food Program, Bishkek.
WFP (World Food Program). 2012a. “Strengthening Food and Nutrition Security and Enhancing
    Resilience.” Operation Document, Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation (PRRO)—Somalia
    200443, World Food Program, Rome.
———. 2012b. “Food Assistance for Food-Insecure and Conflict-Affected Populations in South Sudan.”
    Operation Document, Emergency Operation (EMOP) 200338, World Food Program, Rome.
———. 2012c. “Food Assistance to Vulnerable Populations Affected by Conflict and Natural Disasters.”
    Operation Document, EMOP 200151, World Food Program, Rome.
———. 2012d. “Budget Increase to PRRO Operation Chad 200289: Targeted Food Assistance for
    Refugees and Vulnerable People Affected by Malnutrition and Recurrent Food Crises,” World
    Food Program, Rome.
———. 2012e. “Djibouti Protracted Relief and Recovery Operation (PRRO) 200293—Budget Revision
    No.: 1,” World Food Program, Rome.
———. 2012f. “Honduras Country Programme 200240 (2012-2016),” World Food Program, Rome.
———. 2013b. “Impacts of The Harmonised Social Cash Transfer Programme on Community Dynamics
    In Zimbabwe,” World Food Program, Rome.
———. 2013c. “Budget Revision to Uganda Country Program 108070: Supporting Government-Led
    Initiatives to Address Hunger in Uganda,” World Food Program, Rome.
———. 2013d.” Recovering from previous crises and laying the groundwork for resilience for popula-
    tions affected by food insecurity in Mauritania.” Operations Document, PRRO 200474, World Food
    Program, Rome.
98   REFERENCES

                  ———. 2013e. “Malawi, Emergency Operation 200608: Budget Revision No.3,” World Food Program,
                    Rome.
                  ———. 2013f. “Ghana Country Programme 200247: Budget Revision No.1,” World Food Program,
                    Rome.
                  ———. 2013g. “Country Programme Egypt 2013-2017,” World Food Program, Rome.
                  ———. 2013h. “Assistance to Food-Insecure and Vulnerable Jordanians Affected by the Protracted
                    Economic Crisis Aggravated by the Syrian Conflict.” Operation Document, PRRO 200537, World
                    Food Program, Rome.
                  ———. 2013i. “Bolivia Country Programme 2013-2017,” World Food Program, Rome.
                  ———. 2014a. “Cambodia Country Program 2011-2016,” World Food Program, Rome.
                  ———. 2014b. “Responding to Humanitarian Needs and Strengthening Resilience to Food Insecurity—
                    Zimbabwe.” Operation Document, PRRO 200453, World Food Program, Rome.
                  ———. 2014c. “Central African Republic—WFP Activities.” World Food Programme, Rome. http://www
                    .wfp.org/countries/central-african-republic/operations
                  ———. 2014d. “Strengthening Emergency preparedness and Resilience—Haiti.” Operation Document,
                    PRRO 200618, World Food Program, Rome.
                  ———. 2014e. “Targeted Food Assistance to Victims of Armed Conflict and other Vulnerable Groups—
                    Democratic Republic of the Congo.” Operation Document, PRRO 200167, World Food Program,
                    Rome.
                  ———. 2014f. “Congo, Rep. of—WFP Activities.” World Food Programme, Rome. http://www.wfp.org/
                    countries/congo-republic-of/operations
                  ———. 2014g. “Côte D’Ivoire—WFP Activities.” World Food Programme, Rome. http://www.wfp.org/
                    countries/c%c3%b4te-d-ivoire/operations
                  ———. 2014h. “Ethiopia—WFP Activities.” Operations. World Food Programme. Web. <http://www
                    .wfp.org/countries/ethiopia/operations>.
                  ———. 2014i.” The Gambia—WFP Activities.” World Food Programme, Rome. http://www.wfp.org/
                    countries/the-gambia/operations
                  ———. 2014j. “Afghanistan: WFP Activities.” World Food Programme, Rome. http://www.wfp.org/
                    countries/afghanistan/operations.
                  ———. 2014k. “Guinea—WFP Activities.” World Food Programme, Rome. http://www.wfp.org/
                    countries/guinea/operations/wfp-activities.
                  Wiseman, W., J. Van Domelen, and S. Coll-Black. 2010. Designing and Implementing a Rural Safety
                    Net in a Low Income Setting: Lessons Learned from Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Program
                    2005-2009. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                  World Bank. 2008. “Nicaragua: Social Protection Public Expenditure Review.” Working Paper, World
                    Bank, Washington, DC.
                  ———. 2009a. “Niger: Food Security and Safety Nets.” Policy Note, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  ———. 2009b. “Saint Lucia: Social Safety Net Assessment.” Policy Note, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  ———. 2009c. “St. Kitts and Nevis: Social Safety Net Assessment.” Policy Note, World Bank,
                    Washington, DC.
                  ———. 2009d. “Social Transfers in Bosnia And Herzegovina: Moving Towards A More Sustainable And
                    Better Targeted Safety Net.” Policy Note, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  ———. 2009e. “Bulgaria: Social Assistance Programs: Cost, Coverage, Targeting and Poverty Impact.”
                    Policy Note, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  ———. 2010a. “Belize: Issues and Options to Strengthen the Social Protection System.” World Bank
                    Policy Note No. 1387-BZ, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  ———. 2010b. “St. Vincent and the Grenadines: Social Safety Net Assessment.” Policy Note, World
                    Bank, Washington, DC.
                  ———. 2010c. “Egypt’s Food Subsidies: Benefit Incidence and Leakages.” Policy Note, World Bank,
                    Washington, DC.
                  ———. 2010d. “Accessing Good Quality Jobs: Priorities for Education, Social Protection, Science and
                    Technology.” Report No. 56964-GT, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                                                                                                         REFERENCES   99

———. 2010e. “Social Safety Nets in the Western Balkans: Design, Implementation, and Performance.”
  Report No. 54396-ECA, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2010f. “Bangladesh Poverty Assessment: Assessing a Decade of Progress in Reducing Poverty
  2000–2010.” The World Bank Bangladesh Development Series Report Paper No. 31, World Bank,
  Washington, DC.
———. 2010g. “Social Assistance in Rural China: Tackling Poverty through rural DIBAO.” Washington,
  DC: World Bank.
———. 2010h. “Russian labor Market: Monitoring Trends, Results 2010.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2010i. “Iran’s Subsidy Reform Program.” Internal mimeo, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011a. “A Diagnostic of Social Protection in Liberia.” Draft, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011b. “Botswana: Challenges to the Safety Net.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011c. “Burkina Faso Social Safety Nets.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011d. “Cameroun: Filets Sociaux.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011e. “Europe and Central Asia Social Protection Database.” Last updated Dec. 12, 2011. World
  Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011f. “Les Filets Sociaux au Bénin.” Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011g. “Mali: Social Safety Nets.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011h. “Mauritius: Social Protection Review and Strategy.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011i. “Mozambique: SP Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011j. “Review of Targeting Tools Employed by Existing Social Support Programs in Malawi.”
  World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011k. “Tanzania: Poverty, Growth, and Public Transfers.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011l. “Zimbabwe Rapid Social Response—Productive Safety Net—Pilot Public Works Project.
  World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011m. Romania Functional Review: labor and Social Protection Sector—Volume II. Washington,
  DC: World Bank.
———. 2011n. “Project Appraisal Document to the Government of Albania for the Social Assistance
  Modernization Project.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011o. “Jamaica Social Protection Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011p. “Kazakhstan: Reforming the Last Resort Safety Net Program in an Upper-Middle-Income
  Country.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011q. “Armenia: Social Assistance Programs and Work Disincentives.” Report No. 63112-AM,
  World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011r. “Improving Targeting Accuracy of Social Assistance Programs in Belarus.” Social
  Assistance Policy Note 68 791, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011s. “Ciblage et protection sociale Note d’orientation stratégique.” Report No. AAA65—MA,
  World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011t. Migration and Remittances Factbook 2011. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2012a. “Safety Nets Work: During Crisis and Prosperity.” Development Committee Paper, World
  Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2012b. Resilience, Equity, and Opportunity: The World Bank Social Protection and Labor
  Strategy, 2012-2022. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2012c. Zambia: Using Productive Transfers to Accelerate Poverty Reduction. Washington, DC:
  World Bank.
———. 2012d. “Kenya Social Protection Sector Review.” Nairobi: Ministry of State for Planning, National
  Development and Vision 2030.
———. 2012e. “Lesotho: Inequality, Transfers and Safety Nets.” Draft, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2012f. “Madagascar—Three Years into the Crisis: An Assessment of Vulnerability and Social
  Policies and Prospects for the Future.” Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2012g. “Opening the Door to Good Quality Jobs: The Role of Human Capital Investment and
  Social Protection Policies: Panama.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2012h. “Rwanda SSN Assessment.” Draft, World Bank, Washington, DC.
100   REFERENCES

                   ———. 2012i. “Sierra Leone: Social Protection Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2012j. “Swaziland: Public Transfers and the Social Safety Net.” Draft, World Bank, Washington,
                     DC.
                   ———. 2012k. “Togo: Towards a National Social Protection Policy and Strategy.” Report No. 71936-TG,
                     World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2012l. Georgia Public Expenditure Review: Managing Expenditure Pressures for Sustainability
                     and Growth. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                   ———. 2012m. Malaysia Elderly Protection Study. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                   ———. 2012n. Opening the Door to Good Quality Jobs: The Role of Human Capital Investment and
                     Social Protection Policies: Honduras. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                   ———. 2012o. “Angola: Social Protection Review.” Draft, World Bank, Washington DC.
                   ———. 2012p. “Safety Nets in Sri Lanka: An Overview.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2012q. “Social Assistance Cash Transfer Programs in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia: A Review in
                     Light of International (Benchmarking) Experience.” Internal Document, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2012r. “Implementation Completion and Results Report for a Safety Net and Social Sector
                     Reform Program—Latvia.” Implementation Status Report, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2012s. “Project Appraisal Document to Ukraine—Social Assistance System Modernization.”
                     World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2012t. “Raskin Subsidized Rice Delivery: Social Assistance and Public Expenditure Review.”
                     World Bank, Jakarta.
                   ———. 2012u. “Do School Feeding Programs Help Children?” From Evidence to Policy Note. World
                     Bank, Washington, DC.
                   World Bank. 2013a. “Closing the Gap: The State of Social Safety Nets 2013.” Washington, DC: World
                     Bank.
                   ———. 2013b. “Building Resilience to Disasters and Climate Change through Social Protection.” World
                     Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013c. “Diagnostic Report of Social Safety Net Interventions in South Sudan.” World Bank,
                     Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013d. “Republic of Senegal: Social Safety Net Assessment.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013e. “Europe and Central Asia Social Protection Database.” Last updated Oct. 17, 2013. World
                     Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013f. “Islamic Republic of Mauritania: Summary Analysis of Safety Net Programs and Costs.”
                     World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013g. “Timor-Leste Social Assistance Public Expenditure and Program Performance Report.”
                     Report No: 73484. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                   ———. 2013h. “Seychelles—Second Sustainability and Competitiveness Development Policy Loan
                     Project.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013i. “Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Credit in the Amount of SDR194.7 Million
                     to the Federal Republic of Nigeria for a Youth Employment and Social Support Operation.” World
                     Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013k. “Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Credit in the Amount of SDR32.5 Million to
                     the Republic of Cameroon for a Safety Net Project.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013l. “Pakistan Towards an Integrated National Safety Net System. Assisting Poor and
                     Vulnerable Households: An Analysis of Pakistan’s Main Cash Transfer Program.” Report No. 66421-
                     PK, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013m. “Implementation Status Report: Philippines—PH-Social Welfare and Development
                     Reform (P082144).” Implementation Status Results Report, Sequence 04, World Bank,
                     Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013n. “A Diverse and Dynamic Region: Taking Stock of Social Assistance Performance in East
                     Asia and the Pacific.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
                   ———. 2013o. “Tajikistan Partnership Program Snapshot.” World Bank, Dushanbe.
                                                                                                       REFERENCES   101

———. 2013p. “Consolidation and Transparency: Transforming Tunisia’s Health Care for the Poor.”
  UNICO Studies Series No. 4, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2014a. “Zimbabwe Rapid Social Response: Productive Safety Net Pilot Public Works Project.”
  GRM Completion Report, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2014b. “Implementation Status & Results: Ghana Social Opportunities Project (P115247).”
  Implementation Status Results Report: Sequence 07, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2014c. “Sao Tome and Principe Internal Monitoring Report.” Draft, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2014d. “Malaysia Internal Monitoring Report.” Draft, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2014e. “Kyrgyz Republic Public Expenditure Review Policy Notes: Social Assistance.” World
  Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2014f. “World Bank Group—FYR Macedonia Partnership Country Program Snapshot.” World
  Bank, Washington, DC.
WFP (World Food Program). 2013a. The State of School Feeding Worldwide. Rome: World Food
  Program.



WEBLINKS
ASPIRE: http://www.worldbank.org/aspire
ECLAC, Database of Conditional Transfer Programs (Programas de Transferencias Condicionadas):
   http://dds.cepal.org/bdptc/
Social Safety Nets in Africa: http://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/
   16256/9781464800948.pdf?sequence=1
HelpAge International (2014) “Social Social Pension Database.” Avaialble at http://www.pension-
   watch.net
Government of India Ministry of Rural Development: http://www.mgnrega.nic.in/netnrega/home.aspx
World Bank website. “Chile: The Integrated System of Social Information (SIIS).” http://go.worldbank
   .org/WZ5OPUEF40.
E N D N OT E S
104
104   ENDNOTES

                 1    Blanket price subsidies often are not traceable and verifiable in terms of unit of assistance and
                 amounts of support. In some cases, governments provide citizens with access to specified food
                 products at subsidized prices. Many of these programs are large-scale and are undergoing a transition
                 process, including moving from general subsidy measures (e.g., Iraq’s Public Distribution System
                 or Egypt’s Baladi bread subsidy scheme) to more targeted programs (e.g., India’s Targeted Public
                 Distribution Systems). Those reforms often include transitional periods with changes to benefit
                 structures and the reconfiguration of operational procedures (e.g., use of electronic vouchers, etc.). In
                 a number of countries undergoing such process data on beneficiaries may not always be available or
                 consistent. It is expected that as reporting numbers improve, such targeted schemes may be included
                 in the next issues of the State of Social Safety Nets report.
                 2   Vouchers or near-cash transfers provide access to goods for a given monetary value or quantity in
                 predetermined locations (e.g., stores, fairs, etc.). As such, they are a hybrid form of transfer that shares
                 features with both cash (ultimately, they are market-based) and in-kind transfers (e.g., they may not
                 provide choice when tied to predetermined commodities). Food vouchers are sometimes referred to
                 as “food stamps.”
                 3   Conditional transfers may vary considerably in terms of level of planning, monitoring and
                 enforcement of compliance. For example, in the context of education-related conditions, Baird et al.
                 (2013) distinguish between four categories of conditionalities: (a) explicit conditions on paper and/
                 or encouragement of children’s schooling, but no monitoring or enforcement; (b) explicit conditions,
                 monitored with minimal enforcement; (c) explicit conditions with monitoring and enforcement of
                 enrollment condition; and (d) explicit conditions with monitoring and enforcement of attendance
                 condition.
                 4   In theory, also public works are a form of conditional transfers (i.e., conditioned on labor). Given
                 their peculiar nature and design, however, we considered them as a separate, third class transfers.
                 This is also in line with the general approach followed in the literature. Also, wages in public work
                 programs can be provided in-kind or cash, including food-for-work and cash-for-work programs. Yet,
                 since programs are often reported as “public works,” information on the specific transfer modality may
                 not be available systematically. Also, public works sometimes provide a combination of cash and food
                 transfers, such as in the Ethiopia PSNP. As a result, the report opted to consider public works as a tout
                 court intervention. Just like the conditional transfers, also public works can vary considerably in terms
                 of approach and design parameters.
                 5   A total of 155 countries were surveyed (including 13 HICs), and for 9 countries information on social
                 safety nets was not available (i.e., Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Micronesia, Libya, Oman, Turkmenistan,
                 Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates, and Vanuatu). Note that for Sections 3 and 4, the number of countries
                 for which information was available was smaller, i.e. 107 countries for Section 3 and 135 countries for
                 Section 4.
                 6   In cases where support is provided to the family or household as a unit of assistance, we estimate
                 the number of individuals using an average household size (standard of 5 individuals).
                 7   The percentage of poor individuals (living on less than $1.25/day) is calculated from PovcalNet
                 (http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/index.htm).
                 8   The percentage of poor individuals (living on less than $1.25/day) covered by social safety nets is
                 estimated based on household survey data from 69 developing countries included in ASPIRE. Since
                 household surveys include questions on coverage by social safety nets, the report was able to estimate
                 how many among the extremely poor receive social safety net support at country level. Population
                 numbers are then used to estimate the weighted average of coverage rates. Applying such average
                 coverage rate of the extremely poor to the absolute number of poor globally we estimate how many
                 extremely poor are covered by social safety nets.
                 9 This information can be found in detailed country reports on the ASPIRE website,
                 www.worldbank.org/aspire.
                 10   For an overview, see Gentilini (2007).
                                                                                                               ENDNOTES   105

11   For the specific purpose of this paragraph, public works were left out of the analysis in line with the
rationale set out earlier in the discussion (i.e., in many cases, programs may not report the modality of
transfers or may provide a combination of both). Shares were calculated by first calculating the share
of a given program type (say UCTs) out of all countries for a given income group (e.g., LICs). Then the
same was done for the other program type for the same modality (in this case, CCT). Then the average
of the two shares was considered as the share of cash-based programs for a given income group (in
this case, LICs). The same was applied to the in-kind programs and the other income groups.
12   Aggregate spending data on social assistance rely on multiple sources: the World Bank Eastern
Europe and Central Asia Social Protection expenditure and evaluation Database, European system of
integrated social protection statistics, World Bank LAC SP database, country assessment reports for
Africa, MENA and LAC countries, ADB country reports for South Asia and East Asia countries, regional
, the MENA Social Safety Nets flagship regional report. See Annex 3 for a full list of resources.
13  Social safety net spending in some Eastern Europe and Central Asia countries does not include
public works and school feeding programs (see Annex 3). Cross country comparisons should be
interpreted with caution because the definitions (such as the scope of social assistance or social
insurance) may not be fully consistent across countries.
14   See for example Weigand and Grosh (2008).
15  The definition of safety nets used here is different from the one adopted in a previous cross-country
study on social protection spending (e.g., Weigand and Grosh, 2008), limiting the comparability of
main findings.
16   The high spending in Georgia is accounted by universal social pension program.
17 External finance in Africa is represented by grants from multilateral international organizations
such as the World Bank, WFP and UNICEF as well as several bilateral organizations.
18   See World Bank 2012l
19   See World Bank 2013g.
20   Ahmed, S. 2013, World Bank 2012m, World Bank 2010c
21  Based on the World Bank Easter Europe and Central Asia Social Protection expenditure and
evaluation Database, historical spending data of real safety net spending available in 15 countries.
22 In general, the analysis does not account for decrees, laws or other legislation, but rather investigates

policy and strategic frameworks that often emanate, elaborate and detail the basic content enshrined
in legislation on the matter.
23 These findings are consistent with a recent review of country social protection assessments in

30 countries (Honorati and Rodriguez, 2014). The report finds that while most countries have clear
policies and strategies, a key challenge is often to operationalize them.
24   This section largely draws from Leite and Felix (2014) and Palacios (2014).
25 Six countries in the Annex 7 table are high income countries. As the efforts to collect and

disseminate surveys lead to greater data availability, ASPIRE will expand its coverage.
26   The indicator is a measure of inequality.
27 It is assumed that, in the absence of the program, the welfare aggregate of a recipient household

falls by the value of the transfer. To establish the impact of a social protection program(s) on poverty,
one ought to compare poverty without the program(s) (“pre-transfer”), to poverty with it (“post-
transfer”). Then the transfer received under the program would need to be subtracted from the
welfare aggregate and poverty measure recalculated to get a pre-transfer/program poverty measure.
Comparing the two poverty measures gives an estimate of the program’s poverty impact.
28 These figures show the power of social protection in attaining the goal of ending extreme poverty.

According to World Bank estimates, over the past 20 years the economic growth in the world was able
to lift approximately 35 million people out of extreme poverty each year.
29   See Fiszbein et al. (2013).
30   See Andrews et al. (forthcoming).
106   ENDNOTES

                 31  In theory, the effects of safety nets on labor supply are mediated by two mechanisms. On one
                 hand, beneficiaries’ behavioral response to transfers may include exchanging part of such additional
                 income for more leisure. This is also known as “income effect.” On the other hand, if the size of the
                 transfer is based on income levels, then those benefits could alter beneficiaries’ effective wage. In
                 other words, such “price effect” would result in introducing an implicit tax on earnings, or a marginal
                 tax rate. For example, means-tested transfers aimed at ensuring a minimum income level could imply
                 that program participants may face a 100 percent marginal tax rate—that is, a small increase in non-
                 program income may result in an equal reduction in program benefits. This dynamic is sometimes
                 referred to as a “policy-induced poverty trap.”
                 32   See http://www.fao.org/economic/ptop/home/en/.
                 33 In theory, wages in public work programs can be provided in-kind or cash, including food-for-work

                 and cash-for-work programs. Yet, since programs are often reported as “public works,” information on
                 the specific transfer modality may not be available systematically or transfers are often provided as a
                 combination of cash and food.
                                                      This publication is the first in a series
                                                      of monitoring reports on the rich and
                                                      evolving world of social safety nets
                                                      in developing countries. Social safety
                                                      nets, also known as ‘social assistance’
                                                     or ‘social transfers’, are part of broader
                                                    social protection systems, and provide
                                                  regular and predictable support to poor and
                                                vulnerable people. Such support is critical for
                                             reducing poverty; for boosting inclusive growth
                                          and shared prosperity; for reducing food insecurity
                                      and malnutrition; for increasing demand for education
                              and health services; for stimulating local economies and for
helping households to better manage risks and cope with shocks. Social safety nets are not
just about assistance—they are an important ingredient for building and strengthening social
contracts between states and their citizens.

This report examines data from 144 countries, including detailed household survey data
from 69 countries in the World Bank’s ASPIRE database, it describes key policy and practical
developments, distills evidence, and highlights emerging innovations. It focuses on developing
countries, although in a few cases reference is made to high-income settings.

With new and concisely presented estimates on the scale, type and performance of safety
nets in the developing and emerging world, this report aims to be a reference and a benchmark
for policymakers, thinkers and practitioners in the world of social safety nets and of social
protection more broadly.




          www.worldbank.org/sp                           www.worldbank.org/rsr


         © 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
