                            88029




Albania Country Opinion
     Survey Report

  (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                         Albania                                    Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. General Issues facing Albania ....................................................10
          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank .................................13
         VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................20
        VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments ..................................24
       VIII. How the World Bank Operates ..................................................32
         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania ...........................35
          X. Communication and Openness..................................................39
         XI. Appendices ................................................................................48




                                                          2
The World Bank                                Albania                            Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in Albania
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Albania regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Albania;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in Albania;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank ’s effectiveness and results, knowledge
               and research, and communication and information sharing in Albania; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in Albania.

       Use data to help inform the Albania country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In May and June 2012, 342 stakeholders of the World Bank in Albania were invited to provide
their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country survey.
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President, Prime Minister,
Minister, or Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial department, or implementation
agency; consultants/contractors working on World Bank supported projects/programs; project
management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a project; local government officials or
staff; bilateral or multilateral agencies; private sector organizations, financial sector/private
banks; academia, research institutes or think tanks; NGOs, including CBOs (community- based
organizations); the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; and the judiciary
branch. A total of 198 stakeholders participated in the country survey (58%).

Respondents received questionnaires via courier, post, or email, and returned completed
questionnaires similarly. Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Albania, their
overall attitudes toward the Bank; the World Bank’s effectiveness and results; the Bank’s
knowledge; working with the World Bank; the Bank’s future role in Albania, and the Bank’s
communication and information sharing in Albania:

A. General Issues facing Albania: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Albania is
   headed in the right direction, what they thought were the top three most important
   development priorities, and which areas would contribute most to economic growth.




                                                3
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their familiarity
   with the World Bank, the Bank’s effectiveness in Albania, Bank staff preparedness, the
   extent to which the Bank should seek to influence the global development agenda, their
   agreement with various statements regarding the Bank’s work in Albania, and the extent to
   which the Bank is an effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate
   the sectoral areas on which it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its resources,
   the Bank’s great est values and greatest weaknesses in its work, with which groups the Bank
   should work more, and to what reasons respondents attributed failed or slow reform efforts.
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
   the Bank’s work helps achieve sustainable development results in Albania, the Bank’s level
   of effectiveness across twenty-seven development areas, such as anti-corruption and
   economic growth, and the extent to which the Bank meets Albania’s need for kno wledge
   services and financial instruments.
D. The World Bank’s Knowledge: Respondents were asked to indicate how frequently they
   consult Bank knowledge/research, the areas on which the Bank should focus its research
   efforts, and to rate the effectiveness and quality of the Bank’s knowledge/research, including
   how significant of a contribution the Bank’s knowledge and research make to development
   results and the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge and research.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement with
   a series of statements regarding working with the Bank, such as the World Bank ’s
   “Safeguard Policy” requirements being reasonable, working with the World Bank increasing
   Albania’s institutional capacity, and the Bank disbursing funds promptly.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania: Respondents were asked to rate how
   significant a role the Bank should play in Albania’s development over the medium term and
   to indicate what the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Albania.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate where they
   get information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their access to the Internet, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s website and PICs. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s
   Access to Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of
   agreement that they use more data fro m the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data
   policy. Respondents were also asked their level of agreement that they know how to find
   information from the Bank and that the Bank is responsive to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank, their exposure
   to the Bank in Albania, and their geographic location.

In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 200 respondents (73% response rate) who completed the
country survey in FY 2010. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were
possible.




                                                4
The World Bank                                Albania                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position

       For further analyses, the small number of respondents from local government, bilateral or
        multilateral agencies, and trade unions were included in the “Other” category. Note there
        were no respondents from the judiciary branch.




                                                5
The World Bank                   Albania      Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                   6
The World Bank                                Albania                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The vast majority of respondents indicated that they were located in Tirana and Durres.
        Because of the small number of respondents from Northern, Central, and Southern
        Albania, analyses comparing geographic locations were not possible.




                                                7
The World Bank                            Albania   Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Professional Collaboration with the World Bank




Exposure to the World Bank




                                            8
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank

   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 6.7 on a
    10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar. This was
    significantly lower than the FY ’10 survey, in which familiarity with the Bank received a
    mean rating of 7.2 across all respondents.
         Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from independent government
            institutions indicated the highest levels of familiarity whereas respondents from
            NGOs/CBOs and other organizations indicated significantly lower levels.
         It should be noted that respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the Bank were
            significantly, strongly correlated with their impressions of the Bank’s overall
            effectiveness in Albania as well as significantly, moderately correlated with their
            perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results and
            the Bank’s relevance to Albania’s development.




                                                9
The World Bank                               Albania                            Country Survey 2012




IV. General Issues facing Albania

Headed in the Right Direction

       When asked whether Albania was headed in the right or wrong direction, over half of all
        respondents indicated that Albania was headed in the right direction.
             Pluralities of employees of a ministry, consultants on Bank Projects, and
              respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister, PMUs,
              academia/research institutes, and independent government institutions indicated
              that Albania was headed in the right direction.
             In contrast, pluralities of respondents from the private sector/financial
              sector/private banks and the media indicated that Albania was headed in the
              wrong direction.
             Pluralities of respondents from NGOs/CBOs and other organizations indicated
              that they were not sure if Albania was headed in the right or wrong direction.




                                               10
The World Bank                                       Albania                                    Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Albania (continued)
Development Priority
    Respondents indicated that education was the most important development priority in
      Albania. Law and justice, strengthening property rights, anti-corruption, agricultural and
      rural development, and job creation/employment were also considered top priorities.
           In the FY ’10 country survey*, improving the effectiveness of the law and justice
              system (25%), strengthening property rights (24%), economic growth (24%),
              improving governance (20%), and reducing corruption (20%) were considered the
              most important development priorities for Albania.




       *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’10 survey.
                                                        11
The World Bank                                       Albania                                   Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Albania (continued)
Economic Growth
       Respondents indicated that agricultural and rural development and foreign direct
        investment would contribute most to generating economic growth in Albania. Education,
        governance, anti-corruption, energy, domestic private sector development, and
        strengthening property rights were also identified as key to economic growth.
             In the FY ’10 country survey*, respondents indicated that enhancing the
                environment for private sector growth (38%), reducing corruption (28%),
                improving governance (27%), and increasing agricultural productivity (27%)
                would contribute most to generating economic growth in Albania.




        *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’10 survey.
                                                       12
The World Bank                                       Albania                                   Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank
Focusing World Bank Resources
    Respondents indicated that the Bank would have the most impact on development results
       in Albania by focusing most of its attention and resources on agricultural and rural
       development and education.
            Respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank should focus
              on agriculture and rural development and education; however, respondents from
              the office of the President/Prime Minister indicated that the Bank should focus on
              public financial management and respondents from other organizations indicated
              that the Bank should focus on financial markets.
            In the FY ’10 country survey*, respondents indicated that it would be most
              productive for the Bank to focus on economic growth (21%), strengthening
              property rights (19%), and increasing access to/quality of education (18%).




       *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’10 survey.
                                                       13
The World Bank                                 Albania                              Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Overall Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, ratings of the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Albania
        received a mean rating of 7.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10
        being very effective. This was significantly lower than the FY ’10 survey, in which the
        Bank’s overall effectiveness received a mean rating of 7.8 across all respondents.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from independent government
              institutions gave the highest ratings for the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in
              Albania whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs and other organizations gave
              significantly lower ratings.




                                                 14
The World Bank                                Albania                              Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Achieving Sustainable Development Results

       Across all respondents, the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results
        in Albania received a mean rating of 7.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at
        all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from independent
              government institutions gave the highest ratings for the World Bank helping
              achieve sustainable development results in Albania whereas respondents from the
              media gave the lowest ratings.




                                                15
The World Bank                               Albania                             Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Staff Preparedness

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s staff being well prepared to help Albania solve
        its most complicated development challenges received a mean rating of 7.8 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from independent government institutions and consultants on Bank
              projects gave the highest ratings for the World Bank’s staff being well prepared
              whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs and other organizations gave
              significantly lower ratings.




                                               16
The World Bank                                       Albania                                   Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest value to Albania was its
        financial resources. The Bank’s policy and economic advice and technical assistance
        were also considered of great value to Albania.
             Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey* indicated that the Bank’s greatest
              values to Albania were its financial resources (50%), policy and economic advice
              (36%), technical assistance (29%), and knowledge (25%).




        *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’10 survey.




                                                       17
The World Bank                                       Albania                                   Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Greatest Weakness
       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Albania were
        not being willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country and being
        too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures.
             Respondents in the FY ’10 survey* indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses
                were not enough public disclosure of its work with government (40%) and being
                too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures (37%).
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that these were the Bank’s
                greatest weaknesses, except employees of ministries who indicated not enough
                public disclosure of its work, consultants on Bank projects who indicated not
                exploring alternative policy options, and respondents from the private sector/
                financial sector/private banks, NGOs/CBOs, and other organizations who
                indicated not collaborating enough with non-state actors.




        *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’10 survey.
                                                       18
The World Bank                                  Albania                              Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, respondents
        indicated that they most often attribute this to political pressures and obstacles or the
        government working inefficiently.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they most often
              attribute failed or slowed reform efforts to political pressures and the government
              working inefficiently, except respondents from the office of the President/Prime
              Minister and consultants on Bank projects who indicated lack of/inadequate levels
              of capacity in Government, employees of ministries who indicated an inadequate
              level of citizen/civil society participation and reforms not being well thought out
              in light of country challenges, and respondents from independent government
              institutions who indicated an inadequate level of citizen/civil society participation.




                                                  19
The World Bank                                 Albania                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Specific Areas of Effectiveness
       Respondents saw the Bank as most effective at monitoring and evaluation, receiving a
        mean rating of 7.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not effective
        at all and 10 being very effective.




                                                 20
The World Bank                                 Albania                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder differences in their ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness
        across nearly all of these twenty-seven areas. For the most part, consultants on Bank
        projects and respondents from PMUs and independent government institutions had the
        highest ratings across these areas whereas respondents from academia/research institutes
        and NGOs/CBOs tended to have significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness
        across these areas. Those areas with significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Anti-corruption”;
             “Information and communications technology”;
             “Transport”;
             “Urban development ”;
             “Environmental sustainability and natural resource management ”;
             “Regulatory framework”;
             “Foreign direct investment”;
             “Trade and exports”;
             “Energy”;
             “Monitoring and evaluation”;
             “Job creation/employment”;
             “Health”;
             “Agriculture and rural development ”;
             “Governance”;
             “Strengthening property rights”;
             “Education”;
             “Social protection”; and
             “Climate change”.


       Responses across all stakeholder groups and both country surveys can be found in the
        Appendix.




                                                 21
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s
        effectiveness at all areas that could be compared, except for “Urban development” which
        were statistically similar, compared to respondents in the FY ’10 country survey.




                                                22
The World Bank                                 Albania                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness and
ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable development results in Albania, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings o f the twenty-seven specific
areas of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of
effectiveness in one specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness or perceptions of the Ba nk’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Albania. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at governance;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at anti-corruption;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at law and justice; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at job creation/employment.

       Achieving Sustainable Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest
        Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results in
        Albania, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results. The
        areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at law and justice;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at public sector reform; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth.




                                                 23
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments

Knowledge: Frequency of Use

       Over half of all respondents indicated that they consulted World Bank knowledge and
        research a few times a year.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of usage
              of World Bank knowledge and research.




                                                24
The World Bank                                Albania                            Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Meeting Albania’s Knowledge Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank meets Albania’s needs for
        knowledge services received a mean rating of 6.8 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from independent
              government institutions gave the highest ratings for the Bank meeting Albania’s
              needs for knowledge services whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs gave the
              lowest ratings.




                                                25
The World Bank                                       Albania                                   Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Knowledge: Focusing Bank Research
    Respondents indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
      and knowledge efforts on education. Economic growth, anti-corruption, and domestic
      private sector development were other research areas considered valuable.
           Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey* indicated that it would be most
              valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on education (25%), poverty
              (19%), and labor markets/job creation (17%).
           Respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that these would be the
              most valuable areas for the Bank’s research, except respondents from independent
              government institutions who were more likely to indicate that the Bank should
              focus its research on agriculture and rural development.




        *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’10 survey.
                                                       26
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, the effectiveness of the World Bank’s knowledge and research to
        provide support for program implementation received the highest mean rating, 7.3, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very effective.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from independent government
              institutions had the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge
              and research to enhance knowledge and/or skills whereas respondents from
              academia/research institutes had significantly lower effectiveness ratings.
              Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for the
              effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research in all other areas.




                                                27
The World Bank                                 Albania                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Qualities

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s knowledge and research being appropriately
        translated, being a source of relevant information on global good practices, and being
        accessible all received the highest mean rating, 7.8, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             There were significant stakeholder group differences across most of these
              knowledge and research qualities. For the most part, consultants on Bank projects
              and respondents from independent government institutions gave the highest
              ratings for these qualities whereas respondents from academia/research institutes
              and other organizations tended to give significantly lower ratings. Those areas
              that did not have significant stakeholder group differences were: “Are accessible”
              and “Are adequately disseminated”.




                                                 28
The World Bank                                Albania                            Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Contribution

       Across all respondents, the significance of the contribution that the World Bank’s
        knowledge and research make to development results in Albania received a mean rating
        of 7.7 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not significant at all and 10 being very
        significant.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from independent government
              institutions and PMUs gave the highest ratings for the contribution that the Bank’s
              knowledge and research make to development results in Albania whereas
              respondents from NGOs/CBOs, the media, and other organizations.




                                                29
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Technical Quality

       Across all respondents, the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge and
        research received a mean rating of 8.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being very low
        technical quality and 10 being very high technical quality.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from independent
              government institutions and consultants on Bank projects gave the highest ratings
              for the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge and research whereas
              respondents from the media gave the lowest ratings.




                                                30
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Meeting Albania’s Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank’s financial instruments meet
        Albania’s needs received a mean rating of 6.6 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from independent government institutions and consultants on Bank
              projects gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s financial instruments meeting
              Albania’s needs whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs and other organizations
              gave significantly lower ratings.




                                                31
The World Bank                                 Albania                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates
The World Bank’s Work in Albania
       In terms of the Bank’s work, the World Bank treating clients and stakeholders in Albania
        with respect received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.9, across all respondents, on
        a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of
                agreement that the Bank plays a relevant role in Albania’s development, that the
                programs and strategies the Bank supports are realistic for Albania, and that the
                Bank’s work is aligned with their development priorities compared to respondents
                from the FY ’10 country survey.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from independent government
                institutions had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank plays a relevant role
                in development in Albania whereas respondents from the office of the President/
                Prime Minister and other organizations had significantly lower ratings.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from independent government
                institutions had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank is aligned with their
                development priorities whereas respondents from academia/research institutes and
                other organizations had significantly lower ratings.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from PMUs and independent
                government institutions had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank
                supports realistic programs whereas respondents from academia/research
                institutes, the media, and other organizations had significantly lower ratings.
             Employees of ministries, consultants on Bank projects, and respondents from
                PMUs and independent government institutions had the highest levels of
                agreement that the Bank treats clients and stakeholders with respect whereas
                respondents from academia/research institutes had significantly lower ratings.




                                                 32
The World Bank                                 Albania                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s teams and visits being well coordinated
        received the highest mean rating, 7.8, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all
        and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Ratings in this year’s country survey were significantly lower compared to the
              FY ’10 country survey for all four statements that could be compared.
             There were significant stakeholder group differences across all but one of these
              aspects of how the World Bank operates. For the most part, consultants on Bank
              projects and respondents from independent government institutions gave the
              highest ratings for these aspects whereas respondents from the office of the
              President/Prime Minister tended to give significantly lower ratings. The one area
              that did not have a significant stakeholder group difference was: “The World
              Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes”.




                                                 33
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development
        partner in terms of its collaboration with the Government in Albania received the highest
        mean rating, 8.0, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a
        very significant degree.
             There were significant stakeholder group differences across all but one of these
                aspects of the Bank being an effective development partner. For the most part,
                consultants on Bank projects and respondents from independent government
                institutions gave the highest ratings for these aspects whereas respondents from
                other organizations tended to give significantly lower ratings. The one area that
                did not have a significant stakeholder group difference was: “Openness (sharing
                data and other information)”.




                                                34
The World Bank                                 Albania                             Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania

Role Significance

       Respondents indicated that the Bank should play a fairly significant role in Albania’s
        development over the medium term, receiving a mean rating of 8.4 across all respondents
        on a 10-point scale with 1 being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role.
        This was statistically similar to the mean rating received in the FY ’10 survey (8.2).
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from independent government
              institutions gave the highest ratings for the role significance that the Bank should
              have whereas respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister,
              NGOs/CBOs, and academia/research institutes gave significantly lower ratings.




                                                 35
The World Bank                                       Albania                                   Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should reduce the complexity of obtaining
        Bank financing to make itself of greater value in Albania. Respondents also indicated that
        the Bank should improve the quality of its experts as related to Albania’s specific
        challenges, provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Albania’s
        economy, and improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets.
             Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey* indicated that the World Bank should
              reduce the complexity of obtaining Bank financing (29%) and improve the quality
              of its experts as related to Albania’s specific challenges (26%) to make itself of
              greater value in Albania.
             Respondents across most stakeholders indicated that the Bank should do these
              things to make itself of greater value, except respondents from academia/research
              institutes and the media who indicated that the Bank should ensure greater
              selectivity in its work.




        *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’10 survey.
                                                       36
The World Bank                                       Albania                                   Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania (continued)

Collaborating in Albania

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely with the private
        sector and local government to ensure better development results in Albania.
             Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey* also indicated that the World Bank
              should work more with local government (44%) and private sector (42%) to
              ensure better development results in Albania
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank should work
              more closely with the private sector and local government, except respondents
              from NGOs/CBOs who were more likely to indicate that the Bank should work
              more closely with NGOs and CBOs.




        *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’10 survey.
                                                       37
The World Bank                               Albania                            Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania (continued)

Influencing the Global Development Agenda

       Across all respondents, the extent to which respondents believed the World Bank should
        influence the global development agenda received a mean rating of 7.5 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from independent government
              institutions, PMUs, the private sector/financial sector/private banks, and the
              media gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the Bank should influence
              the global development agenda whereas respondents from academia/research
              institutes gave significantly lower ratings.




                                               38
The World Bank                                       Albania                                   Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       More than three-quarters of all respondents indicated that they got most of their
        information about economic and social development issues in Albania from the Internet.
             Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey* also indicated that they got most of
              their information about economic and social development issues in Albania from
              the Internet (63%).




        *
         Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’10 survey.




                                                       39
The World Bank                              Albania                            Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank, nearly
        two-thirds of respondents indicated the World Bank website. Other popular choices were
        World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences, World Bank publications and other
        written materials, and direct contact with World Bank staff.




                                              40
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       Less than half of all respondents indicated that they were aware of the Bank’s Access to
        Information policy.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              awareness for the Bank’s Access to Information policy.




       Over a third of all respondents indicated that they had requested information from the
        World Bank in the past year.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from PMUs, academia/research
              institutes, the media, independent government institutions, and other
              organizations were significantly more likely to have requested information from
              the World Bank compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                41
The World Bank                                Albania                              Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Nearly all respondents who indicated that they had requested information from the World
        Bank indicated that they were able to obtain this information.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of
              obtaining their requested information.




       Agreement that respondents use more data from the World Bank as a result of its Open
        Data policy received a mean rating of 6.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s
              Open Data policy.




                                                42
The World Bank                                 Albania                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet, but this was
        significantly fewer than the 99% of respondents who indicated that they had access to the
        Internet in the FY ’10 country surve y.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of
              Internet access.




Website Usage

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website, statistically
        similar to the rates of website usage found in the FY ’10 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of Bank
              website usage.




                                                 43
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage (continued)

       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, nearly two-thirds indicated that they
        used the World Bank’s country website, statistically similar to the FY ’10 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of usage
              for the World Bank’s websites.




                                                44
The World Bank                                Albania                              Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Evaluation

       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, agreement that
        respondents find the information on the Bank’s websites useful received the highest mean
        rating, 8.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and
        10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents from the FY ’10 country survey had significantly higher levels of
              agreement regarding both evaluations of the Bank’s websites compared to
              respondents from this country survey.
             Employees of ministries, consultants on Bank projects and respondents from
              independent government institutions had the highest levels of agreement that the
              Bank websites are easy to navigate whereas respondents from the office of the
              President/Prime Minister and the private sector/financial sector/private banks had
              significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Employees of ministries, consultants on Bank projects and respondents from
              PMUs, the media, and independent government institutions had the highest levels
              of agreement that they find the information on the Bank’s websites useful whereas
              respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister, the private
              sector/financial sector/private banks, academia/research institutes, NGOs/CBOs,
              and other organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                45
The World Bank                                 Albania                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
PIC Usage
       More than a third of all respondents in this year’s country survey indicated that they had
        used the Bank’s PICs in Albania, statistically similar to the usage of the Bank’s PICs in
        the FY ’10 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of usage
              for the World Bank’s PICs.




PIC Evaluation
       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s PICs, agreement that
        respondents find them to be a valuable source of information related to development in
        Albania received a mean rating of 6.4, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey had significantly higher levels of
              agreement that the Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of information compared to
              respondents in this year’s country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement regarding the value of the Bank’s PICs.




                                                 46
The World Bank                                Albania                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       In terms of the Bank’s information sharing in Albania, respondents had the highest level
        of agreement that when they need information from the World Bank they know how to
        find it, receiving a mean rating of 7.6, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of
              agreement that the Bank is appropriately responsive to their information requests
              and inquiries and that when they need information from the World Bank they
              know how to find it compared to respondents in the FY ’10 country survey.
             Respondents from the media and independent government institutions had the
              highest levels of agreement that when they need information from the World
              Bank they know how to find it whereas respondents from academia/research
              institutes and other organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest levels of
              agreement that the Bank is appropriately responsive to their information requests
              and inquiries whereas respondents from academia/research institutes, the media,
              and other organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                47
The World Bank                                  Albania                               Country Survey 2012



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 49


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 61


          C. Responses to All Questions by Year .............................................. 76


          D. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank .......... 80


          E. World Bank Client Survey 2012 – Albania Questionnaire ............ 81




                                               ALBANIA




                                                  48
The World Bank                                        Albania                                Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=198)
A. General Issues facing Albania

1. In general, would you say that Albania is headed in...?                  Percentage of Respondents (N=188)
The right direction                                                                       51.1%
The wrong direction                                                                       21.8%
Not sure                                                                                  27.1%

2. When considering development priorities, which ONE                Percentage of Respondents (N=195)
   development priority below is the most important in
   Albania? Which ONE is the second most important
   development priority? Which ONE is the third most              Most       2nd Most    3rd Most
   important priority?                                          Important   Important   Important   Combined
Education                                                         17.4%       11.3%        8.2%       37.0%
Law and justice                                                   8.7%         9.7%        8.2%       26.7%
Strengthening property rights                                     7.7%         7.7%        7.2%       22.6%
Anti-corruption                                                   9.2%         7.7%        5.2%       22.1%
Agriculture and rural development                                 8.2%         5.6%        7.2%       21.1%
Job creation/employment                                           5.6%         9.7%        4.1%       19.5%
Health                                                            3.6%         6.7%        8.2%       18.5%
Governance                                                        5.6%         5.6%        6.2%       17.5%
Economic growth                                                   6.7%         4.1%        3.6%       14.4%
Domestic private sector development                               5.1%         2.6%        4.1%       11.8%
Social protection                                                 2.1%         2.1%        7.2%       11.3%
Foreign direct investment                                         2.6%         3.6%        3.6%       9.8%
Transport                                                         3.6%         2.6%        3.1%       9.2%
Public financial management                                       1.5%         2.6%        3.6%       7.7%
Energy                                                            0.5%         0.5%        5.2%       6.2%
Environmental sustainability and natural resource
                                                                  1.0%        2.1%        3.1%        6.2%
management
Public sector reform                                              2.6%        1.5%        2.1%        6.2%
Regional integration                                              2.6%        3.1%        0.0%        5.6%
Monitoring and evaluation                                         0.0%        3.1%        1.5%        4.6%
Financial markets                                                 1.0%        1.5%        1.5%        4.1%
Urban development                                                 1.5%        1.0%        1.0%        3.6%
Trade and exports                                                 1.0%        1.0%        1.0%        3.1%
Water and sanitation                                              1.0%        1.5%        0.5%        3.1%
Regulatory framework                                              0.5%        2.1%        0.5%        3.1%
Climate change                                                    0.0%        0.5%        1.5%        2.1%
Disaster management                                               0.0%        0.5%        1.0%        1.5%
Information and communications technology                         0.5%        0.0%        1.0%        1.5%




                                                        49
The World Bank                                       Albania                                Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing Albania (continued)

3. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE
   areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating                Percentage of Respondents
   economic growth in Albania? (Choose no more than THREE)                     (Responses Combined; N=197)
Agriculture and rural development                                                          33.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                                  27.4%
Education                                                                                  24.4%
Governance                                                                                 24.4%
Anti-corruption                                                                            21.8%
Energy                                                                                     20.3%
Domestic private sector development                                                        20.3%
Strengthening property rights                                                              19.8%
Law and justice                                                                            17.3%
Job creation/employment                                                                    16.2%
Trade and exports                                                                          14.2%
Public financial management                                                                12.2%
Urban development                                                                          6.1%
Environmental sustainability and natural resource management                               5.6%
Regional integration                                                                       5.1%
Transport                                                                                  5.1%
Health                                                                                     5.1%
Regulatory framework                                                                       4.6%
Information and communications technology                                                  4.1%
Public sector reform                                                                       4.1%
Social protection                                                                          2.0%
Financial markets                                                                          2.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                       1.0%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                  0.5%
Climate change                                                                             0.0%
Disaster management                                                                        0.0%


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Familiarity, Overall Effectiveness, Preparedness                                    N       Mean        SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Albania, on a ten-
                                                                                   197       6.70      2.15
   point scale? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank's effectiveness in
                                                                                   189       7.08      1.87
   Albania, on a ten-point scale. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank’s staff is well prepared to help
   Albania solve its most complicated development challenges? (1-To no degree      175       7.77      1.60
    at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                       50
The World Bank                                        Albania                              Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact
   on development results in Albania, in which sectoral areas do you
   believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and               Percentage of Respondents
   resources in Albania? (Choose no more than THREE)                         (Responses Combined; N=196)
Agriculture and rural development                                                        30.1%
Education                                                                                27.6%
Public financial management                                                              17.3%
Domestic private sector development                                                      16.3%
Economic growth                                                                          16.3%
Governance                                                                               14.8%
Energy                                                                                   13.3%
Law and justice                                                                          13.3%
Health                                                                                   12.8%
Strengthening property rights                                                            12.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                                12.2%
Job creation/employment                                                                  11.7%
Social protection                                                                        10.7%
Transport                                                                                10.7%
Public sector reform                                                                     9.7%
Financial markets                                                                        8.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                          8.2%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                7.7%
Trade and exports                                                                        7.1%
Regulatory framework                                                                     5.6%
Urban development                                                                        5.6%
Regional integration                                                                     5.1%
Environmental sustainability and natural resource management                             5.1%
Water and sanitation                                                                     4.1%
Information and communications technology                                                3.1%
Climate change                                                                           1.0%
Disaster management                                                                      0.5%

                                                                       Percentage of Respondents (N=194)
5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do
   you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second   Greatest   2nd Greatest
   greatest value in Albania?                                          Value         Value      Combined
Financial resources                                                    48.5%        11.3%         59.8%
Policy and economic advice                                             20.6%        16.5%         37.1%
Technical assistance                                                    7.7%        18.0%         25.8%
Training/capacity building                                              5.7%        16.5%         22.2%
Studies/analyses                                                        6.7%        12.4%         19.1%
Ability to mobilize resources from private sector and donors            4.1%        14.9%         19.1%
Convening/facilitating                                                  4.1%         8.2%         12.4%
Data                                                                    2.6%         1.5%          4.1%
Other                                                                   0.0%         0.5%          0.5%




                                                        51
The World Bank                                           Albania                               Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest            Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)                 (Responses Combined; N=181)
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                24.3%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                 23.8%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                   18.8%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                       17.7%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                    17.1%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Albania                           17.1%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                       14.9%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                              14.9%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                    11.0%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                      6.1%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                       6.1%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                         5.5%
Other                                                                                       4.4%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                         3.9%
Not client focused                                                                          3.3%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                    0.0%

Global Development Agenda                                                                 N      Mean       SD
7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the
    global development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate
                                                                                         186      7.45     2.00
    change, communicable diseases, international financial systems, trade, etc.), on a
    ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

8. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
   main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
   Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better                    Percentage of Respondents
   development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                         (Responses Combined; N=195)
Private sector                                                                              49.2%
Local government                                                                            46.7%
NGOs, CBOs                                                                                  25.1%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                    19.5%
Beneficiaries                                                                               14.9%
Donor community                                                                             13.3%
Media                                                                                       8.7%
Parliament                                                                                  8.2%
Foundations                                                                                 7.2%
Other                                                                                       1.5%

                                                                                          Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s
work in Albania, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)          N      Mean        SD
9.   Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Albania    192     7.11      2.14
10. The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                         181     6.80      2.07
    for this country
11. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Albania       179     6.82      2.05
12. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Albania with respect               180     7.90      1.97




                                                           52
The World Bank                                           Albania                                     Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                                                       Degree
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Albania in
terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)        N      Mean       SD
13. Responsiveness                                                                             186     7.92      1.84
14. Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)                          174      7.05     1.89
15. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                   176      6.86     1.93
16. Being inclusive                                                                            174      7.04     1.98
17. Openness (sharing data and other information)                                              187      7.17     2.29
18. Staff accessibility                                                                        168      7.71     2.24
19. Straightforwardness and honesty                                                            176      7.40     2.16
20. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                                        161      6.89     2.14
21. Collaboration with the Government                                                          174      8.03     1.74
22. Collaboration with other donors                                                            152      7.42     2.16
23. Follow through over time                                                                   171      7.40     2.12

24. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
   place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to?                       Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than TWO)                                                          (Responses Combined; N=185)
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                 42.2%
The Government works inefficiently                                                                36.2%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                             24.3%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                   22.7%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                               22.2%
The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                14.1%
ground
Poor donor coordination                                                                         10.8%
The World Bank works too slowly                                                                 9.2%
The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                    7.0%
Other                                                                                           2.2%




                                                            53
The World Bank                                                   Albania                   Country Survey 2012


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the         Effectiveness
following areas of development in Albania, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                           N       Mean      SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                                156      5.25     2.42
2.    Information and communications technology                                      145      6.70     1.92
3.    Transport                                                                      161      6.75     2.14
4.    Law and justice                                                                147      5.47     2.20
5.    Urban development                                                              152      6.32     1.97
6.    Environmental sustainability and natural resource management                   150      6.05     2.04
7.    Regulatory framework                                                           141      6.81     1.91
8.    Domestic private sector development                                            144      6.00     2.25
9.    Foreign direct investment                                                      142      6.85     2.01
10.   Water and sanitation                                                           150      6.23     2.18
11.   Trade and exports                                                              132      6.15     2.07
12.   Economic growth                                                                159      6.42     2.14
13.   Energy                                                                         149      6.54     2.06
14.   Disaster management                                                            141      6.01     2.36
15.   Monitoring and evaluation                                                      145      7.08     1.94
16.   Public financial management                                                    160      6.54     2.08
17.   Job creation/employment                                                        151      5.34     2.16
18.   Financial markets                                                              130      5.98     2.12
19.   Health                                                                         151      6.05     2.20
20.   Agriculture and rural development                                              157      5.92     2.21
21.   Governance                                                                     154      5.78     2.20
22.   Strengthening property rights                                                  155      5.08     2.38
23.   Education                                                                      155      6.01     2.21
24.   Social protection                                                              149      5.84     2.39
25.   Climate change                                                                 130      5.33     2.31
26.   Public sector reform                                                           161      6.04     2.06
27.   Regional integration                                                           140      6.47     2.08


Achieving Sustainable Results                                                        N        Mean         SD
28. To what degree does the World Bank’s work help achieve sustainable development
    results in Albania, on a ten point scale?                                        192      7.13     1.92
      (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank
    in Albania, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)        N       Mean      SD
29. The World Bank’s financial instruments meet the needs of Albania                 179      6.59     2.09
30. The World Bank meets Albania’s needs for knowledge services                      177      6.82     2.03




                                                                   54
The World Bank                                     Albania                             Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research in      Percentage of Respondents
   the work you do?                                                                 (N=197)
Weekly                                                                                9.1%
Monthly                                                                              20.8%
A few times a year                                                                   51.8%
Rarely                                                                               16.2%
Never                                                                                 2.0%

2. When thinking about the development challenges in Albania, where
   do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus
   its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?                Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                            (Responses Combined; N=196)
Education                                                                             35.2%
Economic growth                                                                       23.5%
Anti-corruption                                                                       20.4%
Domestic private sector development                                                   18.9%
Agriculture and rural development                                                     17.3%
Law and justice                                                                       16.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                             16.3%
Governance                                                                            16.3%
Public sector reform                                                                  11.7%
Health                                                                                11.2%
Public financial management                                                           10.7%
Social protection                                                                     10.2%
Energy                                                                                9.2%
Strengthening property rights                                                         9.2%
Trade and exports                                                                     8.7%
Job creation/employment                                                               8.7%
Regional integration                                                                  7.7%
Transport                                                                             6.6%
Financial markets                                                                     5.1%
Urban development                                                                     5.1%
Environmental sustainability and natural resource management                          5.1%
Information and communications technology                                             4.6%
Regulatory framework                                                                  4.6%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                             4.1%
Water and sanitation                                                                  2.6%
Climate change                                                                        1.5%
Disaster management                                                                   1.0%




                                                      55
The World Bank                                                Albania                            Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

In Albania, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research        Level of Effectiveness
are at: (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                      N      Mean        SD
3. Raising your awareness of the particular topic                                       168      6.32      2.22
4.   Stimulating public debate/dialogue                                                 175       5.94      2.26
5.   Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                                             179       6.85      2.30
6.   Contributing to good policy making                                                 175       6.59      2.16
7.   Providing support for program implementation                                       177       7.25      1.91


In Albania, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and                    Degree
research: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                       N       Mean       SD
8.   Are timely                                                                         183       7.32     1.94
9.   Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation            174       6.73     2.09
10. Are relevant to Albania’s development priorities                                    180       7.16     1.91
11. Provide feasible recommendations                                                    182       7.54     1.85
12. Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                183       7.79     1.67
13. A source of relevant information on global good practices                           177       7.82     1.74
14. Are adequately disseminated                                                         167       6.90     2.09
15. Are appropriately translated                                                        165       7.83     1.71
16. Are adaptable to Albania’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                        185       7.21     1.77
    circumstances


Overall Evaluations                                                                          N     Mean       SD
17. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge
    and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?       186       7.66     1.79
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
18. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's knowledge/
    research, on a ten point scale?                                                       181       8.09     1.58
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                56
The World Bank                                                Albania                           Country Survey 2012


E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten             Level of Agreement
point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                    N      Mean     SD
1. The World Bank disburses funds promptly                                              163      6.29   2.43
2. The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                        180      7.48      1.95
    supports
3. The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                  164      6.99      2.10
4.   The World Bank’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonable                    162      7.19      1.95
5.   The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                        158      7.28      1.94
6.   Working with the World Bank increases Albania’s institutional capacity             184      7.60      1.97
7.   The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes            140      7.55      1.76
8.  The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated                              160      7.76      1.92
9.  Where country systems are adequate (e.g., procurement, financial
                                                                                        161      7.53      2.00
    management, etc.), the World Bank makes appropriate use of them
10. The World Bank provides effective implementation support (i.e., supervision of
                                                                                        176      7.72      1.82
    projects)



F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania

The Bank’s Role                                                                          N       Mean      SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank SHOULD play in Albania’s
development over the medium term in the near future, on a ten point scale?              191      8.38     1.72
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of               Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=186)
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                      29.0%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Albania's specific challenges               24.7%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Albania's
                                                                                              24.2%
economy
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                              23.1%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                        19.9%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                      18.8%
Work faster                                                                                   15.1%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                      14.0%
Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                            10.2%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                                   7.0%
Other                                                                                         3.8%




                                                                57
The World Bank                                       Albania                            Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social       Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)                 (Responses Combined; N=196)
Internet                                                                               77.0%
Local television                                                                       31.6%
Local newspapers                                                                       26.0%
International television                                                               17.3%
International newspapers                                                               13.8%
Other                                                                                  7.1%
Periodicals                                                                            6.1%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                              4.6%
Blogs                                                                                  2.0%
Mobile phones                                                                          1.0%
Local radio                                                                            0.5%
International radio                                                                    0.5%
Instant messaging                                                                      0.0%

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?          Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                (Responses Combined; N=196)
World Bank website                                                                     63.8%
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                              38.3%
World Bank publications and other written materials                                    32.1%
Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)               24.0%
e-Newsletters                                                                          15.8%
World Bank Public Information Center                                                   8.2%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                              6.1%
Instant messaging                                                                      3.6%
Mobile phones                                                                          2.0%
Blogs                                                                                  1.0%
Other                                                                                  0.0%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under
    which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession      Percentage of Respondents
    that is not a list of exceptions?                                                (N=177)
Yes                                                                                   39.5%
No                                                                                    60.5%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities     Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                                (N=170)
Yes                                                                                   34.1%
No                                                                                    65.9%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                         (N=58)
Yes                                                                                   86.2%
No                                                                                    13.8%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                               (N=184)
Yes                                                                                   94.0%
No                                                                                    6.0%



                                                       58
The World Bank                                      Albania                                   Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank website?                                            (N=188)
Yes                                                                                         91.0%
No                                                                                          9.0%

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                             (N=191)
The World Bank’s country website (www. worldbank.org.al)                                    62.3%
The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                           37.7%

9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information                   Percentage of Respondents
    Centers (PICs) in Albania?                                                             (N=195)
Yes                                                                                         38.5%
No                                                                                          44.6%
I don’t know what a PIC is                                                                  16.9%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point            Level of Agreement
scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N       Mean      SD
10. I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the organization’s Open
                                                                                      150      6.09      2.47
    Data policy
11. The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of information related to
                                                                                       91      6.41      2.14
    development in Albania
12. I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate                                   175      7.75      1.90
13. I find the information on the World Bank’s websites useful                        177      8.15      1.71
14. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it                 182      7.58      2.40
15. The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries             156      7.31      2.21



H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                      (N=194)
Academia/Research institute/Think tank                                                     21.6%
Employee of Ministry/Ministerial Dept./Implementation Agency                               17.0%
Other                                                                                      13.4%
NGOs (incl. CBOs)                                                                          8.2%
Private sector organization/Financial Sector/Private Bank                                  7.7%
PMU                                                                                        6.7%
Consultant/Contractor on Bank supported Project                                            5.7%
Independent Government Institution                                                         5.2%
Media                                                                                      4.6%
Office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister/Parliamentarian                            4.1%
Local Government office or staff                                                           2.6%
Bilateral or Multilateral Agency                                                           2.1%
Trade Union                                                                                1.0%




                                                       59
The World Bank                                       Albania                             Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                 Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                 (N=189)
Education                                                                             30.2%
Other                                                                                 16.9%
Agriculture and rural development                                                     4.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                   4.8%
Financial markets                                                                     4.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                             4.2%
Governance                                                                            3.7%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                             3.7%
Trade and exports                                                                     3.2%
Energy                                                                                2.6%
Information and communications technology                                             2.6%
Social protection                                                                     2.6%
Health                                                                                2.1%
Public financial management                                                           2.1%
Environmental sustainability and natural resource management                          1.6%
Strengthening property rights                                                         1.6%
Transport                                                                             1.6%
Urban development                                                                     1.6%
Climate change                                                                        1.1%
Economic growth                                                                       1.1%
Regulatory framework                                                                  1.1%
Disaster management                                                                   0.5%
Job creation/employment                                                               0.5%
Law and justice                                                                       0.5%
Public sector reform                                                                  0.5%
Regional integration                                                                  0.5%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World         Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in your country?                                                              (N=193)
Yes                                                                                   38.5%
No                                                                                    61.5%

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World      Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)                                         (N=193)
Use World Bank reports/data                                                           41.5%
Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                          40.9%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                         37.3%
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                              22.3%
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)             19.7%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
5. Which best represents your geographic location?                                   (N=193)
Tirana and Durres                                                                     86.5%
North Albania                                                                         2.1%
Central Albania                                                                       6.2%
South Albania                                                                         5.2%




                                                        60
The World Bank                                                                                                     Albania                                                                                            Country Survey 2012


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

A. General Issues facing Albania
In general, would you say that Albania is headed in...?
                                                                  Office of President/ Employee of     Consultant on                 Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                      Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Prime Minister      a Ministry      Bank project         PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research     CBOs         Media     Government Institution    Other
 The right direction                                                     71.4%            80.6%            70.0%             84.6%            26.7%                42.5%       21.4%        22.2%            100.0%             27.8%
 The wrong direction                                                     28.6%            3.2%             0.0%               0.0%            46.7%                32.5%       14.3%        44.4%             0.0%              33.3%
 Not sure                                                                 0.0%            16.1%            30.0%             15.4%            26.7%                25.0%       64.3%        33.3%             0.0%              38.9%

When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Albania? Which ONE is the second most important development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   st
 1 Most Important
                                                                  Office of President/ Employee of     Consultant on                 Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                       Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Prime Minister      a Ministry      Bank project         PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research     CBOs         Media      Government Institution    Other
 Agriculture and rural development                                       12.5%            6.3%             18.2%              7.7%             0.0%                 2.4%       13.3%        11.1%             20.0%              10.8%
 Education                                                               37.5%            28.1%            9.1%              30.8%             6.7%                19.0%       20.0%        22.2%             10.0%               5.4%
 Social protection                                                        0.0%            6.3%             0.0%               0.0%             6.7%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Transport                                                               12.5%            3.1%             0.0%              15.4%             0.0%                 2.4%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               5.4%
 Public sector reform                                                     0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             6.7%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%              10.8%
 Regional integration                                                     0.0%            3.1%             0.0%               7.7%             6.7%                 4.8%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Strengthening property rights                                           12.5%            9.4%             27.3%              7.7%             6.7%                 2.4%        0.0%         0.0%             30.0%               5.4%
 Domestic private sector development                                      0.0%            6.3%             0.0%               0.0%            20.0%                 7.1%        0.0%        11.1%              0.0%               2.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 2.4%        0.0%        22.2%              0.0%               2.7%
 Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 4.8%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                          0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               7.7%            20.0%                16.7%        6.7%        11.1%              0.0%              10.8%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Public financial management                                              0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 4.8%        6.7%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                  0.0%            9.4%             9.1%               7.7%             6.7%                 4.8%       20.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Governance                                                              12.5%            0.0%             0.0%               7.7%             0.0%                 4.8%       20.0%         0.0%             10.0%               8.1%
 Financial markets                                                        0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 4.8%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Urban development                                                        0.0%            3.1%             9.1%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Environmental sustainability and natural resource management             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             6.7%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Health                                                                   0.0%            6.3%             9.1%               0.0%             0.0%                 2.4%        0.0%         0.0%             10.0%               5.4%
 Energy                                                                   0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             6.7%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Climate change                                                           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                        0.0%            3.1%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Economic growth                                                         12.5%            6.3%             9.1%               0.0%             0.0%                 4.8%       13.3%        11.1%              0.0%              10.8%
 Law and justice                                                          0.0%            9.4%             9.1%               7.7%             6.7%                11.9%        0.0%        11.1%             10.0%              10.8%
 Regulatory framework                                                     0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%             10.0%               0.0%
 Disaster management                                                      0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Information and communications technology                                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%




                                                                                                                   61
The World Bank                                                                                                     Albania                                                                                            Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Albania (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Albania? Which ONE is the second most important development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   nd
 2 Most Important
                                                                  Office of President/ Employee of     Consultant on                 Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                       Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Prime Minister      a Ministry      Bank project         PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research     CBOs         Media      Government Institution    Other
 Agriculture and rural development                                       12.5%            6.3%             18.2%              0.0%             6.7%                 4.8%        6.7%        22.2%              0.0%               0.0%
 Education                                                                0.0%            6.3%             18.2%             15.4%            13.3%                 9.5%       13.3%         0.0%              0.0%              21.6%
 Social protection                                                        0.0%            6.3%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 2.4%        0.0%        11.1%              0.0%               0.0%
 Transport                                                                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               7.7%            13.3%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Public sector reform                                                     0.0%            6.3%             0.0%               7.7%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Regional integration                                                    25.0%            3.1%             9.1%               0.0%             0.0%                 4.8%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Strengthening property rights                                           12.5%            6.3%             9.1%              15.4%            13.3%                 2.4%       13.3%        11.1%             10.0%               5.4%
 Domestic private sector development                                     12.5%            0.0%             0.0%               7.7%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%        11.1%              0.0%               5.4%
 Foreign direct investment                                                0.0%            6.3%             0.0%               0.0%             6.7%                 4.8%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               5.4%
 Water and sanitation                                                    12.5%            3.1%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 2.4%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                         12.5%            3.1%             9.1%               7.7%             0.0%                 7.1%       26.7%        11.1%              0.0%               8.1%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                0.0%            3.1%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 7.1%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               5.4%
 Public financial management                                              0.0%            3.1%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 4.8%        6.7%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                  0.0%            15.6%            18.2%              0.0%             6.7%                 7.1%       13.3%        11.1%             20.0%               8.1%
 Governance                                                               0.0%            0.0%             9.1%               0.0%             6.7%                 7.1%        6.7%        11.1%             10.0%               8.1%
 Financial markets                                                        0.0%            3.1%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 2.4%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Urban development                                                        0.0%            3.1%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 2.4%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Environmental sustainability and natural resource management             0.0%            3.1%             0.0%               7.7%             0.0%                 4.8%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Health                                                                   0.0%            3.1%             0.0%              15.4%             6.7%                16.7%        6.7%         0.0%             10.0%               0.0%
 Energy                                                                   0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Climate change                                                           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Trade and exports                                                        0.0%            3.1%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Economic growth                                                         12.5%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             6.7%                 4.8%        0.0%        11.1%             20.0%               2.7%
 Law and justice                                                          0.0%            12.5%            9.1%              15.4%            13.3%                 4.8%        6.7%         0.0%             20.0%              10.8%
 Regulatory framework                                                     0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             6.7%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%             10.0%               5.4%
 Disaster management                                                      0.0%            3.1%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Information and communications technology                                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%




                                                                                                                   62
The World Bank                                                                                                     Albania                                                                                            Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Albania (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Albania? Which ONE is the second most important development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   rd
 3 Most Important
                                                                  Office of President/ Employee of     Consultant on                 Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                       Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Prime Minister      a Ministry      Bank project         PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research     CBOs         Media      Government Institution    Other
 Agriculture and rural development                                       12.5%            6.5%             9.1%              15.4%             6.7%                 2.4%        6.7%         0.0%             10.0%              10.8%
 Education                                                               12.5%            0.0%             18.2%              0.0%            13.3%                14.3%        0.0%        11.1%             10.0%               5.4%
 Social protection                                                       12.5%            19.4%            0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 7.1%       26.7%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Transport                                                                0.0%            16.1%            0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Public sector reform                                                     0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 7.1%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Regional integration                                                     0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Strengthening property rights                                            0.0%            3.2%             9.1%              23.1%             6.7%                 2.4%        0.0%        11.1%              0.0%              16.2%
 Domestic private sector development                                     12.5%            3.2%             0.0%               7.7%             6.7%                 0.0%        6.7%         0.0%             20.0%               2.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                                0.0%            0.0%             18.2%              0.0%             0.0%                 4.8%        0.0%         0.0%             10.0%               5.4%
 Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%        11.1%              0.0%               0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                         12.5%            6.5%             9.1%               0.0%             6.7%                 2.4%        0.0%        22.2%              0.0%               5.4%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                0.0%            3.2%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%             10.0%               2.7%
 Public financial management                                              0.0%            3.2%             9.1%               0.0%            13.3%                 0.0%        6.7%         0.0%             10.0%               2.7%
 Job creation/employment                                                  0.0%            0.0%             9.1%               7.7%             0.0%                 7.1%        0.0%        11.1%              0.0%               5.4%
 Governance                                                              12.5%            3.2%             9.1%              15.4%             6.7%                 4.8%        6.7%         0.0%             10.0%               5.4%
 Financial markets                                                        0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 4.8%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Urban development                                                        0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 4.8%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Environmental sustainability and natural resource management             0.0%            3.2%             0.0%               7.7%             0.0%                 4.8%        6.7%         0.0%             10.0%               0.0%
 Health                                                                  25.0%            16.1%            0.0%               0.0%             6.7%                 7.1%        6.7%        22.2%              0.0%               5.4%
 Energy                                                                   0.0%            3.2%             0.0%              15.4%            13.3%                 4.8%        6.7%        11.1%              0.0%               2.7%
 Climate change                                                           0.0%            3.2%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               5.4%
 Trade and exports                                                        0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 2.4%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Economic growth                                                          0.0%            6.5%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 7.1%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Law and justice                                                          0.0%            3.2%             0.0%               0.0%            20.0%                 9.5%       26.7%         0.0%             10.0%               8.1%
 Regulatory framework                                                     0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%
 Disaster management                                                      0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               7.7%             0.0%                 2.4%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Information and communications technology                                0.0%            0.0%             9.1%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               2.7%




                                                                                                                   63
The World Bank                                                                                                                    Albania                                                                        Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Albania (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Albania? (Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of Respondents                                       Office of President/ Employee of     Consultant on                Private Sector/ Financial  Academia/      NGOs/                    Independent
  (Responses Combined)                                               Prime Minister      a Ministry     Bank project      PMU         Sector/Private Bank       Research       CBOs        Media   Government Institution   Other
  Energy                                                                 37.5%             18.2%           27.3%         46.2%               20.0%               21.4%         12.5%       11.1%          10.0%             16.7%
  Social protection                                                       0.0%             3.0%            0.0%           0.0%                0.0%                4.8%         6.3%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%
  Climate change                                                          0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                0.0%                0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%
  Anti-corruption                                                        37.5%             15.2%           36.4%         23.1%               20.0%               16.7%         31.3%       44.4%          10.0%             19.4%
  Disaster management                                                     0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                0.0%                0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%
  Agriculture and rural development                                      25.0%             30.3%           18.2%         46.2%               33.3%               28.6%         50.0%       22.2%          60.0%             30.6%
  Foreign direct investment                                              25.0%             30.3%           18.2%         15.4%               33.3%                9.5%         18.8%       33.3%          40.0%             50.0%
  Urban development                                                       0.0%             3.0%            0.0%           7.7%                0.0%               16.7%         0.0%        11.1%           0.0%              5.6%
  Water and sanitation                                                    0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                0.0%                2.4%         6.3%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%
  Education                                                              50.0%             15.2%           18.2%         38.5%               13.3%               28.6%         25.0%       33.3%          30.0%             22.2%
  Information and communications technology                               0.0%             0.0%            9.1%           0.0%               13.3%                4.8%         0.0%        11.1%           0.0%              0.0%
  Regulatory framework                                                    0.0%             3.0%            0.0%           0.0%                6.7%                9.5%         0.0%         0.0%          10.0%              5.6%
  Trade and exports                                                       0.0%             3.0%            18.2%          7.7%               26.7%                9.5%         6.3%        11.1%          20.0%             30.6%
  Public sector reform                                                    0.0%             6.1%            0.0%           0.0%                6.7%                7.1%         6.3%         0.0%           0.0%              2.8%
  Regional integration                                                    0.0%             3.0%            18.2%          0.0%                6.7%                2.4%         6.3%        11.1%          20.0%              2.8%
  Domestic private sector development                                    12.5%             42.4%           36.4%          7.7%               20.0%               16.7%         25.0%       33.3%           0.0%              5.6%
  Job creation/employment                                                 0.0%             18.2%           9.1%          30.8%               20.0%               21.4%         18.8%        0.0%          20.0%             11.1%
  Strengthening property rights                                          25.0%             18.2%           45.5%         23.1%               13.3%                9.5%         25.0%       22.2%          50.0%             13.9%
  Governance                                                             12.5%             18.2%           9.1%          15.4%               13.3%               28.6%         25.0%       11.1%          10.0%             41.7%
  Transport                                                               0.0%             15.2%           9.1%           7.7%                0.0%                7.1%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                               0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                0.0%                2.4%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%
  Environmental sustainability and natural resource management           12.5%             3.0%            0.0%          15.4%                0.0%                4.8%         6.3%        11.1%           0.0%              5.6%
  Health                                                                 12.5%             3.0%            9.1%           0.0%                0.0%               11.9%         0.0%        22.2%           0.0%              0.0%
  Law and justice                                                        12.5%             18.2%           9.1%          15.4%               33.3%               23.8%         6.3%        11.1%          10.0%             16.7%
  Public financial management                                            25.0%             18.2%           0.0%           0.0%               13.3%               11.9%         25.0%        0.0%           0.0%             13.9%
  Financial markets                                                      12.5%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                6.7%                0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          10.0%              2.8%




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective; 1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                  64
The World Bank                                                                                                          Albania                                                                                          Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Albania, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in Albania?
   (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Office of President/ Employee of      Consultant on                 Private Sector/ Financial  Academia/         NGOs/                         Independent
 (Responses Combined)                                              Prime Minister      a Ministry       Bank project       PMU          Sector/Private Bank      Research          CBOs        Media       Government Institution   Other
 Education                                                              25.0%            21.9%             27.3%           38.5%               20.0%               33.3%          31.3%        33.3%                30.0%           22.2%
 Social protection                                                       0.0%            15.6%             18.2%           15.4%                6.7%               7.1%           31.3%        11.1%                 0.0%            5.6%
 Governance                                                             12.5%             9.4%             9.1%             7.7%               20.0%               16.7%          18.8%        11.1%                 0.0%           22.2%
 Agriculture and rural development                                      25.0%            34.4%             36.4%           30.8%               33.3%               23.8%          37.5%        33.3%                70.0%           19.4%
 Transport                                                              25.0%            21.9%             9.1%            23.1%               13.3%               7.1%            6.3%         0.0%                 0.0%            5.6%
 Public sector reform                                                    0.0%             9.4%             0.0%            15.4%               13.3%               4.8%           18.8%         0.0%                10.0%           13.9%
 Regional integration                                                    0.0%             3.1%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%               16.7%           0.0%        11.1%                 0.0%            2.8%
 Domestic private sector development                                    12.5%            21.9%             0.0%             0.0%               26.7%               21.4%          25.0%        33.3%                10.0%            8.3%
 Foreign direct investment                                               0.0%            15.6%             18.2%            0.0%               13.3%               14.3%           0.0%        11.1%                 0.0%           19.4%
 Regulatory framework                                                    0.0%             3.1%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%               7.1%            0.0%         0.0%                20.0%           13.9%
 Water and sanitation                                                   12.5%             6.3%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%               7.1%           12.5%         0.0%                 0.0%            0.0%
 Energy                                                                 25.0%             6.3%             27.3%           23.1%               33.3%               11.9%           0.0%        22.2%                20.0%            5.6%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                              12.5%             3.1%             9.1%             0.0%                0.0%               11.9%          12.5%         0.0%                 0.0%           13.9%
 Public financial management                                            37.5%             9.4%             9.1%            15.4%               20.0%               14.3%          31.3%        11.1%                10.0%           19.4%
 Job creation/employment                                                12.5%            18.8%             9.1%             0.0%               13.3%               11.9%           6.3%        11.1%                20.0%            8.3%
 Financial markets                                                      12.5%             6.3%             0.0%             7.7%                6.7%               2.4%            6.3%         0.0%                 0.0%           25.0%
 Urban development                                                       0.0%             3.1%             9.1%            15.4%                0.0%               4.8%            6.3%        11.1%                 0.0%            8.3%
 Environmental sustainability and natural resource management            0.0%             6.3%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%               4.8%            6.3%         0.0%                10.0%            8.3%
 Health                                                                 25.0%            12.5%             18.2%           15.4%               13.3%               16.7%          12.5%        22.2%                10.0%            2.8%
 Strengthening property rights                                          25.0%             6.3%             36.4%           23.1%                6.7%               7.1%            0.0%        22.2%                50.0%            8.3%
 Climate change                                                          0.0%             3.1%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%               0.0%            0.0%         0.0%                 0.0%            2.8%
 Trade and exports                                                      12.5%             3.1%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%               9.5%            0.0%        11.1%                10.0%           16.7%
 Economic growth                                                        12.5%            15.6%             18.2%           23.1%               20.0%               19.0%          12.5%        11.1%                 0.0%           19.4%
 Law and justice                                                         0.0%            18.8%             9.1%            15.4%               33.3%               9.5%            6.3%         0.0%                10.0%           13.9%
 Anti-corruption                                                        12.5%             3.1%             9.1%            15.4%                6.7%               4.8%           12.5%        22.2%                10.0%            5.6%
 Information and communications technology                               0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%               7.1%            0.0%         0.0%                 0.0%            2.8%
 Disaster management                                                     0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%               2.4%            0.0%         0.0%                 0.0%            0.0%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Albania?
 Greatest Value
                                                                     Office of President/ Employee of       Consultant on                 Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/   NGOs/                       Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Prime Minister      a Ministry        Bank project         PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research   CBOs        Media       Government Institution    Other
 Financial resources                                                        50.0%            58.1%              50.0%             69.2%            40.0%                35.7%     25.0%       66.7%              70.0%              48.6%
 Policy and economic advice                                                 37.5%            19.4%              20.0%             15.4%            33.3%                16.7%     18.8%       33.3%              10.0%              21.6%
 Technical assistance                                                        0.0%            6.5%               20.0%              0.0%             0.0%                14.3%     18.8%        0.0%               0.0%               5.4%
 Studies/analyses                                                            0.0%            3.2%               10.0%              7.7%             6.7%                 4.8%     12.5%        0.0%              10.0%               8.1%
 Training/capacity building                                                 12.5%            6.5%               0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 9.5%     12.5%        0.0%              10.0%               2.7%
 Data                                                                        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 7.1%      6.3%        0.0%               0.0%               2.7%
 Convening/facilitating                                                      0.0%            3.2%               0.0%               0.0%             6.7%                11.9%      0.0%        0.0%               0.0%               2.7%
 Ability to mobilize resources from private sector and donors                0.0%            3.2%               0.0%               7.7%            13.3%                 0.0%      6.3%        0.0%               0.0%               8.1%
 Other                                                                       0.0%            0.0%               0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%      0.0%        0.0%               0.0%               0.0%




                                                                                                                         65
The World Bank                                                                                                           Albania                                                                                   Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe i s of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Albania?
   nd
 2 Greatest Value
                                                                      Office of President/ Employee of       Consultant on                 Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/   NGOs/               Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Prime Minister      a Ministry        Bank project         PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research   CBOs    Media   Government Institution     Other
 Financial resources                                                          0.0%            0.0%               20.0%              7.7%            20.0%                14.3%     18.8%   11.1%          10.0%               13.5%
 Policy and economic advice                                                   0.0%            9.7%               10.0%             15.4%            13.3%                23.8%     25.0%   33.3%           0.0%               16.2%
 Technical assistance                                                        25.0%            19.4%              20.0%              0.0%             6.7%                21.4%      0.0%    0.0%          30.0%               29.7%
 Studies/analyses                                                            12.5%            19.4%              0.0%              15.4%             6.7%                 7.1%     25.0%   33.3%          10.0%                8.1%
 Training/capacity building                                                   0.0%            25.8%              20.0%             30.8%            26.7%                11.9%     18.8%   11.1%          10.0%               10.8%
 Data                                                                         0.0%            3.2%               0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 2.4%      6.3%    0.0%           0.0%                0.0%
 Convening/facilitating                                                      25.0%            6.5%               0.0%               7.7%             0.0%                 7.1%      0.0%    0.0%           0.0%               18.9%
 Ability to mobilize resources from private sector and donors                37.5%            16.1%              30.0%             23.1%            26.7%                11.9%      6.3%   11.1%          30.0%                2.7%
 Other                                                                        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                 0.0%      0.0%    0.0%          10.0%                0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Office of President/ Employee of   Consultant on                    Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/   NGOs/               Independent
 (Responses Combined)                                                    Prime Minister      a Ministry    Bank project     PMU              Sector/Private Bank        Research   CBOs    Media   Government Institution     Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities        12.5%            27.6%          14.3%         11.1%                   14.3%                 9.8%      6.3%   11.1%          11.1%               14.3%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                     12.5%            3.4%           42.9%          0.0%                    7.1%                12.2%      6.3%   11.1%          22.2%               11.4%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                  37.5%            27.6%          14.3%         88.9%                   21.4%                17.1%     25.0%   22.2%          22.2%               14.3%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                        0.0%            3.4%           0.0%          11.1%                    0.0%                 9.8%      6.3%   22.2%           0.0%                5.7%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                      0.0%            0.0%           0.0%           0.0%                    0.0%                 0.0%      0.0%    0.0%           0.0%                0.0%
 Not client focused                                                            0.0%            0.0%           14.3%          0.0%                    0.0%                 7.3%      6.3%    0.0%           0.0%                0.0%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                         0.0%            3.4%           14.3%          0.0%                    0.0%                14.6%      6.3%   11.1%          11.1%                0.0%
 Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the
                                                                              37.5%            17.2%          14.3%         11.1%                    35.7%               29.3%     12.5%   66.7%           0.0%               22.9%
 country
 Too influenced by developed countries                                        12.5%            13.8%          14.3%          0.0%                     7.1%               24.4%     18.8%   11.1%           44.4%              20.0%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                     12.5%            31.0%          14.3%         22.2%                    28.6%               19.5%     12.5%    0.0%           22.2%               5.7%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                    25.0%            24.1%          14.3%         33.3%                     7.1%               17.1%     6.3%    22.2%           33.3%              14.3%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                           0.0%            6.9%           0.0%           0.0%                     7.1%               9.8%      6.3%     0.0%            0.0%               5.7%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                                           0.0%            3.4%           14.3%          0.0%                     0.0%               7.3%      6.3%     0.0%            0.0%               2.9%
 Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                               25.0%            3.4%           14.3%          0.0%                    35.7%               7.3%      37.5%    0.0%            0.0%              25.7%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Albania             0.0%            20.7%          0.0%          11.1%                    21.4%               9.8%      25.0%   11.1%           11.1%              31.4%
 Other                                                                        12.5%            3.4%           0.0%          11.1%                     0.0%               4.9%      6.3%     0.0%           11.1%               2.9%




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                          66
The World Bank                                                                                                        Albania                                                                                               Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)?
  Percentage of Respondents                                            Office of President/ Employee of      Consultant on                Private Sector/ Financial  Academia/       NGOs/                         Independent
  (Responses Combined)                                                    Prime Minister       a Ministry     Bank project      PMU         Sector/Private Bank       Research        CBOs         Media      Government Institution    Other
  NGOs, Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                  12.5%              22.6%            20.0%         23.1%               6.7%               23.8%          81.3%        22.2%              10.0%             24.3%
  Local Government                                                            37.5%              51.6%            50.0%         53.8%              73.3%               42.9%          18.8%        33.3%              50.0%             45.9%
  Beneficiaries                                                               12.5%              32.3%            20.0%         46.2%               6.7%                7.1%          12.5%        11.1%              10.0%              2.7%
  Private sector                                                              62.5%              32.3%            70.0%         38.5%              80.0%               47.6%          25.0%        66.7%              60.0%             56.8%
  Donor community                                                             12.5%              16.1%            30.0%          7.7%               6.7%                9.5%          12.5%        11.1%              20.0%             13.5%
  Foundations                                                                  0.0%              6.5%             0.0%           7.7%               0.0%                9.5%          12.5%        11.1%               0.0%              8.1%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                    50.0%              6.5%             10.0%          7.7%               6.7%               38.1%          12.5%        11.1%              40.0%             16.2%
  Parliament                                                                  12.5%              3.2%             0.0%           0.0%               0.0%                7.1%          12.5%        11.1%              10.0%             16.2%
  Media                                                                        0.0%              12.9%            0.0%           7.7%              13.3%               11.9%          6.3%         22.2%               0.0%              5.4%
  Other                                                                        0.0%              3.2%             0.0%           0.0%               0.0%                0.0%          0.0%          0.0%               0.0%              5.4%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Albania, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                       67
The World Bank                                                                                                           Albania                                                                                    Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Albania in terms of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Office of President/ Employee of   Consultant on                  Private Sector/ Financial      Academia/   NGOs/               Independent
 (Responses Combined)                                                    Prime Minister      a Ministry    Bank project         PMU        Sector/Private Bank           Research   CBOs    Media   Government Institution     Other
 The World Bank works too slowly                                               0.0%            13.3%          10.0%             9.1%               0.0%                    9.5%     12.5%   11.1%          14.3%                8.8%
 The Government works inefficiently                                           37.5%            13.3%          40.0%            45.5%              64.3%                   35.7%     62.5%   22.2%          14.3%               38.2%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation        25.0%            36.7%          20.0%            27.3%              14.3%                   19.0%     25.0%   22.2%          42.9%               23.5%
 Poor donor coordination                                                      12.5%            13.3%           0.0%            36.4%               0.0%                   14.3%     12.5%    0.0%          14.3%                2.9%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                 12.5%            0.0%            0.0%            18.2%              21.4%                    4.8%      6.3%    0.0%           0.0%               11.8%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                          50.0%            13.3%          50.0%            18.2%              35.7%                   19.0%     25.0%   11.1%          28.6%               17.6%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                            25.0%            30.0%          20.0%            27.3%              35.7%                   59.5%     25.0%   66.7%          28.6%               55.9%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges              25.0%            36.7%          20.0%            18.2%              14.3%                   23.8%     18.8%    0.0%          14.3%               23.5%
 The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities
                                                                              12.5%            30.0%          10.0%             0.0%               7.1%                     11.9%   6.3%    33.3%           0.0%               11.8%
 on the ground
 Other                                                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%                     2.4%    6.3%    0.0%            14.3%              0.0%




                                                                                                                          68
The World Bank                                                                                                            Albania                                                                 Country Survey 2012

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Albania, on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                           69
The World Bank                                                                                                         Albania                                                                                             Country Survey 2012

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Albania, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge
How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Office of President/ Employee of          Consultant on                 Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                         Independent
 (Responses Combined)                                               Prime Minister         a Ministry       Bank project         PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research     CBOs           Media      Government Institution   Other
 Weekly                                                                  12.5%                3.0%             18.2%              7.7%             6.7%                11.9%        0.0%          22.2%             30.0%              5.6%
 Monthly                                                                 12.5%               15.2%             9.1%              38.5%            20.0%                28.6%       18.8%          44.4%             30.0%             11.1%
 A few times a year                                                      62.5%               75.8%             54.5%             30.8%            53.3%                45.2%       50.0%          11.1%             30.0%             58.3%
 Rarely                                                                  12.5%                6.1%             18.2%             23.1%            13.3%                11.9%       31.3%          22.2%             10.0%             22.2%
 Never                                                                    0.0%                0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             6.7%                 2.4%        0.0%           0.0%              0.0%              2.8%
When thinking about the development challenges in Albania, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?   (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                        Office of President/ Employee of      Consultant on                  Private Sector/ Financial Academia/         NGOs/                          Independent
 (Responses Combined)                                               Prime Minister        a Ministry     Bank project      PMU           Sector/Private Bank      Research          CBOs           Media     Government Institution   Other
 Public sector reform                                                     0.0%              15.6%            9.1%           7.7%                13.3%                9.5%           25.0%          11.1%              0.0%            11.1%
 Education                                                               62.5%              28.1%           27.3%          30.8%                33.3%               52.4%           37.5%          44.4%             20.0%            25.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                     12.5%              21.9%            0.0%          23.1%                40.0%               14.3%           18.8%          33.3%             20.0%            13.9%
 Foreign direct investment                                               25.0%              12.5%           27.3%          15.4%                13.3%               11.9%            6.3%          22.2%             20.0%            22.2%
 Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%              6.3%             0.0%           7.7%                 0.0%                2.4%            0.0%          11.1%              0.0%             0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          15.4%                 6.7%                9.5%            6.3%          11.1%             30.0%            13.9%
 Economic growth                                                         25.0%              21.9%           36.4%          23.1%                20.0%               28.6%           18.8%          33.3%             30.0%            13.9%
 Energy                                                                   0.0%              6.3%             9.1%           7.7%                20.0%               14.3%            6.3%          22.2%              0.0%             5.6%
 Disaster management                                                      0.0%              0.0%             9.1%           0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%            0.0%           0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                0.0%              6.3%             0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%                2.4%            6.3%           0.0%              0.0%             8.3%
 Governance                                                              25.0%              9.4%             9.1%          15.4%                20.0%                9.5%           25.0%          11.1%             20.0%            25.0%
 Social protection                                                        0.0%              21.9%            9.1%          15.4%                 0.0%                9.5%           18.8%           0.0%              0.0%             8.3%
 Climate change                                                           0.0%              3.1%             0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%                2.4%            0.0%           0.0%              0.0%             2.8%
 Law and justice                                                          0.0%              18.8%            9.1%          23.1%                26.7%               19.0%            6.3%           0.0%             10.0%            25.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                          0.0%              6.3%            18.2%          30.8%                20.0%               21.4%           31.3%          33.3%              0.0%            33.3%
 Financial markets                                                       12.5%              0.0%             0.0%          15.4%                13.3%                2.4%            6.3%           0.0%              0.0%             8.3%
 Urban development                                                        0.0%              3.1%            18.2%           7.7%                 6.7%                4.8%            0.0%          11.1%              0.0%             5.6%
 Regional integration                                                     0.0%              9.4%             0.0%           0.0%                13.3%               16.7%            6.3%           0.0%             10.0%             2.8%
 Information and communications technology                                0.0%              0.0%             9.1%           0.0%                13.3%                7.1%            0.0%           0.0%              0.0%             2.8%
 Transport                                                               12.5%              12.5%            9.1%           0.0%                 6.7%                9.5%            0.0%           0.0%              0.0%             2.8%
 Agriculture and rural development                                       37.5%              21.9%           18.2%          15.4%                 6.7%                9.5%           25.0%          33.3%             50.0%             8.3%
 Environmental sustainability and natural resource management            12.5%              6.3%             0.0%           7.7%                 0.0%                2.4%            0.0%          11.1%              0.0%             8.3%
 Public financial management                                             25.0%              12.5%           18.2%           7.7%                 6.7%                0.0%           25.0%           0.0%              0.0%            16.7%
 Job creation/employment                                                  0.0%              12.5%            0.0%           7.7%                 0.0%               11.9%            6.3%           0.0%             20.0%            11.1%
 Health                                                                  12.5%              21.9%           18.2%          15.4%                 6.7%               11.9%           12.5%           0.0%             10.0%             2.8%
 Regulatory framework                                                    12.5%              3.1%             0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%                7.1%            0.0%           0.0%             20.0%             5.6%
 Strengthening property rights                                           25.0%              9.4%            18.2%           7.7%                13.3%                4.8%            6.3%          11.1%             30.0%             2.8%

                                                                                                                       70
The World Bank                                                                                                                 Albania                              Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

In Albania, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at : (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Albania, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                                71
The World Bank                                                                                                         Albania       Country Survey 2012

E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)




                                                                                                                        72
The World Bank                                                                                                      Albania                                                                                   Country Survey 2012

F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania (continued)
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Office of President/ Employee of    Consultant on                Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/   NGOs/               Independent
 (Responses Combined)                                                  Prime Minister      a Ministry     Bank project        PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research   CBOs    Media   Government Institution     Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Albania's specific
                                                                            33.3%             13.3%          27.3%            30.8%            13.3%                17.9%     53.3%   25.0%           11.1%              36.1%
 challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                    33.3%             40.0%          18.2%            38.5%            33.3%                12.8%     20.0%   37.5%           44.4%              33.3%
 Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                          0.0%             3.3%           9.1%             15.4%             0.0%                28.2%     13.3%    0.0%            0.0%               2.8%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets           33.3%             16.7%          18.2%            23.1%            20.0%                20.5%     26.7%   25.0%           44.4%              27.8%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                      0.0%             16.7%          9.1%             15.4%             6.7%                33.3%     6.7%    50.0%           11.1%              22.2%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                            33.3%             23.3%          18.2%            15.4%            26.7%                28.2%     20.0%   37.5%           0.0%               27.8%
 Albania's economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                                    0.0%             23.3%          36.4%            15.4%            26.7%                15.4%     13.3%   0.0%            33.3%              13.9%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                   16.7%             16.7%          18.2%             0.0%            13.3%                23.1%     13.3%   0.0%            22.2%               8.3%
 Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                16.7%             10.0%          9.1%              0.0%             0.0%                10.3%     13.3%   0.0%             0.0%               5.6%
 Work faster                                                                33.3%             26.7%          9.1%             30.8%            13.3%                10.3%     6.7%    0.0%            22.2%              11.1%
 Other                                                                       0.0%             0.0%           0.0%              0.0%            20.0%                0.0%      13.3%   0.0%            11.1%               0.0%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                        Office of President/ Employee of     Consultant on                  Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/   NGOs/               Independent
 (Responses Combined)                                                Prime Minister      a Ministry     Bank project     PMU            Sector/Private Bank        Research   CBOs    Media   Government Institution     Other
 Local newspapers                                                        37.5%             40.6%            0.0%         23.1%                 46.7%                 9.8%     25.0%   33.3%          40.0%               24.3%
 International newspapers                                                25.0%             6.3%            18.2%         15.4%                  6.7%                26.8%      0.0%    0.0%          10.0%               13.5%
 Local radio                                                              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%          0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%      0.0%    0.0%           0.0%                2.7%
 International radio                                                      0.0%             0.0%             0.0%          0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%      0.0%    0.0%           0.0%                2.7%
 Local television                                                        25.0%             31.3%           63.6%         69.2%                 26.7%                12.2%     31.3%   33.3%          50.0%               29.7%
 International television                                                 0.0%             28.1%           18.2%          7.7%                 26.7%                22.0%     25.0%    0.0%           0.0%               10.8%
 Periodicals                                                             25.0%             3.1%             0.0%          0.0%                  6.7%                12.2%      6.3%   11.1%           0.0%                2.7%
 Internet                                                                75.0%             75.0%           90.9%         76.9%                 66.7%                80.5%     87.5%   66.7%          60.0%               81.1%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                0.0%             6.3%             0.0%          0.0%                  6.7%                 4.9%      6.3%   11.1%           0.0%                5.4%
 Blogs                                                                   12.5%             0.0%             0.0%          0.0%                  0.0%                 2.4%      0.0%    0.0%           0.0%                2.7%
 Mobile phones                                                            0.0%             0.0%             0.0%          0.0%                  0.0%                 2.4%      0.0%    0.0%           0.0%                2.7%
 Instant messaging                                                        0.0%             0.0%             0.0%          0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%      0.0%    0.0%           0.0%                0.0%
 Other                                                                    0.0%             6.3%             9.1%          0.0%                  6.7%                 9.8%      6.3%   11.1%          10.0%                8.1%


How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                        Office of President/ Employee of      Consultant on                 Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/   NGOs/               Independent
 (Responses Combined)                                               Prime Minister      a Ministry       Bank project         PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research   CBOs    Media   Government Institution     Other
 World Bank website                                                      62.5%            50.0%             45.5%             76.9%            57.1%                73.8%     75.0%   44.4%          60.0%               67.6%
 Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face
                                                                         37.5%            28.1%             27.3%             15.4%            42.9%                11.9%     50.0%   33.3%           30.0%              13.5%
 meetings/discussions)
 e-Newsletters                                                           12.5%            15.6%             27.3%             23.1%            35.7%                4.8%      12.5%    0.0%           10.0%              18.9%
 Instant messaging                                                        0.0%            0.0%              0.0%               7.7%             0.0%                7.1%      6.3%     0.0%            0.0%               2.7%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                               37.5%            59.4%             63.6%             23.1%            14.3%                33.3%     12.5%   22.2%           30.0%              54.1%
 World Bank Public Information Center                                     0.0%            3.1%              9.1%               0.0%             7.1%                19.0%     0.0%    22.2%            0.0%               8.1%
 World Bank publications and other written materials                     50.0%            34.4%             9.1%              38.5%            28.6%                35.7%     31.3%    0.0%           70.0%              27.0%
 Mobile phones                                                            0.0%            3.1%              0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                0.0%      0.0%    33.3%            0.0%               0.0%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                0.0%            0.0%              0.0%              15.4%             0.0%                7.1%      12.5%   22.2%            0.0%               8.1%
 Blogs                                                                    0.0%            0.0%              0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                2.4%      0.0%     0.0%            0.0%               0.0%
 Other                                                                    0.0%            0.0%              0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                0.0%      0.0%     0.0%            0.0%               0.0%



                                                                                                                    73
The World Bank                                                                                                         Albania                                                                                      Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                                    Office of President/ Employee of      Consultant on                  Private Sector/ Financial      Academia/   NGOs/                 Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Prime Minister       a Ministry      Bank project        PMU         Sector/Private Bank           Research   CBOs     Media    Government Institution   Other
 Yes                                                                       33.3%             35.5%            14.3%           58.3%                28.6%                  46.2%     25.0%    25.0%           77.8%             40.0%
 No                                                                        66.7%             64.5%            85.7%           41.7%                71.4%                  53.8%     75.0%    75.0%           22.2%             60.0%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?*
                                                                    Office of President/ Employee of       Consultant on                  Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                 Independent
  Percentage of Respondents                                            Prime Minister     a Ministry        Bank project         PMU        Sector/Private Bank        Research     CBOs     Media    Government Institution   Other
  Yes                                                                       16.7%           30.0%              0.0%              41.7%             13.3%                51.5%       14.3%    85.7%           42.9%             29.4%
  No                                                                        83.3%           70.0%             100.0%             58.3%             86.7%                48.5%       85.7%    14.3%           57.1%             70.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                                     Office of President/ Employee of      Consultant on                  Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                 Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Prime Minister      a Ministry       Bank project         PMU        Sector/Private Bank        Research      CBOs    Media    Government Institution   Other
 Yes                                                                        100.0%           100.0%              -               50.0%             50.0%                83.3%       100.0%   83.3%           100.0%            100.0%
 No                                                                          0.0%             0.0%               -               50.0%             50.0%                16.7%        0.0%    16.7%            0.0%             0.0%

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                                     Office of President/ Employee of      Consultant on                  Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                 Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Prime Minister      a Ministry       Bank project       PMU          Sector/Private Bank        Research      CBOs    Media    Government Institution   Other
 Yes                                                                        100.0%           86.7%            100.0%          100.0%               100.0%               92.7%       100.0%   100.0%          90.0%             93.9%
 No                                                                          0.0%            13.3%             0.0%            0.0%                 0.0%                 7.3%        0.0%     0.0%           10.0%              6.1%

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?
                                                                     Office of President/ Employee of      Consultant on                  Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                 Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Prime Minister      a Ministry       Bank project         PMU        Sector/Private Bank        Research      CBOs    Media    Government Institution   Other
 Yes                                                                        100.0%           96.7%             90.0%             84.6%             93.3%                90.5%       100.0%   100.0%          80.0%             88.6%
 No                                                                          0.0%            3.3%              10.0%             15.4%              6.7%                 9.5%        0.0%     0.0%           20.0%             11.4%

Which do you primarily use?
                                                                     Office of President/ Employee of      Consultant on                  Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                 Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Prime Minister      a Ministry       Bank project         PMU        Sector/Private Bank        Research     CBOs     Media    Government Institution   Other
 The World Bank's country website                                           62.5%            64.5%             27.3%             53.8%             78.6%                70.0%       75.0%    66.7%           55.6%             54.1%
 The World Bank's main website                                              37.5%            35.5%             72.7%             46.2%             21.4%                30.0%       25.0%    33.3%           44.4%             45.9%

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Albania?
                                                                  Office of President/ Employee of         Consultant on                  Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/     NGOs/                 Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Prime Minister     a Ministry          Bank project         PMU        Sector/Private Bank        Research     CBOs     Media    Government Institution   Other
 Yes                                                                      37.5%           37.5%                45.5%             46.2%             40.0%                47.6%       12.5%    44.4%           70.0%             27.8%
 No                                                                       37.5%           46.9%                27.3%             53.8%             40.0%                42.9%       56.3%    22.2%           20.0%             52.8%
 I don’t know what a PIC is                                               25.0%           15.6%                27.3%              0.0%             20.0%                 9.5%       31.3%    33.3%           10.0%             19.4%




                                                                                                                        74
The World Bank                                                                                                          Albania                                                                                 Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
                                                                    Office of President/ Employee of        Consultant on                 Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/   NGOs/               Independent
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Prime Minister     a Ministry         Bank project         PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research   CBOs    Media   Government Institution   Other
 Yes                                                                       85.7%            81.3%               90.9%             84.6%            66.7%                26.2%     31.3%   44.4%          87.5%             27.0%
 No                                                                        14.3%            18.8%               9.1%              15.4%            33.3%                73.8%     68.8%   55.6%          12.5%             73.0%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Office of President/ Employee of    Consultant on                     Private Sector/ Financial   Academia/   NGOs/               Independent
 (Responses Combined)                                                 Prime Minister      a Ministry     Bank project             PMU       Sector/Private Bank        Research   CBOs    Media   Government Institution   Other
 Observer                                                                  14.3%             0.0%           9.1%                   0.0%            26.7%                42.9%     18.8%   33.3%          11.1%             16.7%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                               42.9%            40.6%           9.1%                  30.8%            40.0%                42.9%     43.8%   66.7%          66.7%             41.7%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                  14.3%            43.8%           27.3%                 30.8%            26.7%                 7.1%     43.8%    0.0%           0.0%             16.7%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                             42.9%            50.0%           72.7%                 76.9%            26.7%                16.7%     25.0%   22.2%          66.7%             27.8%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.              28.6%            15.6%           18.2%                 30.8%            33.3%                66.7%     43.8%   33.3%          22.2%             58.3%




                                                                                                                         75
The World Bank                                                                     Albania                                                   Country Survey 2012




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Year 1
                             FY ’10 Response Number = 200  FY ’12 Response Number = 198
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between country surveys.

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second grea test value in Albania?
    Greatest Value
  Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY 2010               FY 2012
  Financial resources*                                                         35.0%                 48.5%
  Policy and economic advice                                                   23.5%                 20.6%
  Technical assistance                                                         12.0%                 7.7%
  Studies/analyses                                                             16.0%                 6.7%
  Training/capacity building                                                   4.5%                  5.7%
  Data**                                                                          -                  2.6%
  Convening/facilitating                                                       2.5%                  4.1%
  Ability to mobilize resources from private sector and donors                 1.5%                  4.1%
  Other                                                                        5.0%                  0.0%
*Includes “Lending when others won’t” and “Financial resources” response options from the FY 2010 questionnaire. **Not included in FY 2010 questionnaire.

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Albania?
    2nd Greatest Value
  Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY 2010               FY 2012
  Financial resources*                                                         32.3%                 11.3%
  Policy and economic advice                                                   12.1%                 16.5%
  Technical assistance                                                         16.7%                 18.0%
  Studies/analyses                                                             8.6%                  12.4%
  Training/capacity building                                                   8.1%                  16.5%
  Data**                                                                          -                  1.5%
  Convening/facilitating                                                       5.6%                  8.2%
  Ability to mobilize resources from private sector and donors                 9.6%                  14.9%
  Other                                                                        7.1%                  0.5%
*Includes “Lending when others won’t” and “Financial resources” response options from the FY 2010 questionnaire. **Not included in FY 2010 questionnaire.

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                     FY 2010                 FY 2012
  Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities     29.3%                   14.9%
  Not exploring alternative policy options                                  31.9%                   11.0%
  Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures               38.2%                   23.8%
  Staff too inaccessible                                                     5.2%                   6.1%
  Arrogant in its approach                                                   1.6%                   0.0%
  Not client focused*                                                          -                    3.3%
  The credibility of its knowledge/data                                        -                    6.1%
  Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the
                                                                               -                    24.3%
  country*
  Too influenced by developed countries*                                       -                    17.7%
  Not enough public disclosure of its work                                  41.9%                   17.1%
  World Bank processes too slow and complex*                                   -                    18.8%
  Not aligned with country priorities*                                         -                    5.5%
  Not aligned with other donors’ work*                                         -                    3.9%
  Not collaborating enough with non-state actors*                              -                    14.9%
  Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Albania*           -                    17.1%
  Other                                                                     30.9%                   4.4%
* Not included in FY 2010 questionnaire.




1
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’10 and FY ’12 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.



                                                                                      76
The World Bank                                                               Albania                                                        Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank
In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate
with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)?
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                          FY 2010              FY 2012
  NGOs, Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                     27.1%                25.1%
  Local Government                                                               44.2%                46.7%
  Beneficiaries                                                                  24.1%                14.9%
  Private sector                                                                 42.2%                49.2%
  Donor community                                                                13.1%                13.3%
  Foundations*                                                                      -                 7.2%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes*                                         -                 19.5%
  Parliament                                                                      5.5%                8.2%
  Media*                                                                            -                 8.7%
  Other                                                                          32.2%                1.5%
* Not included in FY 2010 questionnaire.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Albania, on a ten point scale?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.



C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Albania, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between country surveys.




                                                                               77
The World Bank                                                              Albania                                                     Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge
When thinking about the development challenges in Albania, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and
    knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                    FY 2010                FY 2012
  Public sector reform                                                      6.1%                  11.7%
  Education                                                                25.5%                  35.2%
  Domestic private sector development                                       6.1%                  18.9%
  Foreign direct investment*                                                  -                   16.3%
  Water and sanitation                                                      5.1%                  2.6%
  Trade and exports*                                                          -                   8.7%
  Economic growth*                                                            -                   23.5%
  Energy                                                                    9.2%                  9.2%
  Disaster management*                                                        -                   1.0%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                                 3.6%                  4.1%
  Governance                                                               13.3%                  16.3%
  Social protection                                                         7.7%                  10.2%
  Climate change*                                                             -                   1.5%
  Law and justice*                                                            -                   16.8%
  Anti-corruption                                                          12.2%                  20.4%
  Financial markets                                                         6.6%                  5.1%
  Urban development                                                         6.6%                  5.1%
  Regional integration*                                                       -                   7.7%
  Information and communications technology*                                  -                   4.6%
  Transport                                                                 4.1%                  6.6%
  Agriculture and rural development                                        19.9%                  17.3%
  Environmental sustainability and natural resource management              8.2%                  5.1%
  Public financial management                                              12.2%                  10.7%
  Job creation/employment                                                  16.8%                  8.7%
  Health                                                                   10.7%                  11.2%
  Regulatory framework*                                                       -                   4.6%
  Strengthening property rights*                                              -                   9.2%
* Not included in FY 2010 questionnaire.



E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.



F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)




                                                                              78
The World Bank                                                              Albania                                            Country Survey 2012




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Albania (continued)
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                                      FY 2010              FY 2012
  Improve the quality of its experts as related to Albania's specific challenges             25.9%                24.7%
  Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                    29.0%                29.0%
  Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                          2.6%                10.2%
  Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                           13.0%                23.1%
  Ensure greater selectivity in its work*                                                       -                 19.9%
  Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Albania's economy*                 -                 24.2%
  Offer more innovative financial products                                                   13.5%                18.8%
  Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                    9.8%                14.0%
  Increase availability of Fee-Based services*                                                  -                 7.0%
  Work faster*                                                                                  -                 15.1%
  Other                                                                                       6.2%                3.8%
* Not included in FY 2010 questionnaire.

G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                     FY 2010               FY 2012
 Local newspapers                                                          30.5%                 26.0%
 International newspapers                                                  9.6%                  13.8%
 Local radio                                                               1.5%                   0.5%
 International radio                                                       2.5%                   0.5%
 Local television                                                          38.6%                 31.6%
 International television                                                  11.2%                 17.3%
 Periodicals                                                               9.1%                   6.1%
 Internet                                                                  64.0%                 77.0%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)*                                   -                   4.6%
 Blogs                                                                     13.2%                  2.0%
 Mobile phones*                                                               -                   1.0%
 Instant messaging*                                                           -                   0.0%
 Other                                                                     9.6%                   7.1%
*Not included in FY 2010 questionnaire.

Do you have access to the Internet?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY 2010                FY 2012
  Yes                                                                          99.0%                  94.0%
  No                                                                           0.5%                   6.0%
*Significantly different between country surveys.
Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    FY 2010                FY 2012
 Yes                                                                           92.2%                  91.0%
 No                                                                            7.8%                   9.0%

Which do you primarily use?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    FY 2010                FY 2012
 The World Bank's country website (www. worldbank.org.al)                      60.3%                  62.3%
 The World Bank's main website (www.worldbank.org)                             39.7%                  37.7%

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Albania?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  FY 2010                  FY 2012
 Yes                                                                         45.6%                    38.5%
 No                                                                          35.8%                    44.6%
 I don’t know what a PIC is                                                  18.7%                    16.9%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.




                                                                              79
The World Bank                                                                                        Albania                                                                      Country Survey 2012




Appendix D: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank
                                                 H3. Currently, do you
                                                                              H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              professionally collaborate/
                                              work with the World Bank?             Observer             Use WB reports/data   Engage in WB activities       Collaborate         Use WB website

Indicator Question                             No Mean         Yes Mean     No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                 6.30            7.72        7.18              6.54       7.10         6.99      6.95          7.40       6.83         7.43     7.20         6.84
World Bank’s effectiveness in Albania.
The World Bank’s financial instruments
                                                 5.79            7.35        6.71              6.15       6.66         6.53      6.61          6.58       6.45         6.88     6.64         6.56
meet the needs of Albania
The World Bank meets Albania’s needs for
                                                 6.12            7.49        6.91              6.46       6.87         6.74      6.75          7.03       6.48         7.38     6.98         6.59
knowledge services
Overall the World Bank currently plays a
                                                 6.36            7.79        7.22              6.56       7.11         7.06      6.95          7.56       6.88         7.44     7.35         6.72
relevant role in development in Albania
The World Bank’s work is aligned with
what I consider the development priorities       6.04            7.49        6.98              5.88       6.91         6.56      6.51          7.61       6.40         7.35     7.03         6.41
for Albania
Responsiveness                                   7.29            8.44        7.99              7.54       7.92         7.88      7.81          8.22       7.82         8.04     8.01         7.75
Openness (sharing data and other
                                                 6.65            7.65        7.28              6.49       7.04         7.24      6.96          7.71       6.93         7.45     7.41         6.72
information)
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                 6.42            7.34        7.06              6.07       7.02         6.72      6.85          7.03       6.65         7.35     7.02         6.72
Government
Collaboration with the Government                7.47            8.57        8.27              6.97       8.13         7.93      7.93          8.43       7.70         8.59     8.29         7.71
Collaboration with other donors                  6.69            7.99        7.74              5.80       7.29         7.59      7.29          7.85       7.10         7.87     7.59         7.17
To what extent does the World Bank’s work
help to achieve development results in           6.48            7.78        7.27              6.61       7.33         6.90      7.11          7.27       6.81         7.71     7.27         6.97
Albania?
Are adaptable to Albania's specific
development challenges and country               6.52            7.87        7.33              6.68       7.22         7.19      7.11          7.54       6.96         7.64     7.39         6.95
circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do
you believe the World Bank’s knowledge
                                                 6.94            8.36        7.76              7.35       7.79         7.54      7.64          7.83       7.39         8.16     7.86         7.43
and research make to development results
in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank’s                      7.63            8.56        8.14              7.91       8.04         8.18      8.08          8.16       7.85         8.49     8.26         7.86
knowledge/research?
Where country systems are adequate, the
World Bank makes appropriate use of              6.96            8.06        7.79              6.42       7.54         7.58      7.37          8.16       7.26         8.02     7.67         7.41
them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.




                                                                                                       80
The World Bank                                       Albania                                    Country Survey 2012



Appendix E: Albania FY 2012 Questionnaire




                              World Bank Country Survey FY12 – Albania


The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Albania or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey is meant to give the World Bank’s team that works in Albania, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank uses to assess the views of its critical stakeholders. With this
understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies, outreach and programs that support
development in Albania. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm to oversee the logistics of this
effort in Albania. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the survey,
please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion. If you prefer not to answer a
question, please leave it blank.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING ALBANIA

 A1. In general would you say that Albania is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                       81
The World Bank                                             Albania                                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important
 in Albania? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most important
 priority?
                                                                       FIRST priority     SECOND priority      THIRD priority
 Choose only ONE for each column                                     (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)
 1    Agriculture and rural development                                                                         
 2    Education                                                                                                 
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 3                                                                                                              
      assistance)
 4    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                          
 5    Public sector reform                                                                                      
 6    Regional integration                                                                                      
 7    Strengthening property rights                                                                             
 8    Domestic private sector development                                                                       
 9    Foreign direct investment                                                                                 
 10   Water and sanitation                                                                                      
 11   Anti-corruption                                                                                           
 12   Monitoring and evaluation                                                                                 
      Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure,
 13                                                                                                             
      fiscal system reform)
 14   Job creation/employment                                                                                   
 15   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)                                                               
 16   Financial markets                                                                                         
 17   Urban development                                                                                         
      Environmental sustainability and natural resource
 18                                                                                                             
      management
 19   Health                                                                                                    
 20   Energy                                                                                                    
 21   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                             
 22   Trade and exports                                                                                         
 23   Economic growth                                                                                           
 24   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                                   
 25   Regulatory framework                                                                                      
 26   Disaster management                                                                                       
 27   Information and communications technology                                                                 




                                                               82
The World Bank                                               Albania                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A3. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic
 growth in Albania? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy
 2    Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 3    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 4    Anti corruption
 5    Disaster management
 6    Agriculture and rural development
 7    Foreign direct investment
 8    Urban development
 9    Water and sanitation
 10   Education
 11   Information and communications technology
 12   Regulatory framework
 13   Trade and exports
 14   Public sector reform
 15   Regional integration
 16   Domestic private sector development
 17   Job creation/employment
 18   Strengthening property rights
 19   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)
 20   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 21   Monitoring and evaluation
 22   Environmental sustainability and natural resource management
 23   Health
 24   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 25   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 26   Financial markets




                                                               83
The World Bank                                              Albania                                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Albania, on a ten point scale?
         1              2       3       4       5       6          7       8           9               10

 Not familiar at all                                                                           Extremely familiar




 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in Albania, on a
 ten point scale?
          1             2   3       4       5       6   7       8      9                10                  

 Not effective at all                                                                Very effective    Don't know




 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank's staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Albania solve its most complicated development challenges, on a ten
 point scale?
          1             2   3       4       5       6   7       8      9                10                  
                                                                               To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                   Don't know
                                                                                            degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                              84
The World Bank                                               Albania                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development
 results in Albania, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most
 of its attention and resources in Albania? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Education
 2    Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 3    Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)
 4    Agriculture and rural development
 5    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 6    Public sector reform
 7    Regional integration
 8    Domestic private sector development
 9    Foreign direct investment
 10   Regulatory framework
 11   Water and sanitation
 12   Energy
 13   Monitoring and evaluation
 14   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 15   Job creation/employment
 16   Financial markets
 17   Urban development
 18   Environmental sustainability and natural resource management
 19   Health
 20   Strengthening property rights
 21   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 22   Trade and exports
 23   Economic growth
 24   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 25   Anti corruption
 26   Information and communications technology
 27   Disaster management




                                                               85
The World Bank                                                Albania                                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and
 which activity is of second greatest value in Albania?
                                                                        Greatest Value   Second Greatest Value
                                                               (Choose only ONE) (Choose only ONE)
 1    Financial resources                                                                       
 2    Policy and economic advice                                                                
 3    Technical assistance                                                                      
 4    Studies/analyses                                                                          
 5    Training/capacity building                                                                
 6    Data                                                                                      
 7    Convening/facilitating                                                                    
      Ability to mobilize resources from private sector
 8                                                                                              
      and donors
 9    Other (please specify):_______________________                                            



 B6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 4    Staff too inaccessible
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not client focused
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12   Not aligned with country priorities
 13   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 14   Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 15   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Albania
 16   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________




                                                                86
The World Bank                                             Albania                                                         Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the global
 development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate change, communicable
 diseases, international financial systems, trade, etc.), on a ten point scale?
         1              2   3      4       5       6      7           8        9               10                     
 To no degree at                                                                                To a very
                                                                                                                Don't know
 all                                                                                   significant degree




 B8. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor,
 which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your
 country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     NGOs, Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 2     Local Government
 3     Beneficiaries
 4     Private sector
 5     Donor community
 6     Foundations
 7     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 8     Parliament
 9     Media
 10    Other (please specify): __________________________



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Albania, on
 a ten point scale?
                                                                    Strongly                                          Strongly   Don't
                                                                    disagree                                             agree   know
        Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
  B9                                                                 1     2       3   4   5    6   7       8     9        10      
        role in development in Albania
        The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
 B10                                                                 1     2       3   4   5    6   7       8     9        10      
        consider the development priorities for this country
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies
 B11                                                                 1     2       3   4   5    6   7       8     9        10      
        that are realistic for Albania
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
 B12                                                                 1     2       3   4   5    6   7       8     9        10      
        Albania with respect




                                                               87
The World Bank                                                Albania                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Albania, in terms of each of the
 following?
                                                                     To no                                To a very
                                                                                                                       Don't
                                                                     degree at                           significant
                                                                                                                       know
                                                                     all                                    degree
 B13     Responsiveness                                               1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products
 B14                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         and services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B15                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         circumstances)
 B16     Being inclusive                                              1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       

 B17     Openness (sharing data and other information)                1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       

 B18     Staff accessibility                                          1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       

 B19     Straightforwardness and honesty                              1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B20                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B21     Collaboration with the Government                            1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       

 B22     Collaboration with other donors                              1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       

 B23     Follow through over time                                     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       



 B24. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank works too slowly
 2     The Government works inefficiently
 3     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4     Poor donor coordination
 5     The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 6     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 7     Political pressures and obstacles
 8     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 9     The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                88
The World Bank                                               Albania                                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
 development in Albania, on a ten point scale?
                                                                    Not effective                                   Very    Don't
                                                                    at all                                      effective   know
  C1    Anti corruption                                              1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C2    Information and communications technology                    1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C4    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C5    Urban development                                            1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Environmental sustainability and natural resource
  C6                                                                 1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        management
  C7    Regulatory framework                                         1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C8    Domestic private sector development                          1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C9    Foreign direct investment                                    1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C10    Water and sanitation                                         1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C11    Trade and exports                                            1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C12    Economic growth                                              1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C13    Energy                                                       1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C14    Disaster management                                          1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C15    Monitoring and evaluation                                    1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Public financial management (e.g., public
 C16                                                                 1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 C17    Job creation/employment                                      1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C18    Financial markets                                            1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C19    Health                                                       1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C20    Agriculture and rural development                            1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C21    Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)                  1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C22    Strengthening property rights                                1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C23    Education                                                    1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 C24                                                                 1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        assistance)
 C25    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C26    Public sector reform                                         1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C27    Regional integration                                         1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                               89
The World Bank                                               Albania                                                    Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C28. To what extent does the World Bank’s work help to achieve development results in
 Albania, on a ten point scale?
        1            2      3      4       5       6         7         8       9               10               
 To no degree at                                                                                To a very
                                                                                                            Don't know
 all                                                                                   significant degree




 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Albania, on a
 ten point scale?
                                                        Strongly                                             Strongly      Don't
                                                        disagree                                                agree      know
        The World Bank's financial instruments (i.e.,
        investment lending, Development Policy
 C29                                                     1       2         3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10        
        Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.)
        meet the needs of Albania
        The World Bank meets Albania’s needs for
 C30    knowledge services (e.g., research, analysis,    1       2         3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10        
        data, technical assistance)




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                 90
The World Bank                                               Albania                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research (e.g., data, analysis,
 reports) in the work you do?
 1    Weekly
 2    Monthly
 3    A few times a year
 4    Rarely
 5    Never



 D2. When thinking about the development challenges in Albania, where do you believe it would be
 most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?
 (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Public sector reform
 2    Education
 3    Domestic private sector development
 4    Foreign direct investment
 5    Water and sanitation
 6    Trade and exports
 7    Economic growth
 8    Energy
 9    Disaster management
 10   Monitoring and evaluation
 11   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)
 12   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 13   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 14   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 15   Anti corruption
 16   Financial markets
 17   Urban development
 18   Regional integration
 19   Information and communications technology
 20   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 21   Agriculture and rural development
 22   Environmental sustainability and natural resource management
 23   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 24   Job creation/employment
 25   Health
 26   Regulatory framework
 27   Strengthening property rights




                                                               91
The World Bank                                                 Albania                                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE
 In Albania, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at:
                                                          Not
                                                                                                                     Very    Don't
                                                          effective
                                                                                                                 effective   know
                                                          at all
 D3    Raising your awareness of the particular topic      1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
 D4    Stimulating public debate/dialogue                  1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
 D5    Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills              1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
 D6    Contributing to good policy making                  1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
       Providing support for program
 D7                                                        1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
       implementation


 In Albania, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research:
                                                          To no                                               To a very
                                                                                                                             Don't
                                                          degree at                                          significant
                                                                                                                             know
                                                          all                                                   degree
  D8     Are timely                                        1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D9                                                       1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Albania’s development
 D10                                                       1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
         priorities
 D11     Provide feasible recommendations                  1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D12                                                       1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
         understand)
         A source of relevant information on global
 D13                                                       1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
         good practices
 D14     Are adequately disseminated                       1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
 D15     Are appropriately translated                      1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
         Are adaptable to Albania’s specific
 D16     development challenges and country                1       2         3   4   5      6        7   8   9        10      
         circumstances



 D17. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge and
 research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?
           1              2    3     4      5         6        7         8       9              10                  

 Not significant at all                                                                   Very significant   Don't know




 D18. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's knowledge/research,
 on a ten point scale?
           1              2    3     4       5        6        7         8       9              10                  
 Very low technical                                                                             Very high
                                                                                                             Don't know
 quality                                                                                 technical quality




                                                                   92
The World Bank                                              Albania                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale?
                                                       Strongly                                   Strongly   Don't
                                                       disagree                                      agree   know
  E1    The World Bank disburses funds promptly         1       2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        The World Bank effectively monitors and
  E2    evaluates the projects and programs it          1       2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        supports
        The World Bank's approvals and reviews are
  E3                                                    1       2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        done in a timely fashion
        The World Bank's “Safeguard Policy”
  E4                                                    1       2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        requirements are reasonable
        The World Bank imposes reasonable
  E5                                                    1       2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        conditions on its lending
        Working with the World Bank increases
  E6                                                    1       2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Albania’s institutional capacity
        The World Bank ensures consistency and
  E7                                                    1       2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        continuity through staff changes
        The World Bank's teams and visits are well
  E8                                                    1       2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        coordinated
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
        financial management, etc.) are adequate,
  E9                                                    1       2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        the World Bank makes appropriate use of
        them
        The World Bank provides effective
 E10    implementation support (i.e., supervision of    1       2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        projects)




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                              93
The World Bank                                                 Albania                                        Country Survey 2012



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN ALBANIA

 F1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play in Albania’s
 development in the near future, on a ten point scale?
        1            2       3       4         5    6      7             8   9          10               
 Not a significant                                                                Very significant
                                                                                                     Don't know
 role at all                                                                                  role



 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in
 Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Albania’s specific challenges
 2    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3    Focus primarily on advocacy issues
      Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, and other
 4
      terms)
 5    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 6    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Albania’s economy
 7    Offer more innovative financial products
 8    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9    Increase availability of Fee-Based services
 10   Work faster
 11   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                                 94
The World Bank                                              Albania                                     Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues
 in Albania? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?             (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2     Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Public Information Center
 7    World Bank publications and other written materials
 8    Mobile phones
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________



       Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will
 G3                                                                                               Yes        No
       now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 G4                                                                                               Yes        No
       (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                  Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                        Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?                                           Yes        No




                                                              95
The World Bank                                              Albania                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use?
 1     The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org.al)
 2     The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 G9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Albania?
 1     Yes
 2     No
 3     I don’t know what PIC is



 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                                      Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                      disagree                              agree   know
         I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the
 G10                                                                   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         organization's Open Data policy
         The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of
 G11     information related to development in Albania. (Only          1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used the PIC)
         I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only
 G12                                                                   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used a World Bank website)
         I find the information on the World Bank’s websites
 G13     useful. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank            1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         website)
         When I need information from the World Bank I know
 G14     how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them,      1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         etc.)
         The World Bank is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                              96
The World Bank                                             Albania                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?          (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian
 2    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 3    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 4    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 5    Local Government Office or Staff
 6    Bilateral Agency or Multilateral Agency
 7    Private Sector Organization, Financial Sector/Private Bank
 8    Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 9    NGOs, including CBOs (Community Based Organization)
 10   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 11   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 12   Trade Union
 13   Judiciary Branch
 14   Other (please specify): ____________________________________________




                                                             97
The World Bank                                               Albania                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only ONE response)
 1    Agriculture and rural development
 2    Anti corruption
 3    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 4    Disaster management
 5    Domestic private sector development
 6    Economic growth
 7    Education
 8    Energy
 9    Environmental sustainability and natural resource management
 10   Financial markets
 11   Foreign direct investment
 12   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)
 13   Health
 14   Information and communications technology
 15   Job creation/employment
 16   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 17   Monitoring and evaluation
 18   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 19   Public sector reform
 20   Regional integration
 21   Regulatory framework
 22   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 23   Strengthening property rights
 24   Trade and exports
 25   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 26   Urban development
 27   Water and sanitation
 28   Other (please specify): _____________________________________________




                                                               98
The World Bank                                               Albania                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No



 H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Albania?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.



 H5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Tirana and Durres
 2    North Albania
 3    Central Albania
 4    South Albania




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               99
