                            88147




Burundi Country Opinion
    Survey Report

  (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                        Burundi                                     Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. General Issues facing Burundi ...................................................10
          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank .................................14
         VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................20
        VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments ..................................23
       VIII. How the World Bank Operates ..................................................33
         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi ..........................39
          X. Communication and Openness..................................................43
         XI. Appendices ................................................................................51




                                                          2
The World Bank                               Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in Burundi
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Burundi regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Burundi;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in Burundi;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank ’s effectiveness and results, knowledge
               and research, and communication and information sharing in Burundi; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in Burundi.

       Use data to help inform the Burundi country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In April and May 2012, 581 stakeholders of the World Bank in Burundi were invited to provide
their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country survey.
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime Minister;
the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; the 1st Vice President of the Republic
Cabinet; the 2nd Vice President of the Republic Cabinet; employees of a ministry, ministerial
department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World Bank
supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a
project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral agencies; private
sector organizations; private foundations; financial sector/private banks; NGOs; community-
based organizations; the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-based
groups; academia, research institutes or think tanks; and the judiciary branch. A total of 325
stakeholders participated in the country survey (56%).

Respondents either completed the questionnaire with a representative from the local fielding
agency or received the questionnaire via courier and returned the completed questionnaire
accordingly. Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Burundi, their overall attitudes
toward the Bank; the World Bank’s effectiveness and results; the Bank’s knowledge; working
with the World Bank; the Bank’s future role in Burundi, and the Bank’s communicat ion and
information sharing in Burundi:




                                                3
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)
A. General Issues facing Burundi: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Burundi is
   headed in the right direction, what they thought were the top three most important
   development priorities, and which areas would contribute most to poverty reduction and
   economic growth.
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their familiarity
   with the World Bank, the Bank’s effectiveness in Burundi, the extent to which the Bank
   meets Burundi’s need for knowledge services and financial instruments, the extent to which
   the Bank should and does seek to influence the global development agenda, their agreement
   with various statements regarding the Bank’s work in Burundi, and the extent to which the
   Bank is an effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the
   sectoral areas on which it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its resources, the
   Bank’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses in its work, the Bank instruments that are
   most and least effective in reducing poverty, with which groups the Bank should work more,
   and to what reasons respondents attributed failed or slow reform efforts.
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
   the Bank’s work helps achieve sustainable development results in Burundi and the Bank’s
   level of effectiveness across forty development areas, such as poverty reduction, anti-
   corruption, and economic growth.
D. The World Bank’s Knowledge: Respondents were asked to indicate the areas on which the
   Bank should focus its research efforts and to rate the effectiveness and quality of the Bank’s
   knowledge/research, including how significant of a contribution the Bank’s knowledge and
   research make to development results, the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge and
   research, and the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which the Bank
   is adequately staffed in Burundi as well as their level of agreement with a series of statements
   regarding working with the Bank, such as the World Bank safeguard policies requirements
   being reasonable and the Bank disburses funds promptly.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi: Respondents were asked to rate how
   significant a role the Bank should play in Burundi’s development over the medium term and
   to indicate what the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Burundi.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate where they
   get information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their access to the Internet, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s website and PICs. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s
   Access to Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of
   agreement that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data
   policy. Respondents were also asked their level of agreement that they know how to find
   information from the Bank and that the Bank is responsive to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank, their exposure
   to the Bank in Burundi, and their geographic location.



                                                 4
The World Bank                               Burundi                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
    For further analyses: the small number of respondents from the office of the President,
       the office of a Minister, 1st Vice President of the Republic Cabinet, and 2nd Vice
       President of the Republic Cabinet were combined into one group; the small number of
       respondents from community-based organizations were combined with those from
       NGOs; respondents from bilateral agencies were combined with those from multilateral
       agencies; respondents from private sector organizations were combined with those from
       the financial sector and private banks; and the few respondents from the office of a
       Parliamentarian, private foundations, trade unions, faith-based groups, academia/research
       institutes/think tanks, and the judiciary branch were included in the “Other” category.




                                               5
The World Bank                   Burundi      Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                   6
The World Bank                Burundi         Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location




                                7
The World Bank                            Burundi   Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Professional Collaboration with the World Bank




Exposure to the World Bank




                                            8
The World Bank                                Burundi                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank
   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 5.9 on a
    10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar.
        Respondents from PMUs indicated the highest levels of familiarity whereas
           employees of ministries and respondents from NGOs/CBOs, the media, independent
           government institutions, private sector/financial sector/private banks, and other
           organizations indicated significantly lower levels.
        Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings of
           familiarity with the World Bank.
        It should be noted that respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the Bank were
           significantly, moderately correlated with their impressions of the Bank’s overall
           effectiveness and their perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
           development results in Burundi, as well as significantly correlated with and the
           Bank’s relevance to Burundi’s development.




                                                9
The World Bank                               Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Burundi

Headed in the Right Direction

       When asked whether Burundi was headed in the right or wrong direction, three-quarters
        of all respondents indicated that Burundi was headed in the right direction.
             A majority of respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as all geographic
              locations indicated that Burundi was headed in the right direction.




                                                10
The World Bank                               Burundi                            Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)

Development Priority

       Respondents indicated that rural development and education were the most important
        development priorities in Burundi. Anti-corruption, poverty reduction, and energy were
        also considered top priorities.




                                               11
The World Bank                              Burundi                           Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)

Poverty Reduction

       Respondents indicated that economic growth would contribute most to poverty reduction
        in Burundi. Agricultural development, education, and rural development were also
        considered key contributors to poverty reduction.




                                              12
The World Bank                              Burundi                           Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)

Economic Growth

       Half of all respondents indicated that energy would contribute most to generating
        economic growth in Burundi. Anti-corruption, agricultural development and education
        were also identified as key to economic growth.




                                              13
The World Bank                               Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Focusing World Bank Resources

       Respondents indicated that the Bank would have the most impact on development results
        in Burundi by focusing most of its attention and resources on rural development, energy,
        and education. Poverty reduction and agricultural development were also seen as key.




                                               14
The World Bank                                 Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Overall Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, ratings of the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Burundi
        received a mean rating of 7.0 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10
        being very effective.
             Respondents from PMUs gave the highest ratings for the World Bank’s overall
              effectiveness in Burundi whereas respondents from the media and independent
              government institutions gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Central and Southern Burundi gave the highest ratings for the
              World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Burundi whereas respondents from
              Northern Burundi gave significantly lower ratings.




                                                 15
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Achieving Sustainable Development Results

       Across all respondents, the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results
        in Burundi received a mean rating of 7.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at
        all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Consultants on Bank projects gave the highest ratings for the World Bank helping
              achieve sustainable development results in Burundi whereas respondents from
              independent government institutions gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for
              the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results in Burundi.




                                                16
The World Bank                                Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest value to Burundi was its
        financial resources. The Bank’s strategy formulation, training/capacity building,
        mobilization of third party financial resources, and donor coordination were also
        considered of great value to Burundi.




                                                17
The World Bank                                 Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Burundi were
        imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities, being too influenced
        by developed countries, not collaborating enough with non-state actors, and not enough
        public disclosure of its work.




                                                 18
The World Bank                                 Burundi                               Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, respondents
        indicated that they most often attribute this to reforms not being well thought out in light
        of country challenges or the government working inefficiently. Respondents also
        sometimes attributed failed or slow reform efforts to political pressures and obstacles or
        inadequate level of citizen/ civil society participation.
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups and geographic locations attributed
              failed or slow reform efforts to reforms not being well thought out, the
              government working inefficiently, or inadequate level of citizen/ civil society
              participation, except respondents from the media who were more likely to
              attribute it to poor donor coordination and respondents from Northern Burundi
              who were more likely to attribute it to inadequate funding.




                                                 19
The World Bank                              Burundi                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Specific Areas of Effectiveness
    Respondents saw the Bank as most effective at health, receiving a mean rating of 6.8 on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not effective at all and 10 being very effective.




                                              20
The World Bank                                 Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       There were four instances in which there were significant stakeholder differences in their
        ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness across these forty areas:
             Respondents from local government had the highest ratings for the Bank’s
                effectiveness at “Law and justice” whereas consultants on Bank projects had
                significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from local government and NGOs/CBOs had the highest ratings for
                the Bank’s effectiveness at “Local governance and institutions” whereas
                respondents from the office of the President/Minister/1 st or 2nd Vice President had
                significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from NGOs/CBOs had the highest ratings for the Bank’s
                effectiveness at “Job creation/employment” whereas respondents from the media
                and independent government institutions had significantly lower ratings.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from local government and PMUs had
                the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at “Education” whereas
                respondents from the office of the President/Minister/1 st or 2nd Vice President,
                NGOs/CBOs, and independent government institutions had significantly lower
                ratings.

       There were also significant differences between geographic locations in their ratings of
        the Bank’s effectiveness across several of these forty areas. For the most part,
        respondents from Central and Western Burundi had the highest ratings across these areas
        whereas respondents from Eastern and Southern Burundi had significantly lower ratings.
        Those areas with significant differences between geographic locations were:
             “Communicable/non-communicable disease”;
             “Poverty reduction”;
             “Trade and exports”;
             “Energy”;
             “Social cohesion”;
             “Financial markets”;
             “Equality of opportunity”;
             “Global integration”;
             “Governance”;
             “Food security”;
             “Education”;
             “Security/stabilization/reconstruction”;
             “Climate change”;
             “Public sector reform”;
             “Regional integration”; and
             “Agricultural development”.

       Responses across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations can be found in the
        Appendix.


                                                 21
The World Bank                                 Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness and
ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable development results in Burundi, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the forty specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help achieve s ustainable
development results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of
effectiveness in one specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness or perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Burundi. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at environmental sustainability;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at poverty reduction;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at security/stabilization/reconstruction; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth.


       Achieving Sustainable Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest
        Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results in
        Burundi, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sust ainable development results. The
        areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at poverty reduction;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at basic infrastructure; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at local governance and institutions.




                                                 22
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments

Knowledge: Meeting Burundi’s Knowledge Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank meets Burundi’s needs for
        knowledge services received a mean rating of 6.5 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from all geographic
              locations, gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank meeting Burundi’s needs
              for knowledge services.




                                                23
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Knowledge: Focusing Bank Research
       Respondents indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
        and knowledge efforts on energy, agricultural development, and economic growth.
        Research on poverty reduction, education, domestic private sector development, and
        anti-corruption was also considered valuable.




                                                24
The World Bank                               Burundi                            Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, the effectiveness of the World Bank’s knowledge and research to
        provide support for program implementation received the highest mean rating, 6.7, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents from PMUs, local government, and bilateral and multilateral
              agencies gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge
              and research to raise awareness of a particular topic whereas respondents from the
              office of the President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President and the media gave
              significantly lower ratings. Respondents across all stakeholder groups had
              statistically similar ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and
              research in all other areas.
             Respondents from Eastern and Northern Burundi gave significantly lower ratings
              for the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research to raise awareness of a
              particular topic compared to respondents from Western, Southern, and Central
              Burundi. Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar
              ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research in all other
              areas.




                                               25
The World Bank                                Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Qualities

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s knowledge and research being a source of
        relevant information on global good practices received the highest mean rating, 6.9, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from PMUs gave the highest
              ratings for the extent to which the Bank’s knowledge and research provide
              feasible recommendations whereas respondents from the office of the
              President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President and independent government
              institutions gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents across all stakeholder
              groups had statistically similar ratings for the other qualities of the World Bank’s
              knowledge and research.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for
              these qualities of the World Bank’s knowledge and research.




                                                 26
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Contribution

       Across all respondents, the significance of the contribution that the Wo rld Bank’s
        knowledge and research make to development results in Burundi received a mean rating
        of 6.6 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not significant at all and 10 being very
        significant.
             Respondents from PMUs gave the highest ratings for the contribution that the
              Bank’s knowledge and research make to development results in Burundi whereas
              respondents from NGOs/CBOs, independent government institutions, the office of
              the President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President, and the media gave significantly
              lower ratings.
             Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar significance
              ratings for the contribution that the World Bank’s knowledge and research make
              to development results in Burundi.




                                                27
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Technical Quality

       Across all respondents, the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge and
        research received a mean rating of 7.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being very low
        technical quality and 10 being very high technical quality.
             Respondents from Southern Burundi gave the highest ratings for the technical
              quality of the Bank’s knowledge and research whereas respondents from Eastern
              Burundi gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar ratings for the
              technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge and research.




                                                28
The World Bank                                 Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Linkage to Non-Bank Expertise

       Across all respondents, the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank
        expertise received a mean rating of 6.3 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at
        all and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as all geographic locations,
              gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage
              to non-Bank expertise.




                                                 29
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Most Effective

       Two-thirds of all respondents indicated that the World Bank’s investment lending was its
        most effective instrument in reducing poverty in Burundi.
             The majority of respondents across most stakeholder groups and all geographic
              locations indicated that the World Bank’s investment lending was its most
              effective instrument in reducing poverty in Burundi, except respondents from
              bilateral or multilateral agencies who indicated that the Bank’s capacity building
              was its most effective instrument in reducing poverty.




                                                30
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Instruments: Least Effective
       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s policy based lending/budget support to the
        government, analytical work, and technical assistance were the least effective in reducing
        poverty in Burundi.
            A plurality of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated the Bank’s
               policy based lending, analytical work, and technical assistance were least
               effective, except respondents from the office of the President/Minister/1st or 2nd
               Vice President who indicated that the World Bank’s capacity building was least
               effective, respondents from local government who indicated that they didn’t know
               which Bank instruments were least effective, respondents from NGOs/CBOs who
               indicated that the Bank’s co -financing arrangements were least effective, and
               respondents from the media who indicated that both the Bank’s policy based
               lending and emergency recovery lending were its least effective instruments.
            A plurality of respondents from Western, Southern, and Central Burundi indicated
               the Bank’s policy based lending was its least effective instrument in reducing
               poverty in Burundi. Respondents from Eastern Burundi, however, indicated that
               the World Bank’s emergency recovery lending was least effective and
               respondents from Northern Burundi indicated that they didn’t know which Bank
               instruments were least effective in reducing poverty in Burundi.




                                                31
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Meeting Burundi’s Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank’s financial instruments meet
        Burundi’s needs received a mean rating of 6.8 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from independent government institutions, the media, the office of
              the President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President, and private sector/financial
              sector/private banks gave significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s financial
              instruments meeting Burundi’s needs compared to respondents from other
              stakeholder groups.
             Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for
              the Bank’s financial instruments meeting Burundi’s needs.




                                                32
The World Bank                                Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates
The World Bank’s Work in Burundi
 In terms of the Bank’s work, the World Bank currently playing a relevant role in Burundi’s
   development received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.3, across all respondents, on a
   10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
    Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from PMUs and local government had the
      highest levels of agreement that the Bank is currently playing a relevant role in Burundi’s
      development whereas respondents from independent government institutions, the media,
      private sector/financial sector/private banks, bilateral or multilateral agencies, and other
      organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement. Consultants on Bank projects
      and respondents from PMUs, local government, and NGOs/CBOs had the highest levels
      of agreement that the Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic whereas
      employees of ministries and respondents from independent government institutions,
      private sector/financial sector/private banks, the media, bilateral or multilateral agencies,
      and the office of the President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President had significantly lower
      levels of agreement. Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from PMUs had the
      highest levels of agreement that Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Burundi with
      respect whereas respondents from independent government institutions and the office of
      the President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President had significantly lower levels of
      agreement. Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
      agreement that the Bank’s work is aligned with their development priorities for Burundi.
    Respondents from Northern, Southern, and Central Burundi had the highest levels of
      agreement that the Bank’s work is aligned with their development priorities for Burundi
      and that the Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Burundi whereas
      respondents from Eastern Burundi had significantly lower levels of agreement.
      Respondents from Northern Burundi had the highest levels of agreement that Bank treats
      clients and stakeholders with respect whereas respondents from Eastern Burundi had
      significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents across all geographic locations had
      statistically similar levels of agreement that the Bank is currently playing a relevant role
      in Burundi’s development .




                                                33
The World Bank                                Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions

       In terms of overall perceptions of how the Bank operates, the World Bank providing
        effective implementation support received the highest mean rating, 7.2, across all
        respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very
        significant degree.




                                                34
The World Bank                                 Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions (continued)
 There were some interesting stakeholder group differences in their perceptions of how the
   World Bank operates in Burundi.
        Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from PMUs had the highest ratings for
           “The World Bank disburses funds promptly” whereas respondents from the office of
           the President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President had significantly lower ratings.
        Consultants on Bank projects had the highest ratings for “The World Bank effectively
           monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it supports” whereas respondents
           from bilateral or multilateral agencies had significantly lower ratings.
        Respondents from PMUs had the highest ratings for “Working with t he World Bank
           increases Burundi’s institutional capacity” whereas respondents from the office of the
           President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President and independent government institutions
           had significantly lower ratings.
        Respondents from PMUs had the highest ratings for “T he World Bank’s teams and
           visits are well coordinated” whereas respondents from the office of the President /
           Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President, bilateral or multilateral agencies, and the media had
           significantly lower ratings.
        Consultants on Bank projects had the highest ratings for “T he World Bank provides
           effective implementation support” whereas respondents from the office of the
           President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President, bilateral or multilateral agencies, and
           independent government institutions had significantly lower ratings.
   There were also some interesting geographic location differences in their perceptions of how
    the World Bank operates in Burundi.
         Respondents from Western Burundi had the highest ratings for “The World Bank
           disburses funds promptly” whereas respondents from Eastern and Central Burundi
           had significantly lower ratings.
         Respondents from Central Burundi had the highest ratings for “The World Bank’s
           safeguard policy requirements are reasonable” and “The World Bank provides
           effective implementation support” whereas respondents from Eastern Burundi had
           significantly lower ratings.
         Respondents from Central Burundi had the highest ratings for “The World Bank
           imposes reasonable conditions on its lending” whereas respondents from Eastern and
           Southern Burundi had significantly lower ratings.
         Respondents from Northern Burundi had the highest ratings for “Working with t he
           World Bank increases Burundi’s institutional capacity” and “The World Bank ensures
           consistency and continuity through staff changes” whereas respondents from Eastern
           Burundi had significantly lower ratings.
         Respondents from Central and Northern Burundi had the highest ratings for “T he
           World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated” whereas respondents from
           Eastern Burundi had significantly lower ratings.
         Respondents from Central, Southern, and Northern Burundi had the highest ratings
           for “Where country systems are adequate, t he World Bank makes appropriate use of
           them” whereas respondents from Eastern Burundi had significantly lower ratings.


                                                 35
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

Adequately Staffed

   Across all respondents, the World Bank being adequately staffed in Burundi received a mean
    rating of 6.5 on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very
    significant degree.
         Respondents from PMUs and private sector/financial sector/private banks had the
          highest ratings that the Bank is adequately staffed in Burundi whereas employees of
          ministries and respondents from independent government institutions, the media,
          and the office of the President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President had significantly
          lower ratings.
         Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings that the
          Bank is adequately staffed in Burundi.




                                                36
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development
        partner in terms of its collaboration with the Government in Burundi received the highest
        mean rating, 7.5, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a
        very significant degree.




                                                37
The World Bank                                Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner (continued)

       There were some interesting stakeholder group significant differences in their perceptions
        of the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development partner in Burundi.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from local government, consultants on
              Bank projects, and PMUs had the highest ratings regarding the Bank’s “Follow up
              and follow through” whereas respondents from independent government
              institutions, the office of the President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President, and the
              media had significantly lower ratings.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from local government and PMUs
              had the highest ratings regarding the Bank’s “Collaboration with the
              Government” whereas respondents from private sector/financial sector/private
              banks and bilateral or multilateral agencies had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings across
              the other aspects of the World Bank being an effective development partner.

       There were also some interesting significant differences between geographic locations in
        their perceptions of the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development
        partner.
             Respondents from Northern, Southern, and Central Burundi had the highest
              ratings regarding the Bank’s “Follow up and follow through” whereas
              respondents from Eastern Burundi had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Northern and Central Burundi had the highest ratings regarding
              the Bank’s “Responsiveness” and “Collaboration with other donors” whereas
              respondents from Eastern Burundi had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Northern Burundi had the highest ratings regarding the Bank’s
              “Being inclusive” and “Straightforwardness and honesty” whereas respondents
              from Eastern Burundi had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Northern and Western Burundi had the highest ratings
              regarding the Bank’s “Staff accessibility” whereas respondents from Eastern
              Burundi had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Central Burundi had the highest ratings regarding the Bank’s
              “Collaboration with groups outside of the Government ” and “Collaboration with
              the Government ” whereas respondents from Eastern Burundi had significantly
              lower ratings.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for
              the other aspects of the World Bank being an effective development partner.




                                                38
The World Bank                                Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi

Role Significance

       Respondents indicated that the Bank should play a fairly significant role in Burundi’s
        development over the medium term, receiving a mean rating of 8.2 across all respondents
        on a 10-point scale with 1 being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from local government and PMUs
              gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s role significance whereas respondents
              from bilateral or multilateral agencies gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Northern and Central Burundi gave the highest ratings for the
              Bank’s role significance whereas respondents from Eastern Burundi gave
              significantly lower ratings.




                                                 39
The World Bank                               Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank should reduce the complexity of
        obtaining Bank financing to make itself of greater value in Burundi. Respondents
        indicated that the Bank should also offer more innovative financial products and improve
        the quality of its experts as related to Burundi’s specific challenges to make itself of
        greater value.
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups and all geographic locations
              indicated that the Bank should reduce the complexity of obtaining Bank financing
              to make itself of greater value, except respondents from bilateral or multilateral
              agencies who indicated that the Bank should increase the level of World Bank
              staffing in Burundi’s office and respondents from private sector/financial
              sector/private banks who indicated that the Bank should offer more innovative
              knowledge services.




                                               40
The World Bank                              Burundi                            Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi (continued)

Collaborating in Burundi

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely with beneficiaries,
        CBOs, the private sector, and local government to ensure better development results in
        Burundi.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups and all geographic locations indicated
              that the Bank should work more closely with beneficiaries, CBOs, the private
              sector, and local government, except respondents from bilateral or multilateral
              agencies who indicated that the Bank should work more closely with the donor
              community and respondents from NGOs/CBOs who were more likely to indicate
              that the Bank should work more closely with NGOs.




                                              41
The World Bank                                Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi (continued)

Influencing the Global Development Agenda

       Across all respondents, the extent to which respondents believed the World Bank should
        influence the global development agenda received a mean rating of 7.2 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree. The
        extent to which respondents believed the World Bank does influence the global
        development agenda received a mean rating of 6.5 across all respondents.
             Respondents from Southern Burundi gave the highest ratings for the extent to
              which the Bank should influence the global development agenda whereas
              respondents from Eastern Burundi gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents
              across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for the extent to
              which the Bank does influence the global development agenda.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar ratings for the
              extent to which the Bank should and does influence the global development
              agenda.




                                                 42
The World Bank                               Burundi                            Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Respondents indicated that they got most of their information about economic and social
        development issues in Burundi from local radio, local newspapers, and the Internet.
        Local television was also a popular information source.




                                               43
The World Bank                              Burundi                          Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank, nearly
        half of all respondents indicated World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences. Other
        popular choices were the World Bank website, World Bank publications and other
        written materials, and direct contact with World Bank staff.




                                              44
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       The vast majority of respondents indicated that they were unaware of the Bank’s Access
        to Information policy.
             Respondents from Eastern Burundi were significantly more likely to be aware of
              the Bank’s Access to Information policy than respondents from other locations.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              awareness for the Bank’s Access to Information policy.




       Just 15% of respondents indicated that they had requested information from the World
        Bank in the past year.
             Employees of ministries, contractors on Bank projects, and respondents from
              local government were significantly less likely to have requested information
              from the World Bank compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar rates of
              requesting information from the World Bank.




                                                45
The World Bank                                Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Nearly all respondents who indicated that they had requested information from the World
        Bank indicated that they were able to obtain this information.
             Respondents from Eastern Burundi were significantly less likely to have obtained
              their requested information compared to respondents from other locations.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of
              obtaining their requested information.




       Agreement that respondents use more data from the World Bank as a result of its Open
        Data policy received a mean rating of 4.6, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents from Western Burundi had the highest levels of agreement that they
              use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data policy
              whereas respondents from Eastern, Central, and Northern Burundi had
              significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s
              Open Data policy.




                                                46
The World Bank                                 Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       More than three-quarters all respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet.
             Respondents from local government had significantly lower rates of Internet
              access compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from Western Burundi had the highest rates of Internet access
              whereas respondents from Northern Burundi had significantly lower rates of
              Internet access.




Website Usage

       More than a third of all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website.
             Employees of ministries, consultants on Bank projects, and respondents from the
              office of the President/Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President, local government, and
              NGOs/CBOs had significantly lower rates of Bank website usage compared to
              respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from Northern Burundi had significantly lower rates of Bank
              website usage compared to respondents from other locations.




                                                 47
The World Bank                                 Burundi                              Country Survey 2012




X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage (continued)
       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, over half indicated that they used the
        World Bank’s country website.
             Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from local government and private
               sector/financial sector/private banks had significantly higher rates of usage for the
               World Bank’s country website compared to those from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar rates of usage
               for the World Bank’s main and country websites.




Website Evaluation
       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, agreement that
        respondents find the Bank’s websites easy to navigate received the highest mean rating,
        5.9, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and
        10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and all geographic locations had
                statistically similar levels of agreement that they find the information on the
                Bank’s websites useful and that the Bank websites are easy to navigate.




                                                 48
The World Bank                                Burundi                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
PIC Usage
       Just 10% of all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s PICs in Burundi;
        nearly a quarter of all respondents indicated that they were unaware of the Bank’s PICs.
             Respondents from PMUs and private sector/financial sector/private banks were
              the most likely of all stakeholder groups to have used the Bank’s PICs in Burundi.
              Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/
              Minister/1st or 2nd Vice President, local government, and other organizations were
              the least likely of all stakeholder groups to be aware of the Bank’s PICs in
              Burundi.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar rates of usage
              for the World Bank’s PICs.




PIC Evaluation
       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s PICs, agreement that
        respondents find them to be a valuable source of information related to development in
        Burundi received a mean rating of 6.0, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1
        being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement regarding the value of the Bank’s PICs.




                                                49
The World Bank                                 Burundi                              Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       In terms of the Bank’s information sharing in Burundi, respondents had the highest level
        of agreement that “The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and
        inquiries”, receiving a mean rating of 6.7, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and all geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement that “The Bank is appropriately
              responsive to my information requests and inquiries” and that “When I need
              information from the World Bank I know how to find it”.




                                                 50
The World Bank                              Burundi                          Country Survey 2012



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 52


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 69


          C. Responses to All Questions by Geographic Locations ................... 87


          D. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank ........ 102


          E. World Bank Client Survey 2012 – Burundi Questionnaire .......... 103




                                          BURUNDI




                                              51
The World Bank                                       Burundi                               Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=325)
A. General Issues facing Burundi
1. In general, would you say that Burundi is headed in...?                Percentage of Respondents (N=244)
The right direction                                                                     75.0%
The wrong direction                                                                     15.6%
Not sure                                                                                 9.4%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in            Percentage of Respondents (N=262)
                                                                             nd          rd
   Burundi. Please identify which of these you consider the      Most      2 Most       3 Most
   1st, 2nd, and 3rd most important development priority.      Important Important Important Combined
Rural development                                                20.2%        7.7%        3.7%      31.6%
Education                                                        17.2%       11.1%        2.6%      30.9%
Anti-corruption                                                  6.9%         7.3%       11.9%      26.0%
Poverty reduction                                                6.9%         8.8%        4.8%      20.5%
Energy                                                           5.7%         6.9%        5.2%      17.8%
Job creation/employment                                          4.6%         7.3%        4.1%      15.9%
Regional integration                                             6.9%         5.0%        3.3%      15.2%
Agricultural development                                         5.3%         4.2%        4.1%      13.6%
Economic growth                                                  1.5%         4.2%        5.9%      11.7%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                            6.1%         3.1%        2.2%      11.4%
Governance                                                       5.7%         3.1%        2.6%      11.4%
Food security                                                    1.5%         3.4%        5.6%      10.6%
Health                                                           0.8%         3.4%        5.9%      10.2%
Social protection                                                1.1%         3.4%        3.0%       7.6%
Domestic private sector development                              0.0%         2.3%        3.7%       6.0%
Transport                                                        0.8%         1.9%        2.6%       5.3%
Public sector reform                                             0.4%         3.1%        1.5%       4.9%
Law and justice                                                  0.4%         1.1%        3.3%       4.9%
Basic infrastructure                                             1.1%         0.8%        2.6%       4.5%
Public financial management                                      0.4%         1.1%        2.2%       3.8%
Water and sanitation                                             0.8%         1.1%        1.5%       3.4%
Gender                                                           0.4%         0.8%        2.2%       3.4%
Local governance and institutions                                0.4%         1.1%        1.1%       2.6%
Equality of opportunity                                          0.8%         0.8%        1.1%       2.6%
Crime and violence                                               0.0%         0.4%        2.2%       2.6%
Foreign direct investment                                        0.4%         1.5%        0.4%       2.3%
Monitoring and evaluation                                        1.1%         0.8%        0.4%       2.3%
Global integration                                               0.4%         0.8%        1.1%       2.3%
Global information and communications technology                 0.0%         0.4%        1.9%       2.2%
Environmental sustainability                                     0.4%         0.8%        0.7%       1.9%
Natural resource management                                      0.0%         0.4%        1.5%       1.9%
Urban development                                                0.4%         0.0%        1.1%       1.5%
Regional conflict and tensions                                   0.8%         0.4%        0.0%       1.1%
Disaster management                                              0.0%         0.4%        0.7%       1.1%
Financial markets                                                0.4%         0.0%        0.7%       1.1%
Social cohesion                                                  0.4%         0.0%        0.7%       1.1%
Regulatory framework                                             0.0%         0.4%        0.4%       0.8%
Climate change                                                   0.0%         0.0%        0.7%       0.7%
Trade and exports                                                0.0%         0.4%        0.0%       0.4%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%


                                                       52
The World Bank                                    Burundi                           Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
   different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do
   you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Burundi?     Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                         (Responses Combined; N=320)
Economic growth                                                                    41.3%
Agricultural development                                                           28.8%
Education                                                                          27.5%
Rural development                                                                  25.6%
Anti-corruption                                                                    16.9%
Job creation/employment                                                            16.3%
Energy                                                                             15.6%
Food security                                                                      15.3%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                              13.1%
Domestic private sector development                                                10.0%
Health                                                                             10.0%
Governance                                                                         9.7%
Water and sanitation                                                               6.9%
Basic infrastructure                                                               6.9%
Equality of opportunity                                                            4.7%
Regional integration                                                               4.7%
Transport                                                                          4.7%
Public financial management                                                        4.7%
Natural resource management                                                        4.4%
Law and justice                                                                    4.1%
Local governance and institutions                                                  3.4%
Foreign direct investment                                                          3.1%
Urban development                                                                  2.5%
Global information and communications technology                                   2.2%
Public sector reform                                                               2.2%
Gender                                                                             1.9%
Social protection                                                                  1.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                       1.6%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                     1.3%
Global integration                                                                 1.3%
Climate change                                                                     0.9%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                          0.9%
Social cohesion                                                                    0.9%
Disaster management                                                                0.6%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.6%
Crime and violence                                                                 0.3%
Financial markets                                                                  0.3%
Trade and exports                                                                  0.3%
Regulatory framework                                                               0.0%




                                                     53
The World Bank                                   Burundi                            Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE
   areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating        Percentage of Respondents
   economic growth in Burundi? (Choose no more than THREE)             (Responses Combined; N=321)
Energy                                                                             49.5%
Anti-corruption                                                                    32.1%
Agricultural development                                                           28.3%
Education                                                                          25.5%
Foreign direct investment                                                          17.8%
Rural development                                                                  16.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                15.6%
Job creation/employment                                                            12.8%
Public financial management                                                        9.0%
Trade and exports                                                                  7.8%
Governance                                                                         7.8%
Basic infrastructure                                                               7.8%
Food security                                                                      7.5%
Health                                                                             7.2%
Transport                                                                          6.2%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                              6.2%
Natural resource management                                                        5.6%
Global integration                                                                 3.4%
Global information and communications technology                                   3.4%
Regional integration                                                               3.4%
Public sector reform                                                               3.1%
Social protection                                                                  2.5%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                     2.5%
Local governance and institutions                                                  2.5%
Equality of opportunity                                                            1.9%
Financial markets                                                                  1.9%
Climate change                                                                     1.6%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                          1.6%
Social cohesion                                                                    1.2%
Law and justice                                                                    1.2%
Urban development                                                                  0.9%
Environmental sustainability                                                       0.9%
Disaster management                                                                0.6%
Water and sanitation                                                               0.6%
Regulatory framework                                                               0.6%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.3%
Gender                                                                             0.3%
Crime and violence                                                                 0.3%




                                                   54
The World Bank                                           Burundi                                     Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Familiarity and Overall Effectiveness                                                          N       Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Burundi, on a ten-point
                                                                                               309      5.89     2.13
   scale? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank's effectiveness in Burundi,
                                                                                               290      7.03     1.70
   on a ten-point scale. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

To what extent do you believe that… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)   N       Mean       SD
3. The World Bank's financial instruments meet the needs of Burundi, on a ten-point
                                                                                               279      6.76     1.85
    scale?
4. The World Bank meets Burundi's needs for knowledge services (e.g., research,
                                                                                               273      6.48     1.80
    analysis, technical assistance), on a ten-point scale?




                                                           55
The World Bank                                    Burundi                           Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
5. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact
   on development results in Burundi, in which sectoral areas do you
   believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and         Percentage of Respondents
   resources in Burundi? (Choose no more than THREE)                   (Responses Combined; N=318)
Rural development                                                                  35.2%
Energy                                                                             32.1%
Education                                                                          28.9%
Poverty reduction                                                                  23.6%
Agricultural development                                                           22.3%
Economic growth                                                                    17.9%
Job creation/employment                                                            17.6%
Domestic private sector development                                                13.8%
Health                                                                             12.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                    11.0%
Governance                                                                         9.4%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                              8.8%
Transport                                                                          7.9%
Basic infrastructure                                                               7.9%
Food security                                                                      7.5%
Public financial management                                                        6.3%
Foreign direct investment                                                          4.7%
Local governance and institutions                                                  3.1%
Environmental sustainability                                                       2.8%
Global information and communications technology                                   2.8%
Regional integration                                                               2.2%
Water and sanitation                                                               2.2%
Urban development                                                                  2.2%
Natural resource management                                                        2.2%
Financial markets                                                                  1.9%
Law and justice                                                                    1.9%
Climate change                                                                     1.6%
Public sector reform                                                               1.3%
Social protection                                                                  0.9%
Gender                                                                             0.9%
Crime and violence                                                                 0.9%
Regulatory framework                                                               0.9%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                          0.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                            0.6%
Trade and exports                                                                  0.6%
Social cohesion                                                                    0.3%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                     0.3%
Global integration                                                                 0.3%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.3%
Disaster management                                                                0.0%




                                                    56
The World Bank                                         Burundi                                   Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                             Percentage of Respondents (N=218)
6. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do
                                                                                         nd
   you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second         Greatest   2 Greatest
   greatest value in Burundi?                                                Value       Value        Combined
Financial resources                                                          35.8%       14.9%          50.7%
Strategy formulation                                                         15.6%       15.8%          31.4%
Training/capacity building                                                   10.6%       11.6%          22.2%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                   12.8%        9.3%          22.1%
Donor coordination                                                            8.3%       13.0%          21.3%
Technical assistance                                                          4.1%        8.8%          13.0%
Policy advice                                                                 6.0%        7.0%          12.9%
Convening/facilitating                                                        1.8%        5.6%           7.4%
Studies/analyses                                                              1.8%        5.1%           7.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                 0.5%        6.0%           6.5%
Data                                                                          2.3%        1.9%           4.2%
Other                                                                         0.5%        1.4%           1.9%

7. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest               Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)                    (Responses Combined; N=287)
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                          28.6%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                          26.5%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                 24.0%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                       20.9%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                    16.7%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                      15.3%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                            13.2%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                         10.5%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                       10.1%
Not have to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                      6.6%
Other                                                                                          4.9%
Not client focused                                                                             4.2%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                            3.8%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                          2.8%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                       2.1%

8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in             Percentage of Respondents
   reducing poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=304)
Investment lending                                                                             66.4%
Policy based lending/Budget support to the Government                                          24.0%
Capacity building                                                                              23.4%
Emergency recovery lending                                                                     19.7%
Technical assistance                                                                           19.1%
Co-financing arrangements                                                                      18.1%
Sector-wide approaches                                                                         9.2%
Analytical work                                                                                6.9%
Trust Fund management                                                                          5.9%
Don't know                                                                                     2.3%




                                                          57
The World Bank                                           Burundi                                     Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

9. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in                  Percentage of Respondents
   helping to reduce poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)                   (Responses Combined; N=300)
Policy based lending/Budget support to the Government                                            27.3%
Analytical work                                                                                  24.0%
Technical assistance                                                                             21.0%
Don't know                                                                                       18.0%
Trust Fund management                                                                            17.3%
Emergency recovery lending                                                                       17.3%
Co-financing arrangements                                                                        14.0%
Investment lending                                                                               12.3%
Capacity building                                                                                12.3%
Sector-wide approaches                                                                           7.7%

To what extent do you believe that… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)    N       Mean      SD
10. The World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the global development agenda, on a
                                                                                               275      7.19     1.96
    ten point scale?
11. The World Bank DOES seek to influence the global development agenda, on a ten
                                                                                               264      6.48     1.98
    point scale?

12. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
   main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
   Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better                         Percentage of Respondents
   development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                              (Responses Combined; N=314)
Beneficiaries                                                                                    40.4%
Community-based organizations (CBOs)                                                             31.5%
Private sector                                                                                   30.9%
Local government                                                                                 21.3%
NGOs                                                                                             15.9%
Donor community                                                                                  14.3%
Media                                                                                            11.5%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                         5.7%
Emerging donors                                                                                  5.7%
UN agencies                                                                                      4.8%
Parliament                                                                                       4.5%
Regional organizations                                                                           4.1%
Faith-based organizations                                                                        3.2%
Other                                                                                            3.2%
Foundations                                                                                      1.6%
UN and regional peace-keeping forces                                                             0.3%

                                                                                                Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s
work in Burundi, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                N      Mean        SD
13. Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Burundi           303     7.19      1.96
14. The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                               293     6.76      2.01
    for this country
15. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Burundi             294     6.86      2.00
16. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Burundi with respect                     267     6.77      2.00




                                                           58
The World Bank                                                 Burundi                               Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                                                       Degree
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Burundi in
terms of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)       N      Mean       SD
17. Follow up and follow through                                                               270     7.06      1.65
18. Responsiveness                                                                             248      6.63     1.74
19. Flexibility (in terms of the institution's products and services)                          261      6.20     1.75
20. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                   270      6.19     1.93
21. Being inclusive                                                                            262      6.54     1.93
22. Openness (sharing data and other information)                                              276      6.49     2.01
23. Staff accessibility                                                                        266      6.18     2.05
24. Straightforwardness and honesty                                                            267      7.05     1.91
25. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                                        260      6.63     2.02
26. Collaboration with the Government                                                          272      7.53     1.68
27. Collaboration with other donors                                                            249      7.15     1.87

28. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
   place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to?                       Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than TWO)                                                          (Responses Combined; N=313)
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                   31.3%
The Government works inefficiently                                                                30.0%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                 23.0%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                             21.7%
Inadequate funding                                                                                16.9%
Poor donor coordination                                                                           15.0%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                               14.7%
Ongoing conflict and instability                                                                  13.1%
The World Bank works too slowly                                                                   12.5%
The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                      12.5%
Other                                                                                             1.9%




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

                                                                                                       Degree
Achieving Sustainable Results                                                                   N      Mean       SD
1. To what degree does the World Bank's work help achieve sustainable development
    results in Burundi, on a ten point scale?                                                  303      7.10     1.56
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                 59
The World Bank                                      Burundi                                Country Survey 2012


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the         Effectiveness
following areas of development in Burundi, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                           N       Mean      SD
2.    Anti-corruption                                                                246      5.52     2.22
3.    Global information and communications technology                               231      5.81     1.85
4.    Transport                                                                      264      6.32     1.96
5.    Crime and violence                                                             205      5.19     2.28
6.    Regional conflict and tensions                                                 208      5.34     1.98
7.    Law and justice                                                                212      5.44     2.06
8.    Urban development                                                              268      6.31     1.87
9.    Environmental sustainability                                                   251      6.09     1.74
10.   Regulatory framework                                                           213      6.37     1.69
11.   Basic infrastructure                                                           266      6.68     1.84
12.   Communicable/non-communicable disease                                          236      6.69     1.93
13.   Poverty reduction                                                              285      6.47     1.93
14.   Gender                                                                         234      6.18     1.76
15.   Domestic private sector development                                            239      5.99     6.17
16.   Foreign direct investment                                                      204      5.46     2.08
17.   Local governance and institutions                                              238      6.02     1.88
18.   Water and sanitation                                                           239      6.31     1.84
19.   Trade and exports                                                              204      5.35     2.00
20.   Economic growth                                                                271      6.08     1.89
21.   Energy                                                                         246      5.86     2.02
22.   Disaster management                                                            201      4.99     2.10
23.   Monitoring and evaluation                                                      240      6.20     1.93
24.   Public financial management                                                    241      6.36     2.02
25.   Job creation/employment                                                        259      5.80     2.20
26.   Social cohesion                                                                208      5.64     1.94
27.   Financial markets                                                              204      5.90     2.12
28.   Equality of opportunity                                                        214      5.49     2.23
29.   Health                                                                         256      6.84     1.75
30.   Rural development                                                              258      6.45     1.90
31.   Global integration                                                             210      5.59     1.96
32.   Governance                                                                     242      6.24     1.73
33.   Food security                                                                  252      6.00     1.96
34.   Education                                                                      256      6.44     1.83
35.   Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                          237      6.18     1.82
36.   Social protection                                                              199      5.48     1.95
37.   Climate change                                                                 204      5.31     1.98
38.   Public sector reform                                                           223      6.07     1.90
39.   Regional integration                                                           205      6.07     1.81
40.   Agricultural development                                                       256      6.40     1.87
41.   Natural resource management                                                    218      5.36     2.05



                                                         60
The World Bank                                     Burundi                             Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

1. When thinking about the development challenges in Burundi, where
   do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus
   its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?                Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                            (Responses Combined; N=319)
Energy                                                                                32.9%
Agricultural development                                                              27.9%
Economic growth                                                                       26.6%
Poverty reduction                                                                     22.3%
Education                                                                             21.6%
Domestic private sector development                                                   21.6%
Anti-corruption                                                                       18.8%
Public sector reform                                                                  14.1%
Rural development                                                                     11.6%
Job creation/employment                                                               10.7%
Governance                                                                            8.8%
Health                                                                                7.2%
Food security                                                                         6.3%
Natural resource management                                                           5.6%
Climate change                                                                        5.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                             4.4%
Transport                                                                             4.4%
Basic infrastructure                                                                  4.1%
Global information and communications technology                                      3.4%
Public financial management                                                           3.4%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                 3.1%
Regional integration                                                                  3.1%
Local governance and institutions                                                     3.1%
Social protection                                                                     2.8%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                        2.2%
Global integration                                                                    2.2%
Environmental sustainability                                                          2.2%
Financial markets                                                                     1.9%
Gender                                                                                1.6%
Water and sanitation                                                                  1.6%
Trade and exports                                                                     1.6%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                             1.6%
Law and justice                                                                       1.6%
Disaster management                                                                   1.3%
Social cohesion                                                                       0.9%
Equality of opportunity                                                               0.9%
Urban development                                                                     0.6%
Regulatory framework                                                                  0.6%
Crime and violence                                                                    0.3%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                 0.0%




                                                      61
The World Bank                                                Burundi                               Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at …              Level of Effectiveness
in Burundi? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                     N      Mean        SD
2. Raising your awareness of the particular topic                                          233      5.56      2.11
3.   Stimulating public debate/dialogue                                                    246       5.79      2.08
4.   Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                                                255       5.75      2.18
5.   Contributing to good policy making                                                    251       6.24      1.95
6.   Providing support for program implementation                                          268       6.68      1.88


In Burundi, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and                       Degree
research … ? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                       N       Mean       SD
7.   Are timely                                                                            239       5.85     1.98
8.   Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation               253       6.35     1.85
9.   Are relevant to Burundi’s development priorities                                      252       6.50     1.82
10. Provide feasible recommendations                                                       246       6.09     2.01
11. Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                   250       6.87     1.88
12. A source of relevant information on global good practices                              246       5.95     2.03
13. Are adequately disseminated                                                            243       6.26     2.00
14. Are appropriately translated                                                           256       6.28     1.99
15. Are adaptable to Burundi’s development challenges                                      239       5.85     1.98


Overall Evaluations                                                                             N     Mean       SD
16. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge
    and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?          260       6.63     1.80
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
17. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's knowledge/
    research, on a ten point scale?                                                          263       7.05     1.64
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
18. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise,
                                                                                             230       6.27     1.74
    on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                62
The World Bank                                                Burundi                           Country Survey 2012


E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten             Level of Agreement
point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                    N      Mean     SD
1. The World Bank disburses funds promptly                                              258      5.31   2.47
2. The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                        284      7.00        2.01
    supports
3. The World Bank's approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                  256      6.24        1.91
4.   The World Bank's safeguard policy requirements are reasonable                      251      6.48        1.85
5.   The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                        260      6.42        2.19
6.   Working with the World Bank increases Burundi's institutional capacity             285      7.07        2.01
7.   The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes            220      6.29        2.07
8.  The World Bank's teams and visits are well coordinated                              241      6.93        1.86
9.  Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank makes appropriate use of
                                                                                        242      7.09        1.97
    them
10. The World Bank provides effective implementation support                            287      7.21        1.95


Adequately Staffed                                                                         N      Mean        SD
11. To what extent do you believe the World Bank is adequately staffed in Burundi, on
                                                                                          220         6.53   1.92
    a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi

The Bank’s Role                                                                           N       Mean        SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank SHOULD play in Burundi’s
development over the medium term in the near future, on a ten point scale?                303         8.17   1.68
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of               Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=307)
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                      49.8%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                     24.4%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Burundi’s specific challenges               21.2%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                     18.6%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                             17.9%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Burundi's
                                                                                              17.6%
economy
Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                                 13.7%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                        9.1%
Increase the level of World Bank staffing in Burundi ’s office                                9.1%
Work faster                                                                                   8.5%
Other                                                                                         3.9%




                                                                63
The World Bank                                     Burundi                             Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social      Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)                (Responses Combined; N=302)
Local radio                                                                           48.0%
Local newspapers                                                                      42.7%
Internet                                                                              37.1%
Local television                                                                      16.9%
Periodicals                                                                           10.3%
Other                                                                                 9.3%
International newspapers                                                              8.9%
International radio                                                                   7.3%
International television                                                              6.0%
Mobile phones                                                                         2.3%
Instant messaging                                                                     1.7%
Blogs                                                                                 1.0%

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?         Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                               (Responses Combined; N=308)
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                             46.4%
World Bank website                                                                    38.3%
World Bank publications and other written materials                                   33.1%
Direct contact with World Bank                                                        29.2%
e-Newsletters                                                                         16.9%
World Bank Public Information Center                                                  12.7%
Social media                                                                          10.4%
Mobile phones                                                                         3.9%
Instant messaging                                                                     2.3%
Other                                                                                 0.6%
Blogs                                                                                 0.3%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under
    which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession     Percentage of Respondents
    that is not a list of exceptions?                                               (N=296)
Yes                                                                                  9.1%
No                                                                                   90.9%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities    Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                               (N=284)
Yes                                                                                  15.1%
No                                                                                   84.9%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                        (N=45)
Yes                                                                                  82.2%
No                                                                                   17.8%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                              (N=293)
Yes                                                                                  76.8%
No                                                                                   23.2%




                                                      64
The World Bank                                      Burundi                                  Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank website?                                           (N=293)
Yes                                                                                        35.2%
No                                                                                         64.8%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                            (N=141)
The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/burundi)                               57.4%
The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                          42.6%

9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information                  Percentage of Respondents
    Centers (PICs) in Burundi?                                                            (N=290)
Yes                                                                                        9.7%
No                                                                                         65.9%
I don’t know what a PIC is                                                                 24.5%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point           Level of Agreement
scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                       N       Mean      SD
10. I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the organization’s Open
                                                                                     211      4.65      2.67
    Data policy
11. The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of information related to
                                                                                     215      6.00      2.67
    development in Burundi
12. I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate                                  181      5.89      2.54
13. I find the information on the World Bank’s websites useful                        95      5.36      2.08
14. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it                153      6.37      2.12
15. The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries            154      6.73      2.11




                                                      65
The World Bank                                    Burundi                            Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?         Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                             (N=312)
Local Government office or staff                                                  18.3%
Private sector organization                                                       14.1%
Employee of Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency             7.7%
Media                                                                             7.1%
Consultant/Contractor on World Bank supported project/program                     6.7%
NGO                                                                               6.1%
Other                                                                             5.4%
Multilateral agency                                                               5.1%
PMU                                                                               3.8%
Office of Minister                                                                3.5%
Independent Government Institution                                                3.2%
Bilateral agency                                                                  2.9%
Community Based Organization                                                      2.6%
Private foundation                                                                2.2%
Trade Union                                                                       2.2%
Academia/Research institute/Think tank                                            2.2%
2nd Vice-President of the Republic Cabinet                                        2.2%
Financial sector/Private bank                                                     1.3%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                         1.0%
Office of the President, Prime Minister                                           0.6%
Judiciary branch                                                                  0.6%
1st Vice-President of the Republic Cabinet                                        0.6%
Faith-based group                                                                 0.3%




                                                     66
The World Bank                                        Burundi                      Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.           Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                           (N=306)
Local governance and institutions                                               11.4%
Other                                                                           10.1%
Basic infrastructure                                                            8.2%
Agricultural development                                                        7.5%
Domestic private sector development                                             6.2%
Education                                                                       5.6%
Economic growth                                                                 5.2%
Rural development                                                               4.9%
Global information and communications technology                                3.3%
Governance                                                                      3.3%
Health                                                                          2.9%
Energy                                                                          2.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                 2.0%
Law and justice                                                                 2.0%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                       2.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                    1.6%
Social cohesion                                                                 1.6%
Transport                                                                       1.6%
Foreign direct investment                                                       1.3%
Job creation/employment                                                         1.3%
Natural resource management                                                     1.3%
Poverty reduction                                                               1.3%
Public financial management                                                     1.3%
Public sector reform                                                            1.3%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                           1.3%
Urban development                                                               1.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                         1.0%
Financial markets                                                               1.0%
Food security                                                                   1.0%
Regional integration                                                            1.0%
Regulatory framework                                                            1.0%
Climate change                                                                  0.7%
Crime and violence                                                              0.7%
Gender                                                                          0.7%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                           0.3%
Social protection                                                               0.3%
Water and sanitation                                                            0.3%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World   Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in your country?                                                        (N=304)
Yes                                                                             77.6%
No                                                                              22.4%




                                                        67
The World Bank                                       Burundi                          Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World   Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)                                      (N=295)
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                      52.2%
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                           44.7%
Observer                                                                           22.4%
Use World Bank reports/data                                                        18.3%
Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                       11.2%

                                                                         Percentage of Respondents
5. Which best represents your geographic location?                                (N=293)
West                                                                               48.5%
Center                                                                             14.3%
East                                                                               13.0%
North                                                                              13.0%
South                                                                              11.3%




                                                       68
The World Bank                                                                                                           Burundi                                                                                 Country Survey 2012


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups
A. General Issues facing Burundi
In general, would you say that Burundi is headed in...?
                                                                        Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                   Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                    st   nd
                                                                        Minister, 1 or 2          of a      on Bank                       Local            lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      V.P.            Ministry     project           PMU     Government          Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 The right direction                                                           86.7%             89.5%       46.2%             66.7%      93.3%             70.6%             58.3%         65.0%   88.9%      62.5%        71.4%
 The wrong direction                                                            6.7%             10.5%       30.8%             22.2%      6.7%              5.9%              25.0%         15.0%   11.1%      25.0%        22.9%
 Not sure                                                                       6.7%              0.0%       23.1%             11.1%      0.0%              23.5%             16.7%         20.0%   0.0%       12.5%        5.7%
                                                                                                               st   nd         rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Burundi. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
 1st Most Important                                                     Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                   Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                    st   nd
                                                                        Minister, 1 or 2          of a      on Bank                       Local            lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      V.P.            Ministry     project           PMU     Government          Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Rural development                                                             16.7%             15.0%       25.0%             18.2%      31.8%             15.8%             8.6%          8.3%    21.1%       0.0%        25.0%
 Education                                                                      0.0%             25.0%       12.5%              0.0%      15.9%             21.1%             22.9%         16.7%   36.8%      33.3%        13.9%
 Social protection                                                              0.0%              0.0%        6.3%              0.0%      0.0%              5.3%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.8%
 Transport                                                                      0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              2.9%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                          5.6%             25.0%        6.3%              9.1%      6.8%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%      11.1%        8.3%
 Poverty reduction                                                             11.1%              5.0%       12.5%             18.2%      9.1%              5.3%              5.7%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        8.3%
 Public sector reform                                                           5.6%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Regional integration                                                           5.6%             10.0%        6.3%              0.0%      2.3%              10.5%             11.4%         8.3%     5.3%       0.0%        8.3%
 Gender                                                                         0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%      11.1%        0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                            0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                                      0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              2.9%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          8.3%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Energy                                                                        33.3%              0.0%        0.0%              9.1%      4.5%              5.3%              5.7%          0.0%    10.5%       0.0%        0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                 0.0%              5.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%      11.1%        0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                      0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.3%              0.0%              2.9%          4.2%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Public financial management                                                    0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.8%
 Job creation/employment                                                       11.1%              5.0%        6.3%             18.2%      2.3%              0.0%              5.7%          4.2%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Governance                                                                     0.0%              5.0%       12.5%              0.0%      0.0%              21.1%             14.3%         4.2%     5.3%       0.0%        2.8%
 Financial markets                                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%      11.1%        0.0%
 Urban development                                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              9.1%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                   0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          4.2%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                        0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              5.3%              0.0%          4.2%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Health                                                                         0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.3%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.8%
 Global integration                                                             0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          4.2%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Food security                                                                  0.0%              0.0%        6.3%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          4.2%     5.3%       0.0%        2.8%
 Social cohesion                                                                0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%      11.1%        0.0%
 Climate change                                                                 0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                      11.1%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      11.4%             5.3%              2.9%          8.3%     0.0%       0.0%        8.3%
 Trade and exports                                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                             0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Economic growth                                                                0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.3%              0.0%              2.9%          4.2%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Law and justice                                                                0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.8%
 Regulatory framework                                                           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              9.1%      2.3%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.8%
 Local governance and institutions                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.3%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                    0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                                0.0%              5.0%        6.3%              9.1%      4.5%              5.3%              11.4%         16.7%    0.0%      11.1%        8.3%
 Disaster management                                                            0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                               0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%

                                                                                                                          69
The World Bank                                                                                                           Burundi                                                                                 Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)
                                                                                                               st   nd         rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Burundi. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
   nd
 2 Most Important                                                       Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                   Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                    st   nd
                                                                        Minister, 1 or 2          of a      on Bank                       Local            lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      V.P.            Ministry     project           PMU     Government          Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Rural development                                                              5.6%             15.0%        0.0%              0.0%      6.8%              15.8%             5.7%          8.7%     5.3%      11.1%        8.3%
 Education                                                                      0.0%              5.0%        0.0%             36.4%      20.5%             0.0%              5.7%          17.4%    5.3%      11.1%        16.7%
 Social protection                                                              0.0%              0.0%        6.3%              0.0%      2.3%              5.3%              0.0%          13.0%    0.0%       0.0%        8.3%
 Transport                                                                      0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              15.8%             0.0%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                          5.6%              0.0%       18.8%              0.0%      6.8%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                                             16.7%              5.0%       18.8%              0.0%      6.8%              10.5%             5.7%          0.0%    15.8%      11.1%        11.1%
 Public sector reform                                                           5.6%             10.0%        0.0%             18.2%      2.3%              0.0%              0.0%          4.3%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Regional integration                                                           5.6%              0.0%        6.3%              9.1%      4.5%              0.0%              5.7%          0.0%    21.1%       0.0%        2.8%
 Gender                                                                         0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.3%              0.0%              2.9%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                            0.0%              0.0%        6.3%              0.0%      2.3%              5.3%              8.6%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                                      5.6%              0.0%        6.3%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              2.9%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          4.3%     0.0%       0.0%        2.8%
 Energy                                                                        16.7%              5.0%        0.0%              0.0%      4.5%              10.5%             11.4%         4.3%     0.0%      33.3%        5.6%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                 5.6%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                      0.0%              5.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Public financial management                                                    0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.3%              0.0%              5.7%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                        5.6%             15.0%       12.5%              0.0%      6.8%              10.5%             8.6%          4.3%     0.0%      11.1%        5.6%
 Governance                                                                     0.0%              5.0%       12.5%              0.0%      2.3%              0.0%              0.0%          8.7%     0.0%       0.0%        5.6%
 Financial markets                                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Urban development                                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                   0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.3%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.8%
 Equality of opportunity                                                        0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.3%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%      11.1%        0.0%
 Health                                                                         0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      4.5%              5.3%              2.9%          4.3%    10.5%       0.0%        5.6%
 Global integration                                                             0.0%              5.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Food security                                                                  0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              9.1%      2.3%              0.0%              8.6%          8.7%     5.3%       0.0%        2.8%
 Social cohesion                                                                0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Climate change                                                                 0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                       0.0%             10.0%        0.0%              0.0%      4.5%              5.3%              2.9%          4.3%     0.0%       0.0%        8.3%
 Trade and exports                                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          4.3%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                             0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Economic growth                                                                5.6%             10.0%        0.0%              9.1%      2.3%              0.0%              8.6%          0.0%     5.3%      11.1%        2.8%
 Law and justice                                                                0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              5.3%              2.9%          4.3%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.3%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.3%              5.3%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Local governance and institutions                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              9.1%      2.3%              0.0%              0.0%          4.3%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                    0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          4.3%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                               22.2%             10.0%       12.5%              9.1%      4.5%              5.3%              2.9%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        11.1%
 Disaster management                                                            0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              2.9%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                               0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              2.9%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%




                                                                                                                          70
The World Bank                                                                                                           Burundi                                                                                 Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)
                                                                                                               st   nd         rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Burundi. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
   rd
 3 Most Important                                                       Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                   Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                    st   nd
                                                                        Minister, 1 or 2          of a      on Bank                       Local            lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      V.P.            Ministry     project           PMU     Government          Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Rural development                                                             10.5%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      8.3%              0.0%              2.6%          4.3%     5.3%       0.0%        2.7%
 Education                                                                      0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              9.1%      2.1%              0.0%              0.0%          4.3%     0.0%      22.2%        5.4%
 Social protection                                                              0.0%              5.0%        6.7%              0.0%      2.1%              0.0%              0.0%          4.3%     0.0%       0.0%        2.7%
 Transport                                                                      0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      6.3%              0.0%              5.3%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        5.4%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                          0.0%              5.0%        6.7%              0.0%      2.1%              5.3%              0.0%          8.7%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              9.1%      2.1%              0.0%              7.9%          4.3%     5.3%      22.2%        10.8%
 Public sector reform                                                           5.3%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              0.0%              2.6%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.7%
 Regional integration                                                           0.0%              5.0%        0.0%              9.1%      4.2%              5.3%              0.0%          4.3%     5.3%      11.1%        0.0%
 Gender                                                                         0.0%              5.0%        6.7%              0.0%      2.1%              0.0%              2.6%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        5.4%
 Domestic private sector development                                            0.0%             10.0%        0.0%              9.1%      2.1%              5.3%              5.3%          4.3%     0.0%       0.0%        2.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                                      0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      4.2%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Energy                                                                         0.0%              5.0%        6.7%             18.2%      4.2%              5.3%              0.0%          8.7%    10.5%       0.0%        8.1%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                 0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                      0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Public financial management                                                    0.0%              0.0%        6.7%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              10.5%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.7%
 Job creation/employment                                                        0.0%              5.0%       13.3%              0.0%      0.0%              5.3%              7.9%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        8.1%
 Governance                                                                     0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              5.3%              5.3%          4.3%     0.0%      11.1%        2.7%
 Financial markets                                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              5.3%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Urban development                                                              5.3%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              0.0%              2.6%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                   0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          8.7%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                        5.3%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              5.3%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Health                                                                         0.0%             10.0%        0.0%              0.0%      8.3%              21.1%             5.3%          8.7%     5.3%       0.0%        2.7%
 Global integration                                                             0.0%              5.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              0.0%              2.6%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Food security                                                                 26.3%              0.0%        6.7%              9.1%      2.1%              5.3%              2.6%          8.7%    10.5%      11.1%        0.0%
 Social cohesion                                                                0.0%              5.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Climate change                                                                 0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                       5.3%              5.0%        6.7%              0.0%      6.3%              0.0%              2.6%          4.3%     0.0%      11.1%        5.4%
 Trade and exports                                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                             5.3%              5.0%        0.0%              9.1%      4.2%              0.0%              2.6%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Economic growth                                                               10.5%              0.0%        6.7%              9.1%      6.3%              10.5%             13.2%         0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Law and justice                                                                5.3%              5.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              5.3%              2.6%          4.3%     5.3%       0.0%        5.4%
 Regulatory framework                                                           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              2.6%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                           0.0%              0.0%        6.7%              9.1%      0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          4.3%     0.0%      11.1%        5.4%
 Local governance and institutions                                              0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              9.1%      0.0%              0.0%              2.6%          0.0%     5.3%       0.0%        0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                    0.0%             10.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              5.3%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                               15.8%             10.0%       26.7%              0.0%      6.3%              5.3%              7.9%          13.0%   21.1%       0.0%        18.9%
 Disaster management                                                            0.0%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      2.1%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.7%
 Global information and communications technology                               5.3%              0.0%        0.0%              0.0%      4.2%              5.3%              2.6%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%




                                                                                                                          71
The World Bank                                                                                                    Burundi                                                                                             Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                        Office of President, Employee Consultant                                      Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                          Independent
                                                                                    st   nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Minister, 1 or 2        of a       on Bank                      Local            lateral            Sector,         NGO/                 Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                           V.P.          Ministry      project       PMU        Government          Agency          Private Bank        CBO       Media      Institution     Other
 Water and sanitation                                                           0.0%            4.2%         0.0%          8.3%          7.0%             0.0%               8.3%           12.0%      18.2%          0.0%        6.8%
 Equality of opportunity                                                        9.1%            4.2%         0.0%          0.0%          5.3%             8.0%               4.2%            4.0%       0.0%         10.0%        6.8%
 Economic growth                                                               50.0%           58.3%        45.0%         58.3%         38.6%             36.0%              27.1%          36.0%      45.5%         40.0%        43.2%
 Climate change                                                                 0.0%            4.2%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%             4.0%               0.0%            4.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                 0.0%            4.2%         0.0%          0.0%          1.8%             4.0%               0.0%            0.0%       0.0%         10.0%        0.0%
 Disaster management                                                            0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               2.1%            0.0%       4.5%          0.0%        0.0%
 Regional integration                                                           4.5%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          5.3%             8.0%               4.2%            8.0%      13.6%          0.0%        0.0%
 Gender                                                                         0.0%            0.0%         5.0%          0.0%          3.5%             0.0%               2.1%            4.0%       4.5%          0.0%        0.0%
 Rural development                                                             31.8%           29.2%        10.0%         41.7%         29.8%             24.0%              31.3%          20.0%      18.2%         30.0%        25.0%
 Urban development                                                              9.1%            0.0%         0.0%          8.3%          0.0%             4.0%               6.3%            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.3%
 Education                                                                      4.5%           41.7%        15.0%         16.7%         35.1%             32.0%              31.3%          36.0%      18.2%         30.0%        25.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                           0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Local governance and institutions                                              0.0%            0.0%         5.0%          8.3%          5.3%             0.0%               2.1%            8.0%       0.0%         10.0%        4.5%
 Basic infrastructure                                                           4.5%            0.0%        35.0%          8.3%          5.3%             4.0%               4.2%            4.0%       9.1%          0.0%        6.8%
 Social protection                                                              0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          1.8%             4.0%               2.1%            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.3%
 Law and justice                                                                0.0%            4.2%         5.0%          0.0%          1.8%             8.0%               8.3%            0.0%       0.0%         10.0%        4.5%
 Transport                                                                      4.5%           12.5%        10.0%          8.3%          5.3%             0.0%               2.1%            4.0%       9.1%          0.0%        0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                             0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               2.1%            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                          0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               2.1%            4.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                          9.1%           12.5%        10.0%          0.0%         14.0%             16.0%              14.6%          16.0%      22.7%          0.0%        9.1%
 Global information and communications technology                               4.5%            4.2%         0.0%          8.3%          1.8%             0.0%               2.1%            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.3%
 Public sector reform                                                           4.5%            0.0%         5.0%          0.0%          1.8%             4.0%               0.0%            0.0%       4.5%          0.0%        2.3%
 Domestic private sector development                                            9.1%            8.3%        15.0%          8.3%          8.8%             16.0%              18.8%           4.0%       4.5%          0.0%        9.1%
 Foreign direct investment                                                      0.0%            4.2%         5.0%          0.0%          3.5%             0.0%               4.2%            0.0%       4.5%         20.0%        2.3%
 Global integration                                                             0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          1.8%             0.0%               2.1%            0.0%       4.5%          0.0%        2.3%
 Energy                                                                        40.9%           20.8%         5.0%         25.0%         10.5%             12.0%              12.5%          12.0%      22.7%         40.0%        11.4%
 Food security                                                                 13.6%            4.2%        15.0%         16.7%          8.8%             20.0%              14.6%           8.0%      31.8%         20.0%        18.2%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                      0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          1.8%             0.0%               0.0%            8.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Governance                                                                     9.1%            8.3%        10.0%         25.0%          5.3%             12.0%              10.4%          12.0%       4.5%          0.0%        11.4%
 Social cohesion                                                                0.0%            0.0%         5.0%          0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            4.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.3%
 Natural resource management                                                    9.1%            0.0%         5.0%          0.0%          1.8%             8.0%               6.3%            8.0%       0.0%          0.0%        6.8%
 Environmental sustainability                                                   0.0%            4.2%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               2.1%            4.0%       0.0%         10.0%        2.3%
 Health                                                                         0.0%            8.3%         5.0%          0.0%         14.0%             16.0%              6.3%           28.0%       9.1%          0.0%        11.4%
 Public financial management                                                    0.0%            0.0%         5.0%          8.3%          1.8%             8.0%               4.2%            0.0%       9.1%         20.0%        4.5%
 Agricultural development                                                      50.0%           33.3%        30.0%         16.7%         47.4%             12.0%              16.7%          28.0%       4.5%         20.0%        36.4%
 Job creation/employment                                                       13.6%           16.7%        25.0%          0.0%         22.8%             24.0%              12.5%          16.0%       4.5%         10.0%        15.9%
 Financial markets                                                              0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.3%
 Trade and exports                                                              0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%             4.0%               0.0%            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                                9.1%           12.5%        30.0%         33.3%          8.8%             8.0%               27.1%           8.0%      31.8%         10.0%        20.5%




                                                                                                                    72
The World Bank                                                                                                   Burundi                                                                                      Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Burundi? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                       Office of President, Employee Consultant                                     Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                    Independent
                                                                                   st    nd
  Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister, 1 or 2       of a       on Bank                      Local           lateral           Sector,         NGO/            Government
  (Responses Combined)                                                         V.P.          Ministry     project        PMU        Government         Agency         Private Bank        CBO    Media    Institution    Other
  Energy                                                                      77.3%           62.5%        60.0%        41.7%          42.1%            40.0%             43.8%          42.3%   54.5%      60.0%        45.5%
  Equality of opportunity                                                      4.5%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          1.8%             0.0%              2.1%           3.8%     0.0%       0.0%        4.5%
  Social protection                                                            4.5%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             8.0%              4.2%           7.7%     0.0%       0.0%        2.3%
  Global integration                                                           0.0%            4.2%        10.0%         0.0%          1.8%             8.0%              2.1%           0.0%     4.5%       0.0%        4.5%
  Climate change                                                               4.5%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          1.8%             0.0%              2.1%           3.8%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
  Anti-corruption                                                             36.4%           29.2%        25.0%        25.0%          33.3%            24.0%             31.3%          30.8%   40.9%      40.0%        38.6%
  Disaster management                                                          0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         8.3%          0.0%             4.0%              0.0%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
  Regional conflict and tensions                                               4.5%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          1.8%             4.0%              6.3%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.3%
  Rural development                                                           18.2%           16.7%        15.0%        25.0%          22.8%            20.0%             18.8%          7.7%    22.7%      10.0%        9.1%
  Foreign direct investment                                                    9.1%           20.8%         5.0%        25.0%          19.3%            24.0%             14.6%          19.2%    4.5%      40.0%        22.7%
  Urban development                                                            4.5%            0.0%         0.0%         8.3%          0.0%             0.0%              2.1%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                                         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          1.8%             0.0%              2.1%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
  Education                                                                    4.5%           25.0%        10.0%        25.0%          24.6%            24.0%             29.2%          30.8%   45.5%      20.0%        25.0%
  Global information and communications technology                             9.1%            4.2%         0.0%         8.3%          1.8%             4.0%              8.3%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.3%
  Regulatory framework                                                         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%              0.0%           3.8%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable disease                                        0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             4.0%              0.0%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
  Trade and exports                                                            0.0%            0.0%         5.0%         0.0%          7.0%             8.0%              16.7%          11.5%    9.1%      10.0%        9.1%
  Social cohesion                                                              0.0%            4.2%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%              0.0%           3.8%     0.0%       0.0%        2.3%
  Public sector reform                                                         0.0%            4.2%         0.0%         8.3%          0.0%             0.0%              4.2%           11.5%    4.5%       0.0%        4.5%
  Regional integration                                                         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          7.0%             4.0%              4.2%           3.8%     4.5%       0.0%        2.3%
  Domestic private sector development                                         27.3%           12.5%        20.0%        33.3%          8.8%             20.0%             20.8%          7.7%    13.6%      20.0%        13.6%
  Job creation/employment                                                      9.1%           25.0%        25.0%         0.0%          17.5%            8.0%              2.1%           15.4%    4.5%      30.0%        13.6%
  Agricultural development                                                    45.5%           41.7%        35.0%        33.3%          45.6%            20.0%             16.7%          19.2%    4.5%      10.0%        25.0%
  Food security                                                                4.5%            0.0%        10.0%         0.0%          5.3%             8.0%              8.3%           11.5%   22.7%       0.0%        9.1%
  Governance                                                                   4.5%            4.2%        15.0%        16.7%          3.5%             16.0%             4.2%           11.5%    9.1%       0.0%        9.1%
  Transport                                                                    4.5%            4.2%        15.0%         0.0%          7.0%             12.0%             10.4%          0.0%     9.1%       0.0%        2.3%
  Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                        0.0%           16.7%         0.0%         8.3%          8.8%             0.0%              4.2%           7.7%    13.6%      10.0%        2.3%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                                    0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          3.5%             0.0%              2.1%           0.0%     0.0%      10.0%        2.3%
  Gender                                                                       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%              2.1%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
  Natural resource management                                                  4.5%            4.2%        10.0%         0.0%          7.0%             4.0%              0.0%           3.8%     4.5%      10.0%        13.6%
  Environmental sustainability                                                 0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%              2.1%           7.7%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
  Health                                                                       4.5%            8.3%         0.0%         0.0%          7.0%             8.0%              6.3%           7.7%     4.5%      10.0%        13.6%
  Basic infrastructure                                                         4.5%            0.0%        20.0%        25.0%          5.3%             4.0%              6.3%           19.2%    9.1%      10.0%        2.3%
  Law and justice                                                              0.0%            4.2%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%              2.1%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        4.5%
  Local governance and institutions                                            4.5%            0.0%         5.0%         8.3%          1.8%             8.0%              2.1%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.3%
  Crime and violence                                                           0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%              2.1%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
  Public financial management                                                  9.1%            4.2%        15.0%         0.0%          10.5%            8.0%              8.3%           3.8%    13.6%      10.0%        9.1%
  Financial markets                                                            0.0%            8.3%         0.0%         0.0%          1.8%             0.0%              2.1%           0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.3%




                                                                                                                  73
The World Bank                                                                              Burundi   Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                             74
The World Bank                                                                                                     Burundi                                                                                              Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Burundi, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in Burundi?
  (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                     Office of President, Employee Consultant                                        Bi- or Multi-    Private/Financial                            Independent
                                                                                 st   nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Minister, 1 or 2        of a        on Bank                        Local           lateral            Sector,           NGO/                  Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                        V.P.          Ministry       project        PMU        Government          Agency          Private Bank          CBO       Media       Institution    Other
 Rural development                                                          40.9%           20.8%         45.0%          33.3%          40.4%            36.0%              30.4%            19.2%      45.5%         22.2%        40.9%
 Education                                                                   9.1%           37.5%         10.0%          16.7%          38.6%            16.0%              26.1%            30.8%      40.9%         11.1%        36.4%
 Governance                                                                  4.5%            0.0%         10.0%           8.3%          3.5%             16.0%              15.2%            11.5%       9.1%          0.0%        11.4%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                       0.0%           16.7%         15.0%           0.0%          8.8%             4.0%               8.7%             11.5%      18.2%          0.0%        6.8%
 Social protection                                                           0.0%            4.2%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               4.3%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Transport                                                                   9.1%           16.7%         15.0%           8.3%          10.5%            4.0%               4.3%             0.0%        9.1%          0.0%        6.8%
 Poverty reduction                                                          18.2%           12.5%         30.0%          16.7%          33.3%            12.0%              17.4%            19.2%      27.3%         11.1%        36.4%
 Public sector reform                                                        0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           8.3%          0.0%             4.0%               0.0%             3.8%        0.0%         11.1%        0.0%
 Regional integration                                                        0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          3.5%             4.0%               2.2%             3.8%        9.1%          0.0%        0.0%
 Gender                                                                      0.0%            0.0%          5.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               2.2%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        2.3%
 Crime and violence                                                          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             7.7%        0.0%          0.0%        2.3%
 Domestic private sector development                                        22.7%            4.2%         30.0%          33.3%          12.3%            12.0%              19.6%            0.0%        4.5%         22.2%        9.1%
 Foreign direct investment                                                   4.5%            8.3%          5.0%           0.0%          3.5%             8.0%               6.5%             3.8%        4.5%         11.1%        2.3%
 Water and sanitation                                                        0.0%            0.0%         10.0%           0.0%          3.5%             4.0%               0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Energy                                                                     59.1%           41.7%         15.0%          50.0%          29.8%            32.0%              30.4%            30.8%      45.5%         44.4%        20.5%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                   0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          3.5%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Social cohesion                                                             0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          1.8%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Public financial management                                                 9.1%            4.2%          0.0%           0.0%          5.3%             12.0%              8.7%             0.0%        4.5%         11.1%        9.1%
 Job creation/employment                                                    31.8%           20.8%         20.0%          16.7%          15.8%            16.0%              21.7%            15.4%       9.1%         22.2%        13.6%
 Financial markets                                                           0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           8.3%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             7.7%        0.0%         11.1%        2.3%
 Urban development                                                           0.0%            4.2%          0.0%          25.0%          1.8%             0.0%               2.2%             0.0%        4.5%          0.0%        0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                9.1%            4.2%          0.0%           8.3%          1.8%             4.0%               2.2%             3.8%        0.0%         11.1%        0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                     0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%        0.0%         11.1%        0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                              0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Health                                                                      4.5%           12.5%          0.0%           8.3%          12.3%            24.0%              6.5%             26.9%      13.6%         11.1%        13.6%
 Global integration                                                          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             3.8%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Food security                                                               0.0%            0.0%          5.0%           0.0%          8.8%             4.0%               10.9%            15.4%      13.6%         22.2%        4.5%
 Climate change                                                              0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               4.3%             3.8%        0.0%          0.0%        2.3%
 Agricultural development                                                   18.2%           41.7%         15.0%           8.3%          33.3%            32.0%              17.4%            23.1%       4.5%         11.1%        22.7%
 Trade and exports                                                           0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             4.0%               0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        2.3%
 Economic growth                                                            27.3%           20.8%         15.0%          25.0%          10.5%            24.0%              21.7%            19.2%      13.6%         22.2%        15.9%
 Law and justice                                                             0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          1.8%             0.0%               0.0%             3.8%        0.0%         11.1%        2.3%
 Local governance and institutions                                           4.5%            8.3%          5.0%           8.3%          1.8%             0.0%               2.2%             3.8%        0.0%         11.1%        0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                        4.5%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             4.0%               2.2%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                       0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             3.8%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                        4.5%            0.0%         35.0%           8.3%          8.8%             8.0%               8.7%             3.8%        0.0%          0.0%        9.1%
 Natural resource management                                                 4.5%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          1.8%             0.0%               2.2%             3.8%        0.0%          0.0%        6.8%
 Anti-corruption                                                             9.1%           12.5%         15.0%           0.0%          1.8%             4.0%               15.2%            11.5%      22.7%         11.1%        18.2%
 Disaster management                                                         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                            0.0%            8.3%          0.0%           8.3%          1.8%             8.0%               4.3%             3.8%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%




                                                                                                                    75
The World Bank                                                                                                         Burundi                                                                                      Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Burundi?
 Greatest Value                                                           Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                    Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                      st   nd
                                                                          Minister, 1 or 2          of a      on Bank                        Local            lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        V.P.            Ministry     project         PMU        Government          Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Financial resources                                                             41.2%             52.9%       50.0%           37.5%         37.8%             50.0%             37.8%         16.7%   14.3%      50.0%        21.4%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                      11.8%             11.8%       28.6%           25.0%         16.2%             7.1%              10.8%         5.6%     7.1%       0.0%        17.9%
 Technical assistance                                                             0.0%              0.0%        0.0%           12.5%         2.7%              0.0%              5.4%          5.6%    14.3%       0.0%        3.6%
 Policy advice                                                                   11.8%              0.0%        0.0%           12.5%         2.7%              7.1%              8.1%          5.6%     7.1%       0.0%        3.6%
 Donor coordination                                                               5.9%              5.9%        0.0%            0.0%         10.8%             7.1%              5.4%          11.1%   35.7%       0.0%        7.1%
 Data                                                                             0.0%              5.9%        0.0%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          11.1%    0.0%      12.5%        3.6%
 Training/capacity building                                                       5.9%              0.0%        7.1%           12.5%         10.8%             7.1%              18.9%         16.7%   14.3%       0.0%        10.7%
 Studies/analyses                                                                 5.9%              5.9%        0.0%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%              2.7%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Convening/facilitating                                                           0.0%              0.0%        0.0%            0.0%         2.7%              0.0%              0.0%          11.1%    0.0%       0.0%        3.6%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                    0.0%              0.0%        0.0%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%      12.5%        0.0%
 Strategy formulation                                                            17.6%             17.6%       14.3%            0.0%         16.2%             14.3%             10.8%         16.7%    7.1%      25.0%        28.6%
 Other                                                                            0.0%              0.0%        0.0%            0.0%         0.0%              7.1%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Burundi?
   nd
 2 Greatest Value                                                         Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                    Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                      st   nd
                                                                          Minister, 1 or 2          of a      on Bank                        Local            lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        V.P.            Ministry     project         PMU        Government          Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Financial resources                                                             15.4%             17.6%       21.4%           11.1%         7.9%              0.0%              13.9%         33.3%    8.3%      25.0%        16.7%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                       7.7%             11.8%        0.0%            0.0%         7.9%              14.3%             16.7%         5.6%     8.3%       0.0%        13.3%
 Technical assistance                                                             0.0%              0.0%        7.1%            0.0%         13.2%             21.4%             11.1%         0.0%     8.3%      25.0%        10.0%
 Policy advice                                                                   15.4%              0.0%       14.3%           22.2%         0.0%              7.1%              2.8%          16.7%   16.7%       0.0%        3.3%
 Donor coordination                                                               7.7%             11.8%       14.3%           22.2%         18.4%             7.1%              8.3%          11.1%   16.7%      25.0%        10.0%
 Data                                                                             0.0%              0.0%        0.0%            0.0%         7.9%              0.0%              2.8%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Training/capacity building                                                       0.0%             29.4%        7.1%            0.0%         10.5%             0.0%              11.1%         11.1%    8.3%      25.0%        20.0%
 Studies/analyses                                                                 7.7%             11.8%        0.0%            0.0%         5.3%              14.3%             2.8%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        6.7%
 Convening/facilitating                                                          30.8%              0.0%        0.0%           22.2%         2.6%              7.1%              0.0%          11.1%    8.3%       0.0%        3.3%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                   15.4%              0.0%        0.0%           11.1%         0.0%              21.4%             8.3%          5.6%     8.3%       0.0%        6.7%
 Strategy formulation                                                             0.0%             17.6%       35.7%           11.1%         26.3%             7.1%              16.7%         5.6%    16.7%       0.0%        10.0%
 Other                                                                            0.0%              0.0%        0.0%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%              5.6%          5.6%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                           Office of President, Employee Consultant                                        Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                       st   nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                                 Minister, 1 or 2        of a     on Bank                          Local            lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                              V.P.          Ministry    project      PMU             Government          Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities            25.0%           36.8%      21.1%         9.1%              41.2%             16.7%             27.9%         32.0%   28.6%      11.1%        28.2%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                         10.0%           15.8%       5.3%        27.3%              0.0%              8.3%              9.3%          20.0%    4.8%      33.3%        12.8%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                      20.0%           10.5%      21.1%        27.3%              5.9%              25.0%             32.6%         8.0%     9.5%      44.4%        10.3%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                           25.0%           10.5%       0.0%         0.0%              17.6%             20.8%             4.7%          8.0%     0.0%       0.0%        10.3%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                          5.0%            0.0%       5.3%         0.0%              0.0%              4.2%              2.3%          4.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.6%
 Not client focused                                                                0.0%            0.0%      10.5%         0.0%              2.0%              0.0%              9.3%          4.0%     9.5%       0.0%        2.6%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                             0.0%            0.0%       0.0%         0.0%              3.9%              0.0%              2.3%          4.0%     4.8%      22.2%        0.0%
 Not have to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country         5.0%            0.0%      26.3%         9.1%              3.9%              8.3%              0.0%          0.0%     4.8%      11.1%        15.4%
 Too influenced by developed countries                                            30.0%           36.8%      15.8%        18.2%              35.3%             29.2%             16.3%         28.0%   28.6%      33.3%        23.1%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                         10.0%           15.8%      26.3%         9.1%              19.6%             25.0%             25.6%         8.0%    38.1%      22.2%        23.1%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                        20.0%           21.1%      15.8%         9.1%              17.6%             8.3%              9.3%          16.0%    9.5%      33.3%        10.3%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                               5.0%           26.3%      10.5%         9.1%              23.5%             0.0%              14.0%         20.0%    9.5%       0.0%        10.3%
 Not aligned with other donors' work                                               0.0%            0.0%       0.0%         0.0%              2.0%              25.0%             2.3%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        7.7%
 Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                   10.0%           10.5%      26.3%        54.5%              11.8%             16.7%             32.6%         28.0%   42.9%      11.1%        33.3%
 Other                                                                            25.0%            5.3%       5.3%         0.0%              2.0%              0.0%              2.3%          8.0%     0.0%       0.0%        7.7%


                                                                                                                          76
The World Bank                                                                                                    Burundi                                                                                  Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                        Office of President, Employee Consultant                                  Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                    st   nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Minister, 1 or 2        of a       on Bank                      Local        lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                           V.P.          Ministry     project       PMU         Government      Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Investment lending                                                            73.7%           56.5%        94.7%        83.3%          81.8%         20.8%             58.7%         61.5%   66.7%      55.6%        73.8%
 Capacity building                                                             15.8%           26.1%        10.5%         8.3%          23.6%         45.8%             21.7%         23.1%   19.0%      11.1%        33.3%
 Policy based lending/Budget support to the Government                         57.9%           39.1%         5.3%        16.7%          29.1%         20.8%             15.2%         15.4%   23.8%      22.2%        21.4%
 Analytical work                                                                5.3%            0.0%         5.3%        16.7%          1.8%          4.2%              13.0%         23.1%    0.0%      11.1%        2.4%
 Technical assistance                                                          10.5%           30.4%        26.3%         8.3%          20.0%         25.0%             19.6%         11.5%   14.3%      44.4%        7.1%
 Trust Fund management                                                          5.3%            0.0%         0.0%         8.3%          3.6%          8.3%              8.7%          7.7%    14.3%       0.0%        4.8%
 Co-financing arrangements                                                      5.3%           21.7%        21.1%        16.7%          16.4%         29.2%             19.6%         23.1%   28.6%       0.0%        14.3%
 Sector-wide approaches                                                         0.0%           13.0%         0.0%        16.7%          7.3%          16.7%             8.7%          7.7%     0.0%      44.4%        7.1%
 Emergency recovery lending                                                    15.8%            8.7%        36.8%        16.7%          14.5%         16.7%             26.1%         11.5%   28.6%      11.1%        26.2%
 Don't know                                                                     5.3%            4.3%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%              4.3%          7.7%     0.0%       0.0%        2.4%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                         Office of President, Employee Consultant                                 Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                     st   nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Minister, 1 or 2        of a       on Bank                     Local        lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                            V.P.          Ministry      project       PMU       Government      Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Investment lending                                                              5.3%            9.1%         0.0%         8.3%         10.9%         12.0%             15.6%         24.0%   15.0%      22.2%        7.7%
 Capacity building                                                              42.1%            0.0%        10.0%        16.7%         14.5%         4.0%              6.7%          16.0%   10.0%       0.0%        12.8%
 Policy based lending/Budget support to the Government                          21.1%           27.3%        55.0%        25.0%         16.4%         24.0%             37.8%         20.0%   30.0%      11.1%        33.3%
 Analytical work                                                                31.6%           22.7%        15.0%        16.7%         25.5%         20.0%             28.9%         16.0%   20.0%      11.1%        33.3%
 Technical assistance                                                           10.5%           36.4%        15.0%        25.0%         18.2%         32.0%             20.0%         16.0%   15.0%      55.6%        17.9%
 Trust Fund management                                                           5.3%           13.6%        15.0%        16.7%         23.6%         16.0%             11.1%         28.0%   15.0%      33.3%        17.9%
 Co-financing arrangements                                                      10.5%           13.6%        10.0%        16.7%         12.7%         16.0%             11.1%         32.0%   20.0%       0.0%        12.8%
 Sector-wide approaches                                                         21.1%            4.5%        10.0%        16.7%         3.6%          24.0%             11.1%         4.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Emergency recovery lending                                                     10.5%           18.2%        15.0%         8.3%         14.5%         12.0%             17.8%         12.0%   30.0%      33.3%        23.1%
 Don't know                                                                     10.5%           27.3%        20.0%        16.7%         30.9%         12.0%             11.1%         16.0%   15.0%      11.1%        10.3%

To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                   77
The World Bank                                                                                                          Burundi                                                                                                Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups   should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)?
                                                                            Office of President, Employee Consultant                                        Bi- or Multi-    Private/Financial                           Independent
                                                                                        st   nd
  Percentage of Respondents                                                 Minister, 1 or 2         of a       on Bank                        Local           lateral            Sector,         NGO/                   Government
  (Responses Combined)                                                              V.P.           Ministry      project        PMU         Government         Agency          Private Bank        CBO       Media        Institution     Other
  NGOs                                                                              9.5%            17.4%          4.8%          8.3%          14.5%            0.0%               10.4%          48.1%      18.2%           0.0%         27.9%
  Local government                                                                 38.1%            39.1%         14.3%         16.7%          41.8%            16.7%              10.4%          7.4%       22.7%           0.0%         7.0%
  Beneficiaries                                                                    33.3%            52.2%         71.4%         25.0%          49.1%            29.2%              31.3%          33.3%      45.5%          33.3%         37.2%
  Private sector                                                                   19.0%            30.4%         61.9%         50.0%          5.5%             33.3%              58.3%          11.1%      18.2%          44.4%         37.2%
  Community-based organizations (CBOs)                                             38.1%            34.8%          9.5%         25.0%          41.8%            16.7%              27.1%          37.0%      27.3%          55.6%         37.2%
  Donor community                                                                  38.1%             4.3%          9.5%         16.7%          14.5%            37.5%              8.3%           14.8%       9.1%          11.1%         2.3%
  Foundations                                                                       0.0%             0.0%          0.0%          8.3%          1.8%             0.0%               4.2%           0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         2.3%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                          0.0%             4.3%          4.8%          8.3%          1.8%             4.2%               10.4%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         16.3%
  Parliament                                                                        4.8%             4.3%          0.0%          0.0%          5.5%             8.3%               4.2%           7.4%        0.0%           0.0%         4.7%
  Media                                                                             4.8%             4.3%          0.0%         16.7%          1.8%             20.8%              12.5%          18.5%      45.5%          11.1%         9.3%
  Faith-based organizations                                                         0.0%             0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          1.8%             0.0%               4.2%           7.4%        0.0%          11.1%         4.7%
  UN and regional peace-keeping forces                                              4.8%             0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%             0.0%               0.0%           0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         0.0%
  Emerging donors                                                                   4.8%             0.0%          4.8%         16.7%          5.5%             12.5%              4.2%           3.7%        4.5%           0.0%         9.3%
  UN agencies                                                                       4.8%             0.0%         14.3%          0.0%          1.8%             8.3%               4.2%           3.7%        4.5%           0.0%         2.3%
  Regional organizations                                                            0.0%             4.3%          0.0%          8.3%          9.1%             4.2%               0.0%           7.4%        9.1%          11.1%         0.0%
  Other                                                                             0.0%             4.3%          4.8%          0.0%          1.8%             4.2%               6.3%           0.0%        0.0%          22.2%         2.3%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Burundi, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                         78
The World Bank                                                                                                           Burundi                                                                                       Country Survey 2012

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Burundi in terms of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                          Office of President, Employee Consultant                                      Bi- or Multi-       Private/Financial                    Independent
                                                                                      st    nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                                 Minister, 1 or 2       of a       on Bank                        Local          lateral               Sector,        NGO/             Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                             V.P.          Ministry      project         PMU        Government        Agency             Private Bank      CBO      Media    Institution     Other
 The World Bank works too slowly                                                       14.3%        9.5%          4.8%           8.3%          21.4%            8.0%                     8.5%    14.8%    4.5%           20.0%     10.0%
 The Government works inefficiently                                                      0.0%      28.6%         38.1%          50.0%            8.9%          36.0%                   51.1%     40.7%   27.3%           20.0%     35.0%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                 23.8%       19.0%         28.6%          16.7%          21.4%           16.0%                   21.3%     18.5%   13.6%           30.0%     32.5%
 Poor donor coordination                                                               28.6%       19.0%          4.8%           0.0%          14.3%           12.0%                   17.0%     11.1%   36.4%             0.0%    10.0%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                          23.8%       14.3%          4.8%           8.3%          16.1%            8.0%                   10.6%     11.1%   18.2%             0.0%    12.5%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                     9.5%       4.8%         28.6%          33.3%            5.4%          28.0%                   10.6%     22.2%   18.2%           10.0%     12.5%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                                     14.3%       19.0%         23.8%          25.0%          32.1%           12.0%                   21.3%     25.9%   22.7%           10.0%     25.0%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                       33.3%       42.9%         28.6%          33.3%          32.1%           24.0%                   25.5%     33.3%   27.3%           50.0%     32.5%
 Ongoing conflict and instability                                                        4.8%      14.3%         14.3%           8.3%          14.3%           20.0%                   14.9%     11.1%    9.1%           10.0%     15.0%
 Inadequate funding                                                                    33.3%       23.8%         14.3%           8.3%          28.6%            8.0%                     6.4%    11.1%    9.1%           50.0%     10.0%
 Other                                                                                   4.8%       0.0%          4.8%           0.0%            0.0%           8.0%                     2.1%     0.0%    4.5%             0.0%     0.0%




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                          79
The World Bank                                                                                                            Burundi                                                                 Country Survey 2012

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Burundi, on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                           80
The World Bank                                                                                                     Burundi                                                                                              Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

When thinking about the development challenges in Burundi, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                      Office of President, Employee Consultant                                          Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                          Independent
                                                                                   st   nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister, 1 or 2        of a        on Bank                         Local           lateral           Sector,          NGO/                 Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                         V.P.           Ministry      project        PMU        Government            Agency         Private Bank         CBO       Media      Institution    Other
 Public sector reform                                                        13.6%             4.3%         23.8%         0.0%             8.8%             12.0%             14.9%           23.1%      13.6%         0.0%        20.5%
 Gender                                                                       4.5%             0.0%          4.8%         0.0%             3.5%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        2.3%
 Social cohesion                                                              4.5%             0.0%          0.0%         0.0%             1.8%             0.0%              2.1%             0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Education                                                                    4.5%            21.7%          9.5%        18.2%            29.8%             12.0%             21.3%           15.4%      36.4%        30.0%        20.5%
 Domestic private sector development                                          9.1%            21.7%         42.9%        18.2%            15.8%             20.0%             31.9%            3.8%      31.8%        10.0%        29.5%
 Foreign direct investment                                                    0.0%             4.3%          0.0%         0.0%             8.8%             4.0%              2.1%             3.8%       4.5%        10.0%        2.3%
 Water and sanitation                                                         0.0%             4.3%          9.5%         0.0%             1.8%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%       4.5%         0.0%        0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                            4.5%             0.0%          0.0%         9.1%             0.0%             4.0%              0.0%             0.0%       4.5%         0.0%        2.3%
 Economic growth                                                             31.8%            39.1%         33.3%        27.3%            29.8%             32.0%             23.4%           15.4%      18.2%        30.0%        22.7%
 Energy                                                                      59.1%            43.5%         42.9%        36.4%            28.1%             12.0%             31.9%           30.8%      45.5%        30.0%        22.7%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                               0.0%             8.7%          0.0%         0.0%             0.0%             0.0%              4.3%             3.8%       4.5%        10.0%        0.0%
 Disaster management                                                          0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         0.0%             1.8%             4.0%              2.1%             0.0%       4.5%         0.0%        0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                    0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         9.1%             1.8%             0.0%              2.1%             0.0%       4.5%         0.0%        2.3%
 Governance                                                                   0.0%            13.0%          9.5%         9.1%             7.0%             12.0%             4.3%            15.4%       4.5%        10.0%        9.1%
 Social protection                                                            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         0.0%             0.0%             16.0%             8.5%             3.8%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Climate change                                                               9.1%            13.0%          0.0%         0.0%             5.3%             4.0%              4.3%             7.7%       0.0%        20.0%        2.3%
 Poverty reduction                                                           27.3%            17.4%         14.3%        18.2%            33.3%             16.0%             17.0%           23.1%      18.2%        20.0%        27.3%
 Law and justice                                                              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         0.0%             1.8%             4.0%              2.1%             0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        4.5%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                        4.5%             8.7%          0.0%         0.0%             3.5%             0.0%              4.3%             3.8%       4.5%         0.0%        2.3%
 Anti-corruption                                                             27.3%            13.0%          9.5%        18.2%             3.5%             32.0%             19.1%           15.4%      36.4%        40.0%        22.7%
 Financial markets                                                            0.0%             0.0%          4.8%         9.1%             0.0%             8.0%              2.1%             3.8%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                      0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         0.0%             0.0%             0.0%              0.0%             3.8%       0.0%        10.0%        2.3%
 Urban development                                                            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         9.1%             0.0%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%       0.0%        10.0%        0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                           0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         0.0%             0.0%             4.0%              0.0%             0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Regional integration                                                         0.0%             0.0%          4.8%         0.0%             3.5%             4.0%              6.4%             3.8%       9.1%         0.0%        0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                             0.0%             4.3%          0.0%         0.0%             1.8%             4.0%              4.3%             7.7%       0.0%         0.0%        9.1%
 Local governance and institutions                                            4.5%             8.7%          0.0%        18.2%             3.5%             4.0%              2.1%             0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        2.3%
 Transport                                                                    9.1%             4.3%          9.5%         9.1%             3.5%             4.0%              2.1%             0.0%       4.5%         0.0%        4.5%
 Agricultural development                                                    45.5%            13.0%         23.8%        27.3%            38.6%             28.0%             29.8%           34.6%       4.5%        10.0%        25.0%
 Natural resource management                                                  9.1%             8.7%          0.0%        18.2%             5.3%             0.0%              4.3%             7.7%       4.5%        10.0%        6.8%
 Public financial management                                                  4.5%             0.0%          4.8%         0.0%             5.3%             4.0%              4.3%             0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        4.5%
 Job creation/employment                                                      0.0%            17.4%          9.5%         0.0%            10.5%             20.0%             6.4%            15.4%      13.6%        20.0%        6.8%
 Health                                                                       0.0%             4.3%          4.8%         9.1%            14.0%             0.0%              10.6%           15.4%       4.5%        10.0%        2.3%
 Rural development                                                           18.2%             8.7%         14.3%        27.3%            21.1%             12.0%             4.3%             7.7%       0.0%         0.0%        11.4%
 Global integration                                                           0.0%             4.3%          4.8%         0.0%             0.0%             4.0%              0.0%             3.8%       9.1%         0.0%        2.3%
 Food security                                                                4.5%             4.3%          4.8%         0.0%             3.5%             0.0%              6.4%            15.4%       9.1%         0.0%        11.4%
 Environmental sustainability                                                 0.0%             8.7%          0.0%         0.0%             0.0%             0.0%              2.1%             0.0%       0.0%        10.0%        6.8%
 Regulatory framework                                                         0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         0.0%             0.0%             4.0%              0.0%             3.8%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                         4.5%             0.0%         14.3%         0.0%             3.5%             0.0%              6.4%             3.8%       0.0%         0.0%        6.8%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                        0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         0.0%             0.0%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%




                                                                                                                    81
The World Bank                                                                                                                    Burundi                  Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at … in Burundi? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Burundi, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research …? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                   82
The World Bank                                                                                                         Burundi       Country Survey 2012

E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups


F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                        83
The World Bank                                                                                                    Burundi                                                                               Country Survey 2012

F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi (continued)

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                        Office of President, Employee Consultant                               Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                    st    nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Minister, 1 or 2        of a      on Bank                   Local        lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                           V.P.           Ministry     project       PMU     Government      Agency         Private Bank      CBO     Media    Institution    Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Burundi’s specific
                                                                               40.0%            22.7%        4.8%         8.3%      22.8%         25.0%             15.9%          30.8%   23.8%      10.0%        19.0%
 challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                       55.0%            81.8%       52.4%         58.3%     63.2%         16.7%             29.5%          46.2%   47.6%      60.0%        52.4%
 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                  0.0%             9.1%        4.8%          8.3%     14.0%         12.5%             20.5%          19.2%   19.0%      10.0%        16.7%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets               5.0%            22.7%       14.3%         25.0%     19.3%         25.0%             20.5%          11.5%   19.0%      10.0%        19.0%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                         5.0%             0.0%       19.0%          8.3%     3.5%          12.5%             6.8%           11.5%   19.0%       0.0%        11.9%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Burundi's
                                                                                0.0%             4.5%       23.8%         25.0%     14.0%         16.7%             25.0%          19.2%   23.8%      40.0%        14.3%
 economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                                      25.0%            18.2%       33.3%         25.0%     17.5%         16.7%             29.5%          23.1%   23.8%      60.0%        28.6%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                      25.0%            18.2%       14.3%         25.0%     12.3%         16.7%             31.8%          7.7%    23.8%       0.0%        19.0%
 Work faster                                                                    0.0%             0.0%       14.3%          8.3%     21.1%         4.2%              2.3%           15.4%    9.5%       0.0%        2.4%
 Increase the level of World Bank staffing in Burundi's office                 20.0%             4.5%        4.8%          0.0%     3.5%          37.5%             4.5%           11.5%    9.5%      10.0%        4.8%
 Other                                                                         10.0%             9.1%        4.8%          0.0%     0.0%          0.0%              9.1%           0.0%     4.8%       0.0%        4.8%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                       Office of President, Employee Consultant                                Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                   st   nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister, 1 or 2        of a      on Bank                     Local        lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                          V.P.          Ministry     project       PMU       Government      Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Local newspapers                                                             30.0%           45.5%        50.0%       30.0%         56.1%         25.0%             40.0%         40.0%   42.9%      50.0%        43.9%
 International newspapers                                                      0.0%            4.5%        15.0%        0.0%         5.3%          25.0%             8.9%          16.0%   19.0%       0.0%        4.9%
 Local radio                                                                  40.0%           59.1%        55.0%       60.0%         66.7%         16.7%             37.8%         36.0%   42.9%      40.0%        61.0%
 International radio                                                           5.0%            0.0%         0.0%       10.0%         10.5%         8.3%              4.4%          8.0%     9.5%       0.0%        9.8%
 Local television                                                             25.0%           27.3%        25.0%       10.0%         19.3%         8.3%              13.3%         16.0%   14.3%      20.0%        12.2%
 International television                                                     10.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         3.5%          8.3%              6.7%          16.0%    0.0%      10.0%        9.8%
 Periodicals                                                                  25.0%           13.6%        10.0%        0.0%         5.3%          8.3%              13.3%         4.0%     0.0%      20.0%        9.8%
 Internet                                                                     55.0%           13.6%        25.0%       80.0%         10.5%         75.0%             46.7%         36.0%   38.1%      60.0%        36.6%
 Blogs                                                                         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%              2.2%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.4%
 Mobile phones                                                                 0.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         3.5%          4.2%              0.0%          12.0%    0.0%       0.0%        2.4%
 Instant messaging                                                             0.0%            4.5%         0.0%        0.0%         1.8%          0.0%              0.0%          4.0%     9.5%       0.0%        0.0%
 Other                                                                         5.0%           22.7%        10.0%       10.0%         8.8%          8.3%              13.3%         4.0%     9.5%       0.0%        4.9%


How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                      Office of President, Employee     Consultant                             Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                  st    nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister, 1 or 2       of a       on Bank                     Local        lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                         V.P.          Ministry      project         PMU     Government      Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 World Bank website                                                          42.9%           25.0%        52.6%           66.7%      16.1%         48.0%             36.2%         40.0%   50.0%      30.0%        50.0%
 Direct contact with World Bank                                              19.0%           20.8%        42.1%           25.0%      33.9%         16.0%             42.6%         24.0%   35.0%      30.0%        19.0%
 e-Newsletters                                                                9.5%           29.2%        21.1%            0.0%      3.6%          28.0%             19.1%         12.0%   15.0%      40.0%        21.4%
 Instant messaging                                                           14.3%            0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      3.6%          4.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.4%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                   42.9%           66.7%        47.4%           50.0%      69.6%         16.0%             38.3%         48.0%   35.0%      40.0%        40.5%
 World Bank Public Information Center                                        14.3%           16.7%         0.0%           25.0%      12.5%         16.0%             10.6%         8.0%     0.0%      10.0%        21.4%
 World Bank publications and other written materials                         38.1%           25.0%        31.6%           25.0%      39.3%         28.0%             31.9%         32.0%   20.0%      50.0%        38.1%
 Mobile phones                                                                0.0%            4.2%         5.3%            0.0%      5.4%          4.0%              0.0%          20.0%    5.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Social media                                                                19.0%            4.2%         0.0%            0.0%      10.7%         16.0%             12.8%         12.0%   30.0%       0.0%        2.4%
 Blogs                                                                        0.0%            0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      1.8%          0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Other                                                                        0.0%            0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      1.8%          0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        2.4%


                                                                                                                     84
The World Bank                                                                                                        Burundi                                                                                            Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its   possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                                        Office of President, Employee Consultant                                               Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                    Independent
                                                                                    st    nd
                                                                         Minister, 1 or 2        of a        on Bank                           Local              lateral           Sector,        NGO/             Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      V.P.          Ministry        project          PMU         Government             Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media     Institution    Other
 Yes                                                                           27.3%            0.0%           0.0%            16.7%           5.4%                13.0%             9.1%          12.5%   10.0%       11.1%        7.7%
 No                                                                            72.7%           100.0%         100.0%           83.3%          94.6%                87.0%             90.9%         87.5%   90.0%       88.9%        92.3%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?*
                                                                          Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                       Bi- or Multi-    Private/Financial                    Independent
                                                                                      st   nd
                                                                          Minister, 1 or 2          of a      on Bank                          Local             lateral            Sector,        NGO/             Government
  Percentage of Respondents                                                       V.P.            Ministry     project         PMU          Government           Agency          Private Bank       CBO    Media     Institution    Other
  Yes                                                                            22.7%              9.1%        6.3%           27.3%           3.8%               29.2%              14.0%         20.8%   17.6%       50.0%        13.2%
  No                                                                             77.3%             90.9%       93.8%           72.7%           96.2%              70.8%              86.0%         79.2%   82.4%       50.0%        86.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                                          Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                       Bi- or Multi-    Private/Financial                    Independent
                                                                                      st   nd
                                                                          Minister, 1 or 2         of a       on Bank                          Local             lateral            Sector,        NGO/             Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        V.P.            Ministry     project         PMU          Government           Agency          Private Bank       CBO    Media     Institution    Other
 Yes                                                                             60.0%            100.0%      100.0%           66.7%          100.0%             100.0%             100.0%         83.3%   100.0%      60.0%        50.0%
 No                                                                              40.0%             0.0%         0.0%           33.3%           0.0%               0.0%               0.0%          16.7%    0.0%       40.0%        50.0%

Do you have access to the Internet?*
                                                                          Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                       Bi- or Multi-    Private/Financial                    Independent
                                                                                      st   nd
                                                                          Minister, 1 or 2          of a      on Bank                          Local             lateral            Sector,        NGO/             Government
  Percentage of Respondents                                                       V.P.            Ministry     project         PMU          Government           Agency          Private Bank       CBO    Media     Institution    Other
  Yes                                                                            77.8%             70.8%       95.0%           91.7%           35.8%              91.3%              93.5%         72.0%   94.1%       90.0%        84.2%
  No                                                                             22.2%             29.2%        5.0%            8.3%           64.2%              8.7%               6.5%          28.0%    5.9%       10.0%        15.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*
                                                                          Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                       Bi- or Multi-    Private/Financial                    Independent
                                                                                      st   nd
                                                                          Minister, 1 or 2          of a      on Bank                          Local             lateral            Sector,        NGO/             Government
  Percentage of Respondents                                                       V.P.            Ministry     project         PMU          Government           Agency          Private Bank       CBO    Media     Institution    Other
  Yes                                                                            33.3%             20.8%       22.2%           58.3%           9.6%               54.2%              47.7%         28.0%   55.6%       66.7%        43.6%
  No                                                                             66.7%             79.2%       77.8%           41.7%           90.4%              45.8%              52.3%         72.0%   44.4%       33.3%        56.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which do you primarily use?*
                                                                          Office of President,   Employee    Consultant                                       Bi- or Multi-    Private/Financial                    Independent
                                                                                      st   nd
                                                                          Minister, 1 or 2          of a      on Bank                          Local             lateral            Sector,        NGO/             Government
  Percentage of Respondents                                                       V.P.            Ministry     project         PMU          Government           Agency          Private Bank       CBO    Media     Institution    Other
  The World Bank's country website (www. worldbank.org/burundi)                  23.1%             37.5%       83.3%           14.3%           80.0%              68.4%              72.4%         55.6%   64.3%       42.9%        58.8%
  The World Bank's main website (www.worldbank.org)                              76.9%             62.5%       16.7%           85.7%           20.0%              31.6%              27.6%         44.4%   35.7%       57.1%        41.2%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Burundi?*
                                                                        Office of President,     Employee    Consultant                                       Bi- or Multi-    Private/Financial                    Independent
                                                                                    st   nd
                                                                        Minister, 1 or 2            of a      on Bank                          Local             lateral            Sector,        NGO/             Government
  Percentage of Respondents                                                     V.P.              Ministry     project         PMU          Government           Agency          Private Bank       CBO    Media     Institution    Other
  Yes                                                                           9.1%                4.3%        0.0%           16.7%           3.9%               9.1%               18.2%         13.0%   14.3%       10.0%        7.9%
  No                                                                           63.6%               56.5%       82.4%           66.7%           52.9%              77.3%              63.6%         73.9%   71.4%       90.0%        63.2%
  I don’t know what a PIC is                                                   27.3%               39.1%       17.6%           16.7%           43.1%              13.6%              18.2%         13.0%   14.3%        0.0%        28.9%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                                                          85
The World Bank                                                                                                         Burundi                                                                               Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
                                                                         Office of President,   Employee     Consultant                             Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                     st    nd
                                                                          Minister, 1 or 2         of a       on Bank                     Local        lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       V.P.            Ministry      project         PMU     Government      Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Yes                                                                            95.5%             56.5%        95.0%           91.7%      80.4%         92.0%             71.4%         87.5%   66.7%      70.0%        62.8%
 No                                                                              4.5%             43.5%         5.0%            8.3%      19.6%         8.0%              28.6%         12.5%   33.3%      30.0%        37.2%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                        Office of President, Employee Consultant                                    Bi- or Multi-   Private/Financial                   Independent
                                                                                    st    nd
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Minister, 1 or 2       of a       on Bank                        Local        lateral           Sector,        NGO/            Government
 (Responses Combined)                                                           V.P.          Ministry     project             PMU     Government      Agency         Private Bank       CBO    Media    Institution    Other
 Observer                                                                      23.8%           16.7%        10.0%               0.0%      16.7%         12.5%             27.3%         37.5%   35.0%      40.0%        26.2%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                                   14.3%           27.8%        15.0%              27.3%      18.5%         20.8%             2.3%          20.8%   35.0%       0.0%        26.2%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                      28.6%           66.7%        70.0%              45.5%      59.3%         20.8%             47.7%         37.5%   25.0%      40.0%        38.1%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                 66.7%           33.3%        45.0%              81.8%      57.4%         66.7%             50.0%         37.5%   40.0%      50.0%        47.6%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                   0.0%            5.6%         0.0%               0.0%      11.1%         8.3%              15.9%         16.7%   25.0%      30.0%        11.9%




                                                                                                                          86
The World Bank                                                            Burundi                                                      Country Survey 2012




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location

A. General Issues facing Burundi

In general, would you say that Burundi is headed in...?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    East            West             North           South            Center
 The right direction                                                         81.8%            67.3%            81.8%           79.2%            87.9%
 The wrong direction                                                         9.1%             21.4%            9.1%            20.8%            12.1%
 Not sure                                                                    9.1%             11.2%            9.1%             0.0%             0.0%
                                                                                                              st   nd    rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Burundi. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development
    priority.
 1st Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    East            West             North           South            Center
 Rural development                                                           9.4%             16.0%            23.3%           38.5%            24.1%
 Education                                                                   15.6%            16.8%            23.3%           15.4%            20.7%
 Social protection                                                           0.0%             2.5%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Transport                                                                   0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             3.8%             0.0%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                       15.6%            3.4%             0.0%            11.5%            13.8%
 Poverty reduction                                                           3.1%             7.6%             6.7%             3.8%             3.4%
 Public sector reform                                                        3.1%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Regional integration                                                        6.3%             7.6%             3.3%            11.5%             3.4%
 Gender                                                                      0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                         0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                                   0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                        0.0%             1.7%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Energy                                                                      15.6%            2.5%             6.7%             0.0%             6.9%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                              0.0%             1.7%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                   3.1%             1.7%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Public financial management                                                 3.1%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                     3.1%             5.9%             3.3%             0.0%             0.0%
 Governance                                                                  3.1%             11.8%            0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Financial markets                                                           0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Urban development                                                           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             3.8%             0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                     0.0%             1.7%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Health                                                                      3.1%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Global integration                                                          3.1%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Food security                                                               0.0%             0.0%             6.7%             0.0%             3.4%
 Social cohesion                                                             0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Climate change                                                              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                    6.3%             3.4%             3.3%             3.8%            10.3%
 Trade and exports                                                           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                          0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Economic growth                                                             3.1%             2.5%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Law and justice                                                             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             3.8%             0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                        0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                       0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                        0.0%             0.8%             3.3%             0.0%             3.4%
 Local governance and institutions                                           0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                 0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                             3.1%             5.9%             20.0%            3.8%            10.3%
 Disaster management                                                         0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                            0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%




                                                                            87
The World Bank                                                            Burundi                                                      Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)
                                                                                                              st   nd    rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Burundi. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development
    priority.
   nd
 2 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    East            West             North           South            Center
 Rural development                                                           9.4%             4.2%             10.0%            3.8%            17.2%
 Education                                                                   12.5%            13.6%            6.7%             3.8%            13.8%
 Social protection                                                           3.1%             2.5%             3.3%             7.7%             0.0%
 Transport                                                                   0.0%             2.5%             0.0%             3.8%             0.0%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                       0.0%             3.4%             0.0%             0.0%             6.9%
 Poverty reduction                                                           3.1%             9.3%             16.7%            7.7%             6.9%
 Public sector reform                                                        0.0%             1.7%             10.0%            7.7%             3.4%
 Regional integration                                                        3.1%             4.2%             6.7%             0.0%            10.3%
 Gender                                                                      0.0%             1.7%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                         6.3%             1.7%             3.3%             0.0%             3.4%
 Foreign direct investment                                                   0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             3.8%             6.9%
 Water and sanitation                                                        0.0%             1.7%             0.0%             3.8%             0.0%
 Energy                                                                      18.8%            7.6%             0.0%             3.8%             0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                              3.1%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                   0.0%             0.0%             3.3%             3.8%             0.0%
 Public financial management                                                 0.0%             1.7%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                     3.1%             9.3%             10.0%            3.8%             3.4%
 Governance                                                                  3.1%             3.4%             3.3%             7.7%             0.0%
 Financial markets                                                           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Urban development                                                           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             3.8%             0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                     0.0%             0.8%             3.3%             0.0%             0.0%
 Health                                                                      0.0%             2.5%             6.7%             3.8%             6.9%
 Global integration                                                          3.1%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Food security                                                               3.1%             3.4%             3.3%            11.5%             0.0%
 Social cohesion                                                             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Climate change                                                              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                    0.0%             5.9%             6.7%             0.0%             0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                           0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                          0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Economic growth                                                             0.0%             5.9%             0.0%             7.7%             6.9%
 Law and justice                                                             6.3%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                        0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             3.8%             0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                       0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                        0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             3.8%             0.0%
 Local governance and institutions                                           3.1%             1.7%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                 3.1%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                             15.6%            2.5%             6.7%             3.8%            13.8%
 Disaster management                                                         0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                            0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%




                                                                            88
The World Bank                                                            Burundi                                                      Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)
                                                                                                              st   nd    rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Burundi. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development
    priority.

   rd
 3 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    East            West             North           South            Center
 Rural development                                                           2.9%             3.3%             10.0%            0.0%             6.7%
 Education                                                                   2.9%             1.7%             6.7%             0.0%             6.7%
 Social protection                                                           0.0%             2.5%             0.0%             0.0%             3.3%
 Transport                                                                   0.0%             3.3%             3.3%             7.1%             0.0%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                       0.0%             1.7%             3.3%             0.0%             6.7%
 Poverty reduction                                                           0.0%             8.3%             0.0%            10.7%             0.0%
 Public sector reform                                                        2.9%             1.7%             0.0%             3.6%             0.0%
 Regional integration                                                        0.0%             1.7%             6.7%             7.1%             6.7%
 Gender                                                                      0.0%             0.8%             3.3%             3.6%             6.7%
 Domestic private sector development                                         0.0%             5.8%             3.3%             7.1%             0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                                   0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             3.3%
 Water and sanitation                                                        2.9%             0.0%             3.3%             0.0%             0.0%
 Energy                                                                      8.8%             6.6%             3.3%             3.6%             0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                   0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             3.3%
 Public financial management                                                 2.9%             4.1%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                     2.9%             4.1%             0.0%             0.0%             6.7%
 Governance                                                                  2.9%             0.8%             3.3%             3.6%             3.3%
 Financial markets                                                           0.0%             0.0%             3.3%             0.0%             0.0%
 Urban development                                                           2.9%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             3.3%
 Environmental sustainability                                                2.9%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                     2.9%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             3.3%
 Health                                                                      8.8%             8.3%             3.3%             0.0%             3.3%
 Global integration                                                          2.9%             0.8%             0.0%             3.6%             0.0%
 Food security                                                               14.7%            4.1%             6.7%             0.0%             3.3%
 Social cohesion                                                             0.0%             0.0%             3.3%             3.6%             0.0%
 Climate change                                                              0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             3.3%
 Agricultural development                                                    17.6%            1.7%             3.3%             3.6%             3.3%
 Trade and exports                                                           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                          0.0%             2.5%             3.3%             3.6%             3.3%
 Economic growth                                                             2.9%             5.8%             10.0%            3.6%             6.7%
 Law and justice                                                             2.9%             4.1%             3.3%             3.6%             3.3%
 Regulatory framework                                                        0.0%             0.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                       0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                        0.0%             5.0%             0.0%             0.0%             3.3%
 Local governance and institutions                                           0.0%             1.7%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                 0.0%             1.7%             0.0%             3.6%             3.3%
 Anti-corruption                                                             5.9%             10.7%            13.3%           25.0%             6.7%
 Disaster management                                                         0.0%             0.8%             3.3%             0.0%             0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                            2.9%             2.5%             0.0%             3.6%             0.0%




                                                                            89
The World Bank                                                           Burundi                                                      Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would
   contribute most to reducing poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                         East            West            North            South           Center
 Water and sanitation                                                        10.5%            7.1%            2.6%              9.1%            4.8%
 Equality of opportunity                                                     10.5%            5.0%            2.6%              0.0%            4.8%
 Economic growth                                                             44.7%            37.9%           42.1%            45.5%           42.9%
 Climate change                                                               2.6%            1.4%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                               0.0%            1.4%            0.0%              0.0%            4.8%
 Disaster management                                                          0.0%            0.7%            0.0%              0.0%            2.4%
 Regional integration                                                         5.3%            3.6%            10.5%             0.0%            7.1%
 Gender                                                                       0.0%            2.9%            0.0%              0.0%            4.8%
 Rural development                                                           18.4%            29.3%           34.2%            24.2%           21.4%
 Urban development                                                            5.3%            0.7%            0.0%             12.1%            2.4%
 Education                                                                   18.4%            25.7%           34.2%            24.2%           35.7%
 Regulatory framework                                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%
 Local governance and institutions                                            2.6%            3.6%            2.6%              3.0%            2.4%
 Basic infrastructure                                                         7.9%            7.9%            7.9%              6.1%            2.4%
 Social protection                                                            0.0%            2.9%            2.6%              0.0%            0.0%
 Law and justice                                                              5.3%            1.4%            2.6%              3.0%            7.1%
 Transport                                                                    7.9%            5.7%            5.3%              3.0%            2.4%
 Crime and violence                                                           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%              3.0%            0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                        2.6%            0.7%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                       13.2%            12.1%           13.2%             6.1%           16.7%
 Global information and communications technology                             5.3%            0.7%            5.3%              3.0%            0.0%
 Public sector reform                                                         0.0%            2.9%            5.3%              0.0%            0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                         13.2%            14.3%           2.6%             18.2%            0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                                    2.6%            4.3%            0.0%              6.1%            2.4%
 Global integration                                                           2.6%            1.4%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%
 Energy                                                                      23.7%            13.6%           13.2%            21.2%            7.1%
 Food security                                                                5.3%            12.9%           13.2%            24.2%           23.8%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                    0.0%            1.4%            0.0%              0.0%            2.4%
 Governance                                                                   5.3%            12.1%           18.4%             3.0%            9.5%
 Social cohesion                                                              0.0%            1.4%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                  5.3%            5.7%            0.0%              3.0%            2.4%
 Environmental sustainability                                                 5.3%            1.4%            0.0%              0.0%            2.4%
 Health                                                                       2.6%            9.3%            23.7%             6.1%            9.5%
 Public financial management                                                  0.0%            9.3%            5.3%              0.0%            0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                    47.4%            20.0%           28.9%            39.4%           31.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                     18.4%            15.0%           7.9%             18.2%           16.7%
 Financial markets                                                            0.0%            0.7%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                              7.9%            19.3%           15.8%            18.2%           23.8%




                                                                           90
The World Bank                                                                     Burundi                                          Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Burundi (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
   Burundi? (Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                       East            West            North            South          Center
  Energy                                                                    55.3%            45.4%           39.5%            60.6%          50.0%
  Equality of opportunity                                                   0.0%             2.8%             0.0%             3.0%           0.0%
  Social protection                                                         0.0%             5.0%             2.6%             0.0%           0.0%
  Global integration                                                        2.6%             3.5%             2.6%             9.1%           0.0%
  Climate change                                                            2.6%             0.7%             5.3%             0.0%           0.0%
  Anti-corruption                                                           36.8%            31.9%           34.2%            24.2%          40.5%
  Disaster management                                                       0.0%             1.4%             0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
  Regional conflict and tensions                                            5.3%             2.8%             2.6%             3.0%           0.0%
  Rural development                                                         21.1%            17.0%           18.4%             9.1%          16.7%
  Foreign direct investment                                                 18.4%            15.6%            7.9%            30.3%          31.0%
  Urban development                                                         2.6%             0.0%             0.0%             6.1%           0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                                      2.6%             0.0%             0.0%             3.0%           0.0%
  Education                                                                 21.1%            24.8%           39.5%            18.2%          21.4%
  Global information and communications technology                          13.2%            2.8%             2.6%             0.0%           2.4%
  Regulatory framework                                                      0.0%             0.7%             2.6%             0.0%           0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable disease                                     0.0%             0.7%             0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
  Trade and exports                                                         7.9%             8.5%             7.9%             3.0%           9.5%
  Social cohesion                                                           2.6%             0.7%             0.0%             0.0%           2.4%
  Public sector reform                                                      0.0%             7.1%             0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
  Regional integration                                                      0.0%             2.1%             5.3%             3.0%           7.1%
  Domestic private sector development                                       15.8%            15.6%            7.9%            24.2%          16.7%
  Job creation/employment                                                   18.4%            11.3%           10.5%            18.2%          14.3%
  Agricultural development                                                  23.7%            26.2%           39.5%            36.4%          19.0%
  Food security                                                             2.6%             8.5%            13.2%             3.0%           4.8%
  Governance                                                                7.9%             10.6%            5.3%             3.0%           2.4%
  Transport                                                                 13.2%            4.3%             2.6%             6.1%          11.9%
  Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                     5.3%             5.7%            10.5%             6.1%           7.1%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                                 0.0%             2.1%             0.0%             6.1%           0.0%
  Gender                                                                    2.6%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
  Natural resource management                                               0.0%             3.5%             5.3%            12.1%           9.5%
  Environmental sustainability                                              0.0%             1.4%             2.6%             0.0%           0.0%
  Health                                                                    7.9%             6.4%            15.8%             0.0%           2.4%
  Basic infrastructure                                                      0.0%             12.8%            2.6%             3.0%           4.8%
  Law and justice                                                           0.0%             0.7%             0.0%             0.0%           4.8%
  Local governance and institutions                                         0.0%             2.8%             5.3%             3.0%           2.4%
  Crime and violence                                                        0.0%             0.7%             0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
  Public financial management                                               5.3%             8.5%             7.9%             6.1%          16.7%
  Financial markets                                                         2.6%             1.4%             2.6%             0.0%           2.4%




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                                      91
The World Bank                                                               Burundi                                                    Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in    Burundi, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank
  should focus most of its attention and resources in Burundi? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                         East            West             North            South            Center
 Rural development                                                           32.4%            35.0%            26.3%            48.5%            40.5%
 Education                                                                   16.2%            24.3%            47.4%            24.2%            38.1%
 Governance                                                                  5.4%             8.6%             10.5%             9.1%            16.7%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                       18.9%            6.4%             10.5%            12.1%             7.1%
 Social protection                                                           0.0%             1.4%             0.0%              3.0%             0.0%
 Transport                                                                   8.1%             7.9%             5.3%             15.2%             4.8%
 Poverty reduction                                                           18.9%            18.6%            36.8%            21.2%            33.3%
 Public sector reform                                                        0.0%             2.9%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Regional integration                                                        0.0%             2.9%             5.3%              0.0%             2.4%
 Gender                                                                      0.0%             1.4%             0.0%              0.0%             2.4%
 Crime and violence                                                          2.7%             1.4%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                         24.3%            13.6%            10.5%            27.3%             4.8%
 Foreign direct investment                                                   5.4%             5.7%             5.3%              0.0%             2.4%
 Water and sanitation                                                        2.7%             1.4%             2.6%              6.1%             0.0%
 Energy                                                                      37.8%            33.6%            21.1%            33.3%            21.4%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                   0.0%             0.7%             0.0%              3.0%             0.0%
 Social cohesion                                                             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%              0.0%             2.4%
 Public financial management                                                 5.4%             7.9%             0.0%             12.1%             7.1%
 Job creation/employment                                                     21.6%            17.9%            13.2%            18.2%            14.3%
 Financial markets                                                           0.0%             3.6%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Urban development                                                           2.7%             2.9%             0.0%              6.1%             0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                8.1%             2.9%             0.0%              3.0%             2.4%
 Equality of opportunity                                                     0.0%             0.7%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                              0.0%             0.0%             2.6%              0.0%             0.0%
 Health                                                                      10.8%            13.6%            15.8%             6.1%            11.9%
 Global integration                                                          0.0%             0.7%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Food security                                                               8.1%             7.1%             15.8%             6.1%             4.8%
 Climate change                                                              8.1%             0.0%             5.3%              0.0%             0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                    29.7%            20.7%            13.2%            21.2%            23.8%
 Trade and exports                                                           2.7%             0.7%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Economic growth                                                             5.4%             19.3%            26.3%             9.1%            19.0%
 Law and justice                                                             0.0%             3.6%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Local governance and institutions                                           2.7%             2.1%             0.0%              3.0%            11.9%
 Regulatory framework                                                        2.7%             1.4%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                       2.7%             0.0%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                        8.1%             8.6%             7.9%              3.0%             4.8%
 Natural resource management                                                 0.0%             2.1%             2.6%              0.0%             7.1%
 Anti-corruption                                                             2.7%             11.4%            13.2%            12.1%            14.3%
 Disaster management                                                         0.0%             0.0%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                            5.4%             2.9%             2.6%              0.0%             2.4%




                                                                               92
The World Bank                                                              Burundi                                                         Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Burundi?
 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      East             West             North            South            Center
 Financial resources                                                           45.2%             33.0%            50.0%            33.3%            13.6%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                    16.1%             11.0%            12.5%            14.3%            13.6%
 Technical assistance                                                          3.2%              5.0%             4.2%              0.0%             9.1%
 Policy advice                                                                 16.1%             6.0%             0.0%              4.8%             0.0%
 Donor coordination                                                            6.5%              7.0%             4.2%              4.8%            27.3%
 Data                                                                          3.2%              4.0%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Training/capacity building                                                    3.2%              14.0%            8.3%              9.5%            13.6%
 Studies/analyses                                                              0.0%              1.0%             0.0%              9.5%             4.5%
 Convening/facilitating                                                        0.0%              2.0%             8.3%              0.0%             0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                 0.0%              1.0%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%
 Strategy formulation                                                          6.5%              15.0%            12.5%            23.8%            18.2%
 Other                                                                         0.0%              1.0%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Burundi?
   nd
 2 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      East             West             North            South            Center
 Financial resources                                                           7.4%              16.5%            8.7%             23.8%             9.1%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                    7.4%              7.8%             8.7%              4.8%            18.2%
 Technical assistance                                                          11.1%             5.8%             17.4%            14.3%             4.5%
 Policy advice                                                                 3.7%              6.8%             8.7%              0.0%             4.5%
 Donor coordination                                                            7.4%              12.6%            26.1%            14.3%            13.6%
 Data                                                                          3.7%              1.0%             0.0%              4.8%             4.5%
 Training/capacity building                                                    11.1%             12.6%            13.0%             9.5%             9.1%
 Studies/analyses                                                              3.7%              4.9%             4.3%              4.8%             4.5%
 Convening/facilitating                                                        3.7%              8.7%             0.0%              4.8%             4.5%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                 7.4%              9.7%             0.0%              0.0%             4.5%
 Strategy formulation                                                          25.9%             13.6%            13.0%            19.0%            22.7%
 Other                                                                         7.4%              0.0%             4.3%              0.0%             0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in   Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                         East               West             North            South            Center
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities       34.3%               24.0%            40.6%            24.1%            29.7%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                    2.9%                11.6%            12.5%            10.3%            10.8%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                 28.6%               15.5%            6.3%             24.1%             8.1%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                      25.7%               7.0%             3.1%             13.8%            16.2%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                    2.9%                1.6%             6.3%              0.0%             0.0%
 Not client focused                                                          2.9%                4.7%             3.1%              0.0%             5.4%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                       2.9%                2.3%             3.1%              0.0%             2.7%
 Not have to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country   2.9%                5.4%             18.8%            10.3%             0.0%
 Too influenced by developed countries                                       31.4%               23.3%            31.3%            27.6%            29.7%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                    17.1%               20.9%            15.6%            24.1%            18.9%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                   8.6%                17.8%            3.1%             24.1%            18.9%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                         5.7%                8.5%             25.0%            13.8%            29.7%
 Not aligned with other donors' work                                         5.7%                5.4%             0.0%              3.4%             0.0%
 Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                              17.1%               31.8%            15.6%            24.1%            21.6%
 Other                                                                       11.4%               4.7%             6.3%              0.0%             5.4%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                         East            West            North                South            Center
 Investment lending                                                          73.7%            55.3%           68.4%                77.4%            80.0%
 Capacity building                                                           7.9%             27.3%           23.7%                25.8%            25.0%
 Policy based lending/Budget support to the Government                       47.4%            19.7%           34.2%                16.1%            15.0%
 Analytical work                                                             2.6%             12.9%           2.6%                  0.0%             2.5%
 Technical assistance                                                        21.1%            18.9%           10.5%                22.6%            20.0%
 Trust Fund management                                                       2.6%             7.6%            7.9%                  3.2%             5.0%
 Co-financing arrangements                                                   15.8%            18.9%           18.4%                19.4%            17.5%
 Sector-wide approaches                                                      0.0%             12.9%           2.6%                 16.1%             2.5%
 Emergency recovery lending                                                  21.1%            18.2%           21.1%                12.9%            32.5%
 Don't know                                                                  2.6%             2.3%            5.3%                  3.2%             0.0%




                                                                              93
The World Bank                                                               Burundi                                                       Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                          East             West           North           South               Center
 Investment lending                                                           13.2%            14.6%           10.8%            6.7%               12.8%
 Capacity building                                                            23.7%            13.8%           13.5%            0.0%                2.6%
 Policy based lending/Budget support to the Government                        10.5%            29.2%           16.2%           40.0%               38.5%
 Analytical work                                                              23.7%            23.8%           18.9%           30.0%               28.2%
 Technical assistance                                                         23.7%            26.9%           21.6%           13.3%               10.3%
 Trust Fund management                                                         5.3%            16.9%           24.3%           23.3%               17.9%
 Co-financing arrangements                                                     5.3%            15.4%           13.5%            6.7%               23.1%
 Sector-wide approaches                                                       18.4%             8.5%            2.7%            6.7%                2.6%
 Emergency recovery lending                                                   34.2%            11.5%            8.1%           26.7%               17.9%
 Don't know                                                                   21.1%            13.1%           32.4%           16.7%               17.9%

To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between locations

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate
with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)?
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                             East            West            North            South           Center
  NGOs                                                                            16.2%            12.9%           15.8%            21.9%           25.0%
  Local government                                                                40.5%            10.1%           42.1%            18.8%           22.5%
  Beneficiaries                                                                   37.8%            41.0%           42.1%            31.3%           52.5%
  Private sector                                                                  24.3%            35.3%           15.8%            43.8%           20.0%
  Community-based organizations (CBOs)                                            27.0%            30.2%           31.6%            40.6%           32.5%
  Donor community                                                                 16.2%            13.7%           21.1%             9.4%           10.0%
  Foundations                                                                     2.7%             2.2%             0.0%             0.0%            0.0%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                        10.8%            4.3%             0.0%             3.1%           15.0%
  Parliament                                                                      0.0%             5.8%             7.9%             3.1%            5.0%
  Media                                                                           0.0%             18.0%           13.2%             9.4%            5.0%
  Faith-based organizations                                                       0.0%             4.3%             2.6%             0.0%            2.5%
  UN and regional peace-keeping forces                                            2.7%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%            0.0%
  Emerging donors                                                                 8.1%             7.2%             0.0%             0.0%            5.0%
  UN agencies                                                                     5.4%             5.0%             2.6%             9.4%            0.0%
  Regional organizations                                                          2.7%             4.3%             2.6%             6.3%            5.0%
  Other                                                                           2.7%             3.6%             5.3%             3.1%            0.0%




                                                                               94
The World Bank                                                             Burundi                                                      Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Burundi, on a ten point scale?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Burundi in terms of…, on a ten point scale?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between locations

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                           East             West            North             South           Center
 The World Bank works too slowly                                               22.2%            13.1%             5.3%              9.1%           17.5%
 The Government works inefficiently                                            22.2%            30.7%            26.3%             36.4%           37.5%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation         19.4%            22.6%            18.4%             39.4%            7.5%
 Poor donor coordination                                                       27.8%             8.8%            21.1%              9.1%           25.0%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                  22.2%            13.1%            10.5%              9.1%           10.0%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                            8.3%            19.7%            15.8%             15.2%            0.0%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                             22.2%            15.3%            23.7%             27.3%           32.5%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges               36.1%            29.9%            26.3%             30.3%           32.5%
 Ongoing conflict and instability                                               2.8%            15.3%            18.4%              9.1%           12.5%
 Inadequate funding                                                            11.1%            16.1%            28.9%             15.2%           22.5%
 Other                                                                          0.0%             2.9%             0.0%              0.0%            2.5%




                                                                             95
The World Bank                                                              Burundi                                                         Country Survey 2012




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Burundi, on a ten point scale?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                              96
The World Bank                                                               Burundi                                                    Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

When thinking about the development challenges in Burundi, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and
  knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                        East            West              North           South             Center
 Public sector reform                                                       15.8%            14.9%             21.1%           12.5%              7.3%
 Gender                                                                     0.0%             2.1%              2.6%             0.0%              2.4%
 Social cohesion                                                            2.6%             0.0%              2.6%             0.0%              2.4%
 Education                                                                  18.4%            17.7%             36.8%            9.4%             29.3%
 Domestic private sector development                                        18.4%            23.4%             15.8%           37.5%             14.6%
 Foreign direct investment                                                  2.6%             2.1%              7.9%             6.3%              9.8%
 Water and sanitation                                                       0.0%             0.0%              2.6%             3.1%              0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                          2.6%             0.7%              0.0%             3.1%              2.4%
 Economic growth                                                            26.3%            28.4%             21.1%           28.1%             29.3%
 Energy                                                                     42.1%            31.2%             23.7%           34.4%             31.7%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                             2.6%             2.8%              2.6%             3.1%              0.0%
 Disaster management                                                        0.0%             1.4%              2.6%             0.0%              0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                  0.0%             1.4%              2.6%             0.0%              2.4%
 Governance                                                                 7.9%             9.9%              7.9%             3.1%             14.6%
 Social protection                                                          0.0%             4.3%              0.0%             6.3%              0.0%
 Climate change                                                             15.8%            3.5%              0.0%             9.4%              2.4%
 Poverty reduction                                                          21.1%            18.4%             26.3%           28.1%             26.8%
 Law and justice                                                            0.0%             2.1%              0.0%             0.0%              4.9%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                      7.9%             1.4%              5.3%             3.1%              4.9%
 Anti-corruption                                                            26.3%            21.3%             15.8%           12.5%             17.1%
 Financial markets                                                          0.0%             3.5%              0.0%             0.0%              0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                    2.6%             0.7%              0.0%             0.0%              0.0%
 Urban development                                                          0.0%             0.7%              0.0%             3.1%              0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                         0.0%             0.7%              0.0%             0.0%              0.0%
 Regional integration                                                       0.0%             2.8%              2.6%             3.1%              7.3%
 Global information and communications technology                           2.6%             5.0%              5.3%             0.0%              2.4%
 Local governance and institutions                                          2.6%             3.5%              0.0%             3.1%              7.3%
 Transport                                                                  5.3%             4.3%              0.0%            12.5%              2.4%
 Agricultural development                                                   26.3%            28.4%             36.8%           25.0%             19.5%
 Natural resource management                                                7.9%             6.4%              5.3%             0.0%              2.4%
 Public financial management                                                2.6%             4.3%              0.0%             3.1%              4.9%
 Job creation/employment                                                    13.2%            12.1%             2.6%             6.3%              9.8%
 Health                                                                     5.3%             5.0%              10.5%            6.3%             12.2%
 Rural development                                                          13.2%            10.6%             18.4%           15.6%              7.3%
 Global integration                                                         2.6%             2.8%              2.6%             3.1%              0.0%
 Food security                                                              2.6%             4.3%              7.9%             6.3%             12.2%
 Environmental sustainability                                               5.3%             2.8%              0.0%             3.1%              0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                       0.0%             1.4%              0.0%             0.0%              0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                       0.0%             4.3%              2.6%             6.3%              7.3%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                      0.0%             0.0%              0.0%             0.0%              0.0%


How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at … in Burundi? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                               97
The World Bank                                                                     Burundi                                                                 Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

In Burundi, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research …? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                                     98
The World Bank                                                              Burundi                                                  Country Survey 2012




E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                              99
The World Bank                                                               Burundi                                                         Country Survey 2012




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Burundi (continued)

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                          East            West            North                 South            Center
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Burundi’s specific
                                                                              31.4%            20.6%           13.2%                 16.1%            26.8%
 challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                      54.3%            41.2%           47.4%                 71.0%            53.7%
 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                17.1%            11.0%           26.3%                 12.9%            17.1%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets             20.0%            16.2%           18.4%                 25.8%            19.5%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                       2.9%             11.0%           2.6%                  12.9%            7.3%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Burundi's
                                                                              20.0%            14.7%           23.7%                 16.1%            17.1%
 economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                                     14.3%            27.2%           28.9%                 16.1%            22.0%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                     11.4%            22.8%           10.5%                 19.4%            19.5%
 Work faster                                                                  5.7%             11.0%           10.5%                 3.2%             9.8%
 Increase the level of World Bank staffing in Burundi's office                20.0%            11.0%           7.9%                  0.0%             2.4%
 Other                                                                        0.0%             5.1%            2.6%                  3.2%             0.0%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                       East             West            North          South                     Center
 Local newspapers                                                          40.5%             41.2%           45.7%          36.7%                     47.5%
 International newspapers                                                   5.4%             10.3%           11.4%           3.3%                      7.5%
 Local radio                                                               45.9%             41.9%           51.4%          56.7%                     62.5%
 International radio                                                       16.2%             5.1%            8.6%            3.3%                     12.5%
 Local television                                                          16.2%             14.0%           28.6%          30.0%                     12.5%
 International television                                                   8.1%             8.1%            2.9%            0.0%                      5.0%
 Periodicals                                                               24.3%             5.9%            14.3%          13.3%                      5.0%
 Internet                                                                  27.0%             50.0%           17.1%          26.7%                     25.0%
 Blogs                                                                      2.7%             0.7%            0.0%            3.3%                      0.0%
 Mobile phones                                                              5.4%             2.2%            2.9%            0.0%                      2.5%
 Instant messaging                                                          2.7%             0.7%            5.7%            0.0%                      2.5%
 Other                                                                      2.7%             8.8%            5.7%           13.3%                     12.5%


How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                       East           West                    North             South            Center
 World Bank website                                                        39.5%           41.6%                   25.7%             34.4%            41.5%
 Direct contact with World Bank                                            36.8%           21.2%                   51.4%             34.4%            26.8%
 e-Newsletters                                                              7.9%           19.7%                   0.0%              15.6%            19.5%
 Instant messaging                                                         10.5%           1.5%                    0.0%               0.0%             2.4%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                 39.5%           43.1%                   65.7%             56.3%            43.9%
 World Bank Public Information Center                                      15.8%           14.6%                   8.6%              15.6%             9.8%
 World Bank publications and other written materials                       36.8%           32.1%                   31.4%             28.1%            34.1%
 Mobile phones                                                              0.0%           4.4%                    2.9%               3.1%             7.3%
 Social media                                                              10.5%           10.2%                   14.3%              6.3%            14.6%
 Blogs                                                                      0.0%           0.7%                    0.0%               0.0%             0.0%
 Other                                                                      2.6%           0.7%                    0.0%               0.0%             0.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of
exceptions?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                    East            West             North             South              Center
  Yes                                                                         32.4%            8.5%              0.0%              6.5%               5.0%
  No                                                                          67.6%            91.5%            100.0%            93.5%              95.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      East              West             North             South            Center
 Yes                                                                           16.7%              21.1%            6.1%              17.2%             5.6%
 No                                                                            83.3%              78.9%            93.9%             82.8%            94.4%

Were you able to obtain this information?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                      East             West             North            South            Center
  Yes                                                                           42.9%             85.2%            100.0%           100.0%           100.0%
  No                                                                            57.1%             14.8%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                              100
The World Bank                                                              Burundi                                                    Country Survey 2012




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Do you have access to the Internet?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                      East            West             North        South          Center
  Yes                                                                           62.9%            90.2%            50.0%        64.3%          66.7%
  No                                                                            37.1%            9.8%             50.0%        35.7%          33.3%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                      East            West             North        South          Center
  Yes                                                                           38.9%            44.6%            11.4%        30.0%          26.3%
  No                                                                            61.1%            55.4%            88.6%        70.0%          73.7%
*Significantly different between locations

Which do you primarily use?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       East            West             North        South          Center
 The World Bank's country website (www. worldbank.org/burundi)                  35.0%            64.9%            66.7%        53.8%          64.3%
 The World Bank's main website (www.worldbank.org)                              65.0%            35.1%            33.3%        46.2%          35.7%

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in B urundi?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                     East              West             North        South          Center
 Yes                                                                          18.4%              9.7%             0.0%          7.4%          11.1%
 No                                                                           50.0%              69.4%            70.6%        59.3%          61.1%
 I don’t know what a PIC is                                                   31.6%              20.9%            29.4%        33.3%          27.8%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations



H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      East             West             North        South          Center
 Yes                                                                           80.6%             82.6%            74.3%        73.3%          66.7%
 No                                                                            19.4%             17.4%            25.7%        26.7%          33.3%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                          East           West           North             South          Center
 Observer                                                                     26.5%           20.7%          29.7%             22.6%          21.6%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                                  17.6%           12.6%          18.9%             35.5%          16.2%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                     50.0%           44.4%          51.4%             35.5%          40.5%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                41.2%           54.8%          51.4%             58.1%          51.4%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                 17.6%           10.4%          13.5%              9.7%          10.8%




                                                                              101
The World Bank                                                                                        Burundi                                                                      Country Survey 2012




Appendix D: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank
                                                 H3. Currently, do you
                                                                               H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              professionally collaborate/
                                              work with the World Bank?             Observer             Use WB reports/data   Engage in WB activities       Collaborate         Use WB website

Indicator Question                             No Mean         Yes Mean     No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                 6.83            7.13        7.12              6.68       7.05         6.96      6.79          7.31       6.83         7.20     7.13         6.23
World Bank's effectiveness in Burundi.
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank's financial instruments meet the            6.91            6.77        6.77              6.83       6.82         6.64      6.47          7.16       6.77         6.79     6.79         6.70
needs of Burundi?
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank meets Burundi's needs for knowledge         6.33            6.57        6.55              6.17       6.52         6.29      6.20          6.82       6.36         6.58     6.50         6.27
services?
Overall the World Bank currently plays a
                                                 7.20            7.28        7.25              7.05       7.25         7.02      6.77          7.74       7.02         7.36     7.33         6.27
relevant role in development in Burundi
The World Bank's work is aligned with
what I consider the development priorities       6.48            6.87        6.78              6.78       6.82         6.59      6.50          7.13       6.76         6.80     6.77         6.81
for Burundi
Responsiveness                                   6.70            6.65        6.61              6.67       6.66         6.47      6.52          6.77       6.41         6.81     6.68         6.29
Openness (sharing data and other
                                                 5.92            6.65        6.58              6.32       6.45         6.80      6.24          6.89       6.32         6.68     6.58         6.09
information)
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                 6.40            6.72        6.53              6.86       6.62         6.49      6.24          7.06       6.71         6.51     6.57         6.79
Government
Collaboration with the Government                7.86            7.52        7.58              7.35       7.48         7.78      7.14          8.02       7.46         7.60     7.54         7.48
Collaboration with other donors                  7.48            7.13        7.07              7.70       7.15         7.40      6.89          7.62       7.45         7.00     7.17         7.38
To what degree does the World Bank's
work help achieve sustainable                    6.84            7.20        7.18              6.93       7.21         6.79      6.80          7.53       6.99         7.25     7.20         6.59
development results in Burundi?
Are relevant to Burundi's development
                                                 6.13            6.45        6.34              6.43       6.31         6.58      6.06          6.77       6.33         6.40     6.46         5.74
priorities
Overall, how significant a contribution do
you believe the World Bank's knowledge
and research make to development results         6.35            6.74        6.69              6.50       6.71         6.41      6.45          6.91       6.35         6.90     6.76         5.91
in Burundi?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank's                      6.98            7.11        7.19              6.73       7.11         7.02      6.91          7.33       6.84         7.30     7.09         7.13
knowledge/research?
Where country systems are adequate, the
World Bank makes appropriate use of              7.54            7.03        7.12              7.19       7.11         7.27      6.75          7.65       7.11         7.16     7.10         7.37
them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.




                                                                                                       102
The World Bank                                        Burundi                                      Country Survey 2012



Appendix E: Burundi FY 2012 Questionnaire




                               World Bank Client Survey FY12 – BURUNDI


The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Burundi or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey is meant to give the World Bank’s team that works in Burundi, more in-depth insight into how the Bank’s
work is perceived. This is one tool the World Bank uses to assess the views of its critical stakeholders. With this
understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies, outreach and programs that support
development in Burundi. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm to oversee the logistics of this
effort in Burundi. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the survey,
please circle the number that most accurately reflects your answer. If you prefer not to answer a question,
please leave it blank.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO
NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED
IN ANALYSIS.



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BURUNDI

 A1. In general would you say that Burundi is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                       103
The World Bank                                              Burundi                                         Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BURUNDI (CONT...)
 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Burundi.
 Please identify which of these you consider the 1st,            FIRST priority     SECOND priority      THIRD priority
 2nd, and 3d most important development priority               (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)
 1    Rural development                                                                                   
 2    Education                                                                                           
 3    Social protection                                                                                   
 4    Transport (e.g., roads, transportation)                                                             
 5    Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                               
 6    Poverty reduction                                                                                   
 7    Public sector reform                                                                                
 8    Regional integration                                                                                
 9    Gender                                                                                              
 10   Domestic private sector development                                                                 
 11   Foreign direct investment                                                                           
 12   Water and sanitation                                                                                
 13   Energy                                                                                              
 14   Regional conflict and tensions (Great Lakes)                                                        
 15   Monitoring and evaluation                                                                           
      Public financial management (e.g., public
 16                                                                                                       
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 17   Job creation/employment                                                                             
 18   Governance                                                                                          
 19   Financial markets                                                                                   
 20   Urban development                                                                                   
 21   Environmental sustainability                                                                        
 22   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                              
 23   Health                                                                                              
 24   Global integration                                                                                  
 25   Food security                                                                                       
 26   Social cohesion                                                                                     
 27   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                       
 28   Agricultural development                                                                            
 29   Trade and exports                                                                                   
 30   Crime and violence                                                                                  
 31   Economic growth                                                                                     
 32   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                             
 33   Regulatory framework                                                                                
 34   Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                               
 35   Basic infrastructure                                                                                
 36   Local governance and institutions                                                                   
      Natural resource management (e.g., mining, forests,
 37                                                                                                       
      Lake Tanganyika)
 38   Anti corruption                                                                                     
 39   Disaster management                                                                                 
 40   Global information and communications technology                                                    




                                                             104
The World Bank                                              Burundi                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BURUNDI (CONT...)

 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most
 to reducing poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Water and sanitation
 2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 3    Economic growth
 4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5    Regional conflict and tensions (Great Lakes)
 6    Disaster management
 7    Regional integration
 8    Gender
 9    Rural development
 10   Urban development
 11   Education
 12   Regulatory framework
 13   Local governance and institutions
 14   Basic infrastructure
 15   Social protection
 16   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 17   Transport (e.g., roads, dams, transportation means)
 18   Crime and violence
 19   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 20   Security/stabilization/reconstruction
 21   Global information and communications technology
 22   Public sector reform
 23   Domestic private sector development
 24   Foreign direct investment
 25   Global integration
 26   Energy
 27   Food security
 28   Monitoring and evaluation
 29   Governance
 30   Social cohesion
 31   Natural resource management (e.g., mining, forests, Lake Tanganyika)
 32   Environmental sustainability
 33   Health
 34   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 35   Agricultural development
 36   Job creation/employment
 37   Financial markets
 38   Trade and exports
 39   Anti corruption



                                                             105
The World Bank                                              Burundi                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BURUNDI (CONT…)

 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating
 economic growth in Burundi? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy
 2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 3    Social protection
 4    Global integration
 5    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Anti corruption
 7    Disaster management
 8    Regional conflict and tensions (Great Lakes)
 9    Rural development
 10   Foreign direct investment
 11   Urban development
 12   Water and sanitation
 13   Education
 14   Global information and communications technology
 15   Regulatory framework
 16   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 17   Trade and exports
 18   Social cohesion
 19   Public sector reform
 20   Regional integration
 21   Domestic private sector development
 22   Job creation/employment
 23   Agricultural development
 24   Food security
 25   Governance
 26   Transport (e.g., roads, dams, transportation means)
 27   Security/stabilization/reconstruction
 28   Monitoring and evaluation
 29   Gender
 30   Natural resource management (e.g., mining, forests, Lake Tanganyika)
 31   Environmental sustainability
 32   Health
 33   Basic infrastructure
 34   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 35   Local governance and institutions
 36   Crime and violence
 37   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 38   Financial markets




                                                             106
The World Bank                                                Burundi                                                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Burundi, on a ten point
 scale?
         1              2         3       4       5       6         7           8           9                10

 Not familiar at all                                                                                Extremely familiar




 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in
 Burundi, on a ten point scale?
          1             2     3       4       5       6   7         8       9               10                     

 Not effective at all                                                                   Very effective       Don't Know




 To what extent do you believe that…
                                                              To no                                                To a very
                                                              degree                                              significant      Don't
                                                              at all                                                 degree        know

        The World Bank's financial instruments meet
 B3                                                             1       2       3   4   5       6   7    8     9        10          
        the needs of Burundi, on a ten point scale?
        The World Bank meets Burundi’s needs for
 B4     knowledge services (e.g., research, analysis,           1       2       3   4   5       6   7    8     9        10          
        technical assistance), on a ten point scale?




                                                               107
The World Bank                                              Burundi                    Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)
 B5. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development
 results in Burundi, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most
 of its attention and resources in Burundi? (Please choose no more than THREE)
 1    Rural development
 2    Education
 3    Governance
 4    Security/stabilization/reconstruction
 5    Social protection
 6    Transport (e.g., roads, dams, transportation means)
 7    Poverty reduction
 8    Public sector reform
 9    Regional integration
 10   Gender
 11   Crime and violence
 12   Domestic private sector development
 13   Foreign direct investment
 14   Water and sanitation
 15   Energy
 16   Monitoring and evaluation
 17   Social cohesion
 18   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 19   Job creation/employment
 20   Financial markets
 21   Urban development
 22   Environmental sustainability
 23   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 24   Regional conflict and tensions (Great Lakes)
 25   Health
 26   Global integration
 27   Food security
 28   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 29   Agricultural development
 30   Trade and exports
 31   Economic growth
 32   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 33   Local governance and institutions
 34   Regulatory framework
 35   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 36   Basic infrastructure
 37   Natural resource management (e.g., mining, forests, Lake Tanganyika)
 38   Anti corruption
 39   Disaster management
 40   Global information and communications technology



                                                             108
The World Bank                                              Burundi                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B6. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Burundi?
                                                                          Greatest Value    Second Greatest Value
                                                                        (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)
 1    Financial resources                                                                          
 2    Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                   
 3    Technical assistance                                                                         
 4    Policy advice                                                                                
 5    Donor coordination                                                                           
 6    Data                                                                                         
 7    Training/capacity building                                                                   
 8    Studies/analyses                                                                             
 9    Convening/facilitating                                                                       
      Linkage to non-Bank expertise (e.g., South-South
 10                                                                                                
      knowledge sharing)
 11   Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)                                                 
 12   Other (please specify):______________________________                                        



 B7. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES
 in its work in Burundi? (Please choose no more than TWO)
 1    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 4    Staff too inaccessible
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not client focused
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not have to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12   Not aligned with country priorities
 13   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 14   Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 15   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________




                                                             109
The World Bank                                               Burundi                                             Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing
 poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity building
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    Co-financing arrangements (i.e., with other donors)
 8    Sector-wide approaches
 9    Emergency Recovery lending
 10   Don’t know



 B9. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to
 reduce poverty in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 6    Trust Fund management
  7   Co-financing arrangements (i.e., with other donors)
  8   Sector-wide approaches
  9   Emergency Recovery lending
 10   Don’t know


To what extent do you believe that …
                                                            To no                                   To a very
                                                            degree                                 significant    Don't
                                                            at all                                    degree      know
       The World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the
B10    global development agenda, on a ten point              1        2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10         
       scale?
       The World Bank DOES seek to influence the
B11    global development agenda, on a ten point              1        2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10         
       scale?




                                                              110
The World Bank                                             Burundi                                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B12. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
 interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate
 with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1     NGOs
 2     Local Government
 3     Beneficiaries
 4     Private sector
 5     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 6     Donor community
 7     Foundations
 8     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 9     Parliament
 10    Media
 11    Faith based organizations
 12    UN and regional peace keeping forces
 13    Emerging donors
 14    UN agencies
 15    Regional organizations
 16    Other (please specify): __________________________



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in
 Burundi, on a ten point scale?
                                                                 Strongly                                Strongly   Don't
                                                                 disagree                                   agree   know
        Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
 B13                                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        role in development in Burundi
        The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
 B14                                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        consider the development priorities for this country
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies
 B15                                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        that are realistic for Burundi
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
 B16                                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Burundi with respect




                                                               111
The World Bank                                                Burundi                                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Burundi in terms of ...,
 on a ten point scale?
                                                                    To no                                To a very
                                                                                                                      Don't
                                                                    degree at                           significant
                                                                                                                      know
                                                                    all                                    degree
 B17    Follow up and follow through                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B18    Responsiveness                                              1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
        Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B19                                                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
        services)
        Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B20                                                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
        circumstances)
 B21    Being inclusive                                             1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B22    Openness (sharing data and other information)               1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B23    Staff accessibility                                         1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B24    Straightforwardness and honesty                             1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
        Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B25                                                                1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
        Government
 B26    Collaboration with the Government                           1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B27    Collaboration with other donors                             1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       


 B28. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which
 TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank works too slowly
 2     The Government works inefficiently
 3     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4     Poor donor coordination
 5     The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 6     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 7     Political pressures and obstacles
 8     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 9     Ongoing conflict and instability
 10    Inadequate funding
 11    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                  112
The World Bank                               Burundi                                         Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C1. To what degree does the World Bank’s work, help achieve sustainable development
 results in Burundi, on a ten point scale?
        1          2   3   4     5     6    7          8   9          10                
 To no degree at                                                        To a very
                                                                                    Don't Know
 all                                                           significant degree




                                                113
The World Bank                                           Burundi                                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS (CONT...)
 How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in Burundi, on a ten point scale?
                                                                Not effective                                   Very    Don't
                                                                at all                                      effective   know
 C2     Anti corruption                                             1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C3     Global information and communications technology            1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C4     Transport (e.g., roads, dams, transportation means)         1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C5     Crime and violence                                          1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C6     Regional conflict and tensions (Great Lakes)                1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C7     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                     1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C8     Urban development                                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C9     Environmental sustainability                                1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C10    Regulatory framework                                        1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C11    Basic infrastructure                                        1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C12    Communicable/non-communicable disease                       1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C13    Poverty reduction                                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C14    Gender                                                      1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C15    Domestic private sector development                         1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C16    Foreign direct investment                                   1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C17    Local governance and institutions                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C18    Water and sanitation                                        1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C19    Trade and exports                                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C20    Economic growth                                             1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C21    Energy                                                      1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C22    Disaster management                                         1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C23    Monitoring and evaluation                                   1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Public financial management (e.g., public
 C24                                                                1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 C25    Job creation/employment                                     1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C26    Social cohesion                                             1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C27    Financial markets                                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C28    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                      1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C29    Health                                                      1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C30    Rural development                                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C31    Global integration                                          1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C32    Governance                                                  1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C33    Food security                                               1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C34    Education                                                   1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C35    Security/stabilization/reconstruction                       1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C36    Social protection                                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C37    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)               1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C38    Public sector reform                                        1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C39    Regional integration                                        1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C40    Agricultural development                                    1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Natural resource management (e.g., mining, forests,
 C41                                                                1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Lake Tanganyika)




                                                              114
The World Bank                                              Burundi                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE
 D1. When thinking about the development challenges in Burundi, where do you
 believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and
 knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Public sector reform
 2    Gender
 3    Social cohesion
 4    Education
 5    Domestic private sector development
 6    foreign direct investment
 7    Water and sanitation
 8    Trade and exports
 9    Economic growth
 10   Energy
 11   Regional conflict and tensions (Great Lakes)
 12   Disaster management
 13   Monitoring and evaluation
 14   Governance
 15   Social protection
 16   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 17   Poverty reduction
 18   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 19   Security/stabilization/reconstruction
 20   Anti corruption
 21   Financial markets
 22   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 23   Urban development
 24   Crime and violence
 25   Regional integration
 26   Global information and communications technology
 27   Local governance and institutions
 28   Transport (e.g., roads, dams, transportation means)
 29   Agricultural development
 30   Natural resource management (e.g., mining, forests, Lake Tanganyika)
 31   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 32   Job creation/employment
 33   Health
 34   Rural development
 35   Global integration
 36   Food security
 37   Environmental sustainability
 38   Regulatory framework
 39   Basic infrastructure
 40   Communicable/non-communicable disease



                                                             115
The World Bank                                                 Burundi                                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 How effective do you believe the World Bank's knowledge and research are at … in Burundi?
                                                          Not
                                                                                                                       Very    Don't
                                                          effective
                                                                                                                   effective   know
                                                          at all
 D2    Raising your awareness of the particular topic      1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D3    Stimulating public debate/dialogue                  1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D4    Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills              1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D5    Contributing to good policy making                  1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       Providing support for program
 D6                                                        1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       implementation



 In Burundi, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank's knowledge and research …

                                                          To no                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                               Don't
                                                          degree at                                             significant
                                                                                                                               know
                                                          all                                                      degree
 D7      Are timely                                        1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
 D8                                                        1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Burundi's development
 D9                                                        1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         priorities
 D10     Provide feasible recommendations                  1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D11                                                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         understand)
         A source of relevant information on global
 D12                                                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         good practices
 D13     Are adequately disseminated                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D14     Are appropriately translated                      1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Are applicable to Burundi's development
 D15                                                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         challenges


 D16. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge
 and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?
           1              2    3     4      5         6        7         8       9         10                   

 Not significant at all                                                              Very significant       Don't know




                                                                   116
The World Bank                                          Burundi                                            Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 D17. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's
 knowledge/research, on a ten point scale?
         1              2       3   4       5       6   7         8   9         10                
 Very low                                                                        Very high
                                                                                              Don't know
 technical quality                                                        technical quality




 D18. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank
 expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing, etc.), on a ten point scale?
           1                2   3   4   5       6       7         8   9          10               

 Not effective at all                                                       Very effective    Don't know




                                                            117
The World Bank                                              Burundi                                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale?
                                                       Strongly                                                Strongly   Don't
                                                       disagree                                                   agree   know
  E1    The World Bank disburses funds promptly         1       2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9        10      
        The World Bank effectively monitors and
  E2    evaluates the projects and programs it          1       2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9        10      
        supports
        The World Bank's approvals and reviews are
  E3                                                    1       2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9        10      
        done in a timely fashion
        The World Bank's safeguard policy
  E4                                                    1       2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9        10      
        requirements are reasonable
        The World Bank imposes reasonable
  E5                                                    1       2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9        10      
        conditions on its lending
        Working with the World Bank increases
  E6                                                    1       2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9        10      
        BurundiI's institutional capacity
        The World Bank ensures consistency and
  E7                                                    1       2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9        10      
        continuity through staff changes
        The World Bank's teams and visits are well
  E8                                                    1       2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9        10      
        coordinated
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
        financial management, etc.) are adequate,
  E9                                                    1       2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9        10      
        the World Bank makes appropriate use of
        them
        The World Bank provides effective
 E10    implementation support (i.e., supervision of    1       2         3   4   5     6     7        8   9        10      
        projects)



 E11. To what extent do you believe the World Bank is adequately staffed in Burundi, on
 a ten point scale?
        1           2       3      4      5       6     7             8       9          10                    
 To no degree at                                                                           To a very       Don't
 all                                                                              significant degree       Know




                                                             118
The World Bank                                                 Burundi                                            Country Survey 2012



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN BURUNDI

 F1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play in Burundi’s
 development over the medium term in the near future, on a ten point scale?
        1            2       3      4       5      6       7             8   9           10              
 Not a significant                                                                Very significant
                                                                                                     Don't Know
 role at all                                                                                  role




 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value
 in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Burundi’s specific challenges
 2    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3    Focus primarily on advocacy issues
      Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, and other
 4
      terms)
 5    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 6    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Burundi’s economy
 7    Offer more innovative financial products
 8    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9    Work faster
 10   Increase the level of World Bank staffing in Burundi’s office (number of people)
 11   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                                119
The World Bank                                              Burundi                                     Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social
 development issues in Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Blogs
 10   Mobile phones
 11   Instant messaging
 12   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2     Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Public Information Center
 7    World Bank publications and other written materials
 8    Mobile phones
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________



       Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will
 G3                                                                                               Yes        No
       now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 G4                                                                                               Yes        No
       (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                  Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                        Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?                                           Yes        No




                                                             120
The World Bank                                              Burundi                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING (CONT...)

 G8. Which do you primarily use?
 1     The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/burundi)
 2     The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 G9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in
 Burundi?
 1     Yes
 2     No
 3     I don’t know what PIC is

 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                                      Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                      disagree                              agree   know
         I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the
 G10                                                                   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         organization's Open Data policy
         The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of
 G11     information related to development in Burundi. (Only          1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used the PIC)
         I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only
 G12                                                                   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used a World Bank website)
         I find the information on the World Bank’s websites
 G13     useful. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank            1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         website)
         When I need information from the World Bank I know
 G14     how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them,      1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         etc.)
         The World Bank is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries




                                                              121
The World Bank                                            Burundi                                        Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position? (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   1st Vice-Président of the Republic Cabinet
 22   2nd Vice-Président of the Republic Cabinet
 23   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                           122
The World Bank                                             Burundi                    Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only ONE response)
 1    Agricultural development
 2    Anti corruption
 3    Basic infrastructure
 4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5    Communicable/non-communicable disease
 6    Crime and violence
 7    Disaster management
 8    Domestic private sector development
 9    Economic growth
 10   Education
 11   Energy
 12   Environmental sustainability
 13   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 14   Financial markets
 15   Food security
 16   Foreign direct investment
 17   Gender
 18   Global information and communications technology
 19   Global integration
 20   Governance
 21   Health
 22   Job creation/employment
 23   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 24   Local governance and institutions
 25   Monitoring and evaluation
 26   Natural resource management (e.g., mining, forests, Lake Tanganyika)
 27   Poverty reduction
 28   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 29   Public sector reform
 30   Regional conflict and tensions (Great Lakes)
 31   Regional integration
 32   Regulatory framework
 33   Rural development
 34   Security/stabilization/reconstruction
 35   Social cohesion
 36   Social protection
 37   Trade and exports
 38   Transport (e.g., roads, transportation)
 39   Urban development
 40   Water and sanitation
 41   Other (please specify): _____________________________________________



                                                            123
The World Bank                                               Burundi                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your
 country?
 1    Yes
 2    No



 H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in
 Burundi? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.



 H5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    East
 2    West
 3    North
 4    South
 5    Center




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               124
