                            88145




Bulgaria Country Opinion
     Survey Report

  (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                        Bulgaria                                    Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. General Issues facing Bulgaria ...................................................10
          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank .................................14
         VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................21
        VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments ..................................23
       VIII. How the World Bank Operates ..................................................34
         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Bulgaria ..........................37
          X. Communication and Openness..................................................41
         XI. Appendices ................................................................................47




                                                          2
The World Bank                                 Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in Bulgaria
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Bulgaria regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Bulgaria;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in Bulgaria;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank ’s effectiveness and results, knowledge
               and research, and communication and information sharing in Bulgaria; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in Bulgaria.

       Use data to help inform the Bulgaria country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In May and June 2012, 405 stakeholders of the World Bank in Bulgaria were invited to provide
their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country survey.
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime Minister;
the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial
department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World Bank
supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a
project; local government officials or staff; European Commission staff or representatives; the
diplomatic corps; private sector organizations; private foundations; financial sector/private
banks; NGOs; the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; academia, research
institutes or think tanks; and the judiciary branch. A total of 173 stakeholders participated in the
country survey (43%).

Respondents received the questionnaire via post or email and returned it accordingly.
Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Bulgaria, their overall attitudes toward the
Bank; the World Bank’s effectiveness and results; the Bank’s knowledge; working with the
World Bank; the Bank’s future role in Bulgaria, and the Bank’s communication and information
sharing in Bulgaria:

A. General Issues facing Bulgaria: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Bulgaria is
   headed in the right direction, what they thought were the top three most important
   development priorities, which areas would contribute most to achieving convergence of
   Bulgarian living standards with the EU, and which areas would contribute most to generating
   economic growth.



                                                  3
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their familiarity
   with the World Bank, the Bank’s effectiveness in Bulgaria, the extent to which the Bank’s
   staff is well prepared to help Bulgaria, the extent to which the Bank should seek to influence
   the global development agenda, their agreement with various statements regarding the
   Bank’s work in Bulgaria, and the extent to which the Bank is an effective development
   partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the sectoral areas on which it would be most
   productive for the Bank to focus its resources, the Bank’s greatest values and greatest
   weaknesses in its work, the Bank instruments that are most and least effective in helping
   improve living standards, with which groups the Bank should work more, and to what
   reasons respondents attributed failed or slow reform efforts.
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
   the Bank’s work helps achieve sustainable development results in Bulgaria, the extent to
   which the Bank meets Bulgaria’s need for knowledge services and financial instruments, and
   the Bank’s level of effectiveness across twenty development areas, such as climate change,
   governance, and economic growth.
D. The World Bank’s Knowledge: Respondents were asked to indicate how frequently they
   consult World Bank knowledge and research, the areas on which the Bank should focus its
   research efforts and to rate the effectiveness and quality of the Bank’s knowledge/research,
   including how significant of a contribution the Bank’s knowledge and research make to
   development results, the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge and research, and the
   Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement with
   a series of statements regarding working with the Bank, such as the World Bank ’s
   “Safeguard Policy” requirements being reasonable, working with the World Bank increasing
   Bulgaria’s institutional capacity, and the World Bank disbursing funds promptly.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Bulgaria: Respondents were asked to rate how
   significant a role the Bank should play in Bulgaria’s development in the near future and to
   indicate what the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Bulgaria.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate where they
   get information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their access to the Internet, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s website. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s Access to
   Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of agreement
   that they use more data from the World Ba nk as a result of the Bank’s Open Data policy.
   Respondents were also asked their level of agreement that they know how to find information
   from the Bank and that the Bank is responsive to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank, their exposure
   to the Bank in Bulgaria, and their geographic location.

In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s survey were
compared to responses from the 300 respondents (84% response rate) who completed the country
survey in FY 2005. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were possible.


                                                4
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
    For further analyses: the small number of respondents from the office of the President,
       Prime Minister and those from the office of a Minister were combined into one group and
       respondents from private sector were combined with those from the financial sector/
       private banks. The few consultants working on Bank projects and respondents from the
       office of a Parliamentarian, Project Management Units (PMUs), European Commission
       staff/representatives, private foundations, the media, independent government
       institutions, trade unions, and the judiciary branch were included in the “Other” category.




                                                 5
The World Bank                   Bulgaria     Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                    6
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The vast majority of respondents indicated that they were located in Sofia. Because of
        the small number of respondents from Outside Sofia, no comparisons between
        geographic locations could be conducted.




                                                7
The World Bank                            Bulgaria   Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Professional Collaboration with the World Bank




Exposure to the World Bank




                                             8
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank
   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 6.9 on a
    10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar. This was
    significantly higher than the FY ’05 survey, in which familiarity with the Bank received a
    mean rating of 5.8 across all respondents.
         Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/Prime
            Minister/Minister and other organizations indicated the highest levels of familiarity
            whereas respondents from diplomatic corps and the private sector/financial
            sector/private banks indicated significantly lower levels.
         It should be noted that respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the Bank were
            significantly, moderately correlated with their impressions of the Bank’s over all
            effectiveness in Bulgaria, their perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve
            sustainable development results, and the Bank’s relevance to Bulgaria’s development.




                                                9
The World Bank                                 Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Bulgaria

Headed in the Right Direction

       When asked whether Bulgaria was headed in the right or wrong direction, more than
        three-quarters of all respondents indicated that Bulgaria was headed in the right direction.
             A majority of respondents across all stakeholder groups indicated that Bulgaria
              was headed in the right direction.




                                                 10
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)
Development Priority
       Respondents indicated that economic growth was the most important development
        priority in Bulgaria. Education was also considered a top priority.
             In the FY ’05 country survey, becoming an effective EU member was considered
                the most important development priority in Bulgaria (31%), followed by reducing
                poverty (27%), improving economic competitiveness/productivity (25%), and
                improving investment/business climate (23%).




                                               11
The World Bank                              Bulgaria                          Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)

Convergence with EU Living Standards

       Respondents indicated that economic growth and business environment and private sector
        development would contribute most to a convergence of living standards with the EU.
        Education, law and justice, and governance were also considered key contributors.




                                              12
The World Bank                              Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)

Economic Growth

       Respondents indicated that business environment and private sector development and
        research and innovation would contribute most to generating economic growth in
        Bulgaria. Education and transport infrastructure were also identified as key.
                Respondents across most stakeholder groups identified these areas as
                   contributing most to economic growth, except respondents from diplomatic
                   corps who identified governance as contributing most to economic growth.




                                              13
The World Bank                              Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank
Focusing World Bank Resources
       Respondents indicated that the Bank would have the most impact on development results
        in Bulgaria by focusing most of its attention and resources on education and business
        environment and private sector development.
             In the FY ’05 country survey, respondents indicated that it would be most
               productive for the Bank to focus its resources on the economy and jobs (43%),
               infrastructure (39%), and education (35%).
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank should focus
               on education and private sector development, except respondents from the office
               of the President/Prime Minister/Minister who indicated that the Bank should
               focus on water and sanitation and governance.




                                              14
The World Bank                                 Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Overall Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, ratings of the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Bulgaria
        received a mean rating of 7.0 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10
        being very effective. This was significantly higher than the FY ’05 survey, in which the
        Bank’s overall effectiveness received a mean rating of 6.3 across all respondents.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from other organizations
              gave the highest ratings for the World Bank’s overall e ffectiveness in Bulgaria
              whereas respondents from local government gave the lowest ratings.




                                                 15
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Achieving Sustainable Development Results

       Across all respondents, the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results
        in Bulgaria received a mean rating of 6.3 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at
        all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from diplomatic corps
              gave the highest ratings for the World Bank helping achieve sustainable
              development results in Bulgaria whereas employees of ministries and respondents
              from other organizations gave the lowest ratings.




                                                16
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Staff Preparedness

       Across all respondents, the World Bank ’s staff being well prepared to help Bulgaria solve
        its most complicated development challenges received a mean rating of 7.6 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from local government
              and diplomatic corps gave the highest ratings for the World Bank ’s staff being
              well prepared whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private
              banks gave the lowest ratings.




                                                17
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest value to Bulgaria was its
        knowledge and advisory services. The Bank’s financial resources were also considered of
        great value to Bulgaria.
             Respondents in the FY ’05 country survey indicated that the Bank’s greatest value
              to Bulgaria was its financial resources (53%).




                                                18
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Bulgaria were
        not enough public disclosure of its work, being too influenced by developed countries,
        and imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities.
             Respondents in the FY ’05 country survey indicated that the Bank’s greatest
              weaknesses were imposing solutions disregarding the country’s realities (34%)
              and being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures (23%).
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that these were the Bank’s
              greatest weaknesses, except respondents from NGOs who indicated that Bank was
              not collaborating enough with non-state actors.




                                               19
The World Bank                                 Bulgaria                              Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, respondents
        indicated that they most often attribute this to reforms not being well thought out in light
        of country challenges, inadequate government capacity, the government working
        inefficiently, or an inadequate level of citizen/civil society participation.




                                                 20
The World Bank                                 Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Specific Areas of Effectiveness
       Respondents saw the Bank as most effective at public finance and administration and
        transport infrastructure, both receiving a mean rating of 6.7, across all respondents, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not effective at all and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents from diplomatic corps had the highest ratings for the Bank’s
              effectiveness at energy and energy efficiency whereas employees of ministries
              and respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister had
              significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness. Respondents across all
              stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings fo r the Bank’s effectiveness
              across the other nineteen areas of development.




                                                 21
The World Bank                                 Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness and
ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable development results in Bulgaria, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the twenty specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of
effectiveness in one specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness or perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Bulgaria. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at public finance and administration;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at governance;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at convergence of living standards with the EU;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at social inclusion;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at climate change and green growth; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth.

       Achieving Sustainable Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest
        Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results in
        Bulgaria, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results. The
        areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at public finance and administration;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at law and justice;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at convergence of living standards with the EU;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at climate change and green growth.



                                                 22
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                          Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments

Knowledge: Frequency of Use

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that they consulted World Bank knowledge and
        research a few times a year.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister, NGOs, and
              academia had significantly higher frequency of usage of World Bank knowledge
              and research compared to other stakeholder groups.




                                               23
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Meeting Bulgaria’s Knowledge Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank meets Bulgaria’s needs for
        knowledge services received a mean rating of 6.8 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from diplomatic corps
              gave the highest ratings for the Bank meeting Bulgaria’s needs for knowledge
              services whereas employees of ministries gave the lowest ratings.




                                                24
The World Bank                             Bulgaria                          Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Knowledge: Focusing Bank Research
    Respondents indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
      and advisory services on business environment and private sector development, economic
      growth, and education.
          Respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated private sector development
             and economic growth would be the most valuable areas for the Bank’s research,
             except respondents from local government and diplomatic corps who indicated
             that the Bank should focus its research on convergence of living standards with
             the EU and respondents from the private sector/financial sector/ private banks
             who indicated that the Bank should focus its research on governance.




                                             25
The World Bank                                 Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, the effectiveness of the World Bank’s knowledge and advisory
        services to raise awareness of a particular topic received the highest mean rating, 7.4, on
        a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents from NGOs and academia had the highest ratings for the
              effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and advisory services to enhance one’s
              knowledge and/or skills whereas respondents from diplomatic corps had
              significantly lower effectiveness ratings. Respondents across all stakeholder
              groups had statistically similar ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s
              knowledge and advisory services in all other areas.




                                                 26
The World Bank                                 Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Qualities

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s knowledge and advisory services being a
        source of relevant information on global good practices received the highest mean rating,
        7.6, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant
        degree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for
              these qualities of the World Bank’s knowledge and advisory services.




                                                 27
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                          Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Contribution

       Across all respondents, the significance of the contribution that the World Bank’s
        knowledge and research make to development results in Bulgaria received a mean rating
        of 7.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not significant at all and 10 being very
        significant.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from academia gave the
              highest ratings for the contribution that the Bank’s knowledge and research make
              to development results in Bulgaria whereas respondents from the office of the
              President/Prime Minister/Minister and diplomatic corps had the lowest ratings.




                                               28
The World Bank                                 Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Technical Quality

       Across all respondents, the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge and
        research received a mean rating of 7.9 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being very low
        technical quality and 10 being very high technical quality.
                  Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from local
                   government gave the highest ratings for the technical quality of the Bank’s
                   knowledge and research whereas employees of ministries gave the lowest
                   ratings.




                                                 29
The World Bank                                 Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Linkage to Non-Bank Expertise

       Across all respondents, the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank
        expertise received a mean rating of 6.8 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at
        all and 10 being very effective.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from academia gave the
              highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank
              expertise whereas employees of ministries gave the lowest ratings.




                                                 30
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Most Effective

       Nearly two-thirds of all respondents indicated that the World Bank’s investment lending
        was its most effective instrument in helping Bulgaria improve living standards.
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that the World Bank’s
              investment lending was its most effective instrument in helping Bulgaria improve
              living standards, except respondents from diplomatic corps and academia who
              were more likely to indicate capacity development. Respondents from the office
              of the President/Prime Minister/Minister indicated that investment lending,
              capacity development, and knowledge and advisory services were the Bank’s
              most effective instruments.




                                               31
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Least Effective

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s policy based lending/budget support to the
        government was least effective in helping Bulgaria improve living standards. More than a
        quarter of all respondents indicated that they didn’t know which of the World Bank’s
        instruments was least effective.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated the Bank’s policy based
              lending was least effective, except respondents from the office of the President/
              Prime Minister/Minister who indicated that the World Bank’s capacity
              development was least effective, respondents from the private sector/financial
              sector/private banks who indicated that they didn’t know what Bank instrument
              was least effective, and respondents from local government who indicated that the
              Bank’s policy based lending and capacity development were lease effective.




                                               32
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Meeting Bulgaria’s Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank’s financial instruments meet
        Bulgaria’s needs received a mean rating of 6.6 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of the
              President/Prime Minister/Minister gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s
              financial instruments meeting Bulgaria’s needs whereas respondents from the
              private sector/financial sector/private banks gave the lowest ratings.




                                                33
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates

The World Bank’s Work in Bulgaria

       In terms of the Bank’s work, the World Bank treating clients and stakeholders in Bulgaria
        with respect received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.8, across all respondents, on
        a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of
              agreement that the Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Bulgaria with respect,
              supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Bulgaria, plays a relevant
              role in Bulgaria’s development, and that the Bank’s work is aligned with
              development priorities compared to respondents from the FY ’05 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement across these statements.




                                                34
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions

       Across all respondents, “Working with the World Bank increases Bulgaria’s institutional
        capacity” and “The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated” both received
        the highest mean rating, 7.6, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10
        being to a very significant degree.
             Ratings for “The World Bank disburses funds promptly” in this year’s country
              survey were significantly lower compared to the FY ’05 country survey. In
              contrast, ratings for “The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its
              lending” in this year’s country survey were significantly higher compared to the
              FY ’05 country survey. Respondents across both country surveys had statistically
              similar ratings that “The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the
              projects and programs it supports”.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for
              these aspects of working with the World Bank.




                                                35
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)
The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner
       Across all respondents, the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development
        partner in terms of its collaboration with the Government in Bulgaria received the highest
        mean rating, 8.1, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a
        very significant degree.
             Ratings for the extent to which the Bank displayed flexibility in terms of the
                country’s changing circumstances (the only aspect that could be compared)
                received statistically similar ratings the FY ’05 and FY ’12 country surveys.
             In terms of stakeholder group differences, respondents from the office of the
                President/Prime Minister/Minister, local government, and academia had the
                highest ratings regarding the Bank’s openness whereas employees of ministries
                and respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks had
                significantly lower ratings. Respondents from the office of the President/Prime
                Minister/Minister, local government, and academia had the highest ratings
                regarding the Bank’s straightforwardness and honesty whereas employees of
                ministries and respondents from NGOs had significantly lower ratings.
                Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings across
                the other areas.




                                                36
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Bulgaria

Role Significance

       Respondents indicated that the Bank should play a fairly significant role in Bulgaria’s
        development over the medium term, receiving a mean rating of 7.2 across all respondents
        on a 10-point scale with 1 being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role.
             Respondents from diplomatic corps, academia, local government, and NGOs gave
              the highest ratings for the Bank’s role significance whereas respondents from the
              office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister and employees of ministries gave
              significantly lower ratings for the role that the Bank should play in Bulgaria’s
              development over the medium term.




                                                 37
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012




IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Bulgaria (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should offer more innovative knowledge
        services and reduce the complexity of obtaining Bank financing to make itself of greater
        value in Bulgaria.
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that the World Bank
              should offer more innovative knowledge services and reduce the complexity of
              obtaining Bank financing to make itself of greater value in Bulgaria, except
              respondents from diplomatic corps who indicated that the Bank should improve
              the quality of its experts as related to Bulgaria’s specific challenges.




                                                38
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Bulgaria (continued)

Collaborating in Bulgaria

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely with local
        government and private sector to ensure better development results in Bulgaria.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank should work
              more closely with local government and the private sector, except respondents
              from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister who were more likely to
              indicate that the Bank should work more closely with beneficiaries and
              respondents from NGOs who were more likely to indicate that the Bank should
              work with NGOs.




                                               39
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Bulgaria (continued)

Influencing the Global Development Agenda

       Across all respondents, the extent to which respondents believed the World Bank should
        influence the global development agenda received a mean rating of 7.3 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from local government
              had the highest ratings for the extent to which the Bank should influence the
              global development agenda whereas respondents from diplomatic corps had the
              lowest ratings.




                                               40
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Three quarters of all respondents indicated that they got most of their information about
        economic and social development issues in Bulgaria from the Internet.
             Respondents in the FY ’05 country survey indicated that they got most of their
              information about economic and social development issues in Bulgaria from local
              newspapers (79%), local television (69%), and websites (67%).




                                                41
The World Bank                               Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank, over
        half of all respondents indicated the World Bank website. Other popular choices were
        direct contact with World Bank staff, e-Newsletters, World Bank publications and other
        written materials, and World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences.




                                               42
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       Less than a third of respondents indicated that they were aware of the Bank’s Access to
        Information policy.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              awareness for the Bank’s Access to Information policy.




       Nearly a quarter of all respondents indicated that they had requested information from the
        World Bank in the past year.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister were
              significantly more likely to have requested information from the World Bank
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                43
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Nearly all respondents who indicated that they had requested information from the World
        Bank indicated that they were able to obtain this information.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of
              obtaining their requested information.




       Agreement that respondents use more data from the World Bank as a result of its Open
        Data policy received a mean rating of 6.8, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents from NGOs, academia, and other organizations had the highest
              levels of agreement that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the
              Bank’s Open Data policy whereas respondents from diplomatic corps had
              significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                44
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                            Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       All respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet (100%).

Website Usage

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website, significantly
        more than in the FY ’05 country survey (63%).
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of usage
              for the World Bank’s website.




       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, nearly two-thirds indicated that they
        used the World Bank’s country website, significantly more than in the FY ’0 5 country
        survey (47%).
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of usage
              for the World Bank’s country and main websites.




                                                45
The World Bank                                Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Website Evaluation
       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, agreement that
        respondents find the information on the Bank’s websites useful received the highest mean
        rating, 7.9, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and
        10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
                agreement that they find the information on the Bank’s websites useful and that
                the Bank websites are easy to navigate.




Information Sharing
       In terms of the Bank’s information sharing in Bulgaria, respondents had the highest level
        of agreement that the Bank is appropriately responsive to information requests, receiving
        a mean rating of 7.8, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly
        disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents from academia had the highest levels of agreement that when they
               need information from the World Bank they know how to find it whereas
               respondents from local government, diplomatic corps, and the private sector/
               financial sector/private banks had significantly lower levels of agreement.
               Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
               agreement that the Bank is appropriately responsive to information requests.




                                                46
The World Bank                                  Bulgaria                              Country Survey 2012



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 48


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 60


          C. Responses to All Questions by Year .............................................. 75


          D. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank .......... 76


          E. World Bank Client Survey 2012 – Bulgaria Questionnaire ........... 77




                                              BULGARIA




                                                  47
The World Bank                                        Bulgaria                               Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=178)
A. General Issues facing Bulgaria
1. In general, would you say that Bulgaria is headed in...?                 Percentage of Respondents (N=171)
The right direction                                                                       77.8%
The wrong direction                                                                        9.4%
Not sure                                                                                  12.9%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in              Percentage of Respondents (N=172)
                                                                               nd          rd
   Bulgaria. Please identify which of these you consider the       Most      2 Most       3 Most
   1st, 2nd, and 3rd most important development priority.        Important Important Important Combined
Economic growth                                                    54.1%        9.3%        7.0%      70.4%
Education (incl. tertiary education)                               8.7%        19.2%       12.9%      40.8%
Convergence of living standards with the EU                        9.9%        13.4%        5.3%      28.5%
Business environment and private sector development                5.8%         9.3%       11.1%      26.2%
Law and justice (incl. judiciary)                                  4.7%        12.2%        6.4%      23.3%
Health                                                             2.3%         7.0%       11.1%      20.4%
Research and innovation                                            0.6%         5.2%        8.8%      14.6%
Governance (incl. anti-corruption)                                 6.4%         3.5%        4.1%      14.0%
Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)                       0.6%         2.9%        7.0%      10.5%
Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)                            2.3%         3.5%        4.1%       9.9%
Energy and energy efficiency                                       1.7%         4.1%        2.9%       8.7%
Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)              0.0%         3.5%        3.5%       7.0%
Agriculture                                                        0.6%         2.9%        3.5%       7.0%
Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster
                                                                   1.2%       1.2%        2.9%        5.2%
management) and green growth
Rural development                                                  0.0%       1.2%        3.5%        4.7%
Public finance and administration                                  1.2%       0.6%        2.9%        4.7%
Water and sanitation                                               0.6%       0.0%        1.2%        1.8%
Financial markets                                                  0.0%       1.2%        0.6%        1.7%
Trade                                                              0.0%       0.0%        0.6%        0.6%
Urban development                                                  0.0%       0.0%        0.6%        0.6%




                                                        48
The World Bank                                     Bulgaria                             Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)

3. Convergence of living standards with the EU encompasses work in
   many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below
   do you believe would contribute most to achieving convergence of          Percentage of Respondents
   living standards in Bulgaria with the EU? (Choose no more than THREE)   (Responses Combined; N=177)
Economic growth                                                                        53.1%
Business environment and private sector development                                    44.1%
Education (incl. tertiary education)                                                   32.8%
Law and justice (incl. judiciary)                                                      32.2%
Governance (incl. anti-corruption)                                                     27.1%
Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)                                           15.8%
Research and innovation                                                                15.8%
Health                                                                                 14.1%
Social protection                                                                      13.6%
Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)                                                9.6%
Urban development                                                                      8.5%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                           7.3%
Public finance and administration                                                      5.6%
Agriculture                                                                            5.6%
Rural development                                                                      4.5%
Trade                                                                                  4.0%
Climate change and green growth                                                        2.3%
Water and sanitation                                                                   1.7%
Financial markets                                                                      1.1%


4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE
   areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating            Percentage of Respondents
   economic growth in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)                (Responses Combined; N=176)
Business environment and private sector development                                    58.0%
Research and innovation                                                                45.5%
Education (incl. tertiary education)                                                   36.4%
Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)                                           33.5%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                           27.3%
Governance (incl. anti-corruption)                                                     24.4%
Agriculture                                                                            19.9%
Law and justice (incl. judiciary)                                                      17.0%
Rural development                                                                      7.4%
Trade                                                                                  6.8%
Public finance and administration                                                      6.8%
Financial markets                                                                      3.4%
Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and
                                                                                      2.8%
green growth
Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)                                               2.8%
Urban development                                                                     2.3%
Water and sanitation                                                                  1.1%
Health                                                                                0.6%
Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)                                 0.6%




                                                     49
The World Bank                                           Bulgaria                                       Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Familiarity, Overall Effectiveness, Preparedness                                                  N        Mean      SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Bulgaria, on a ten-point
                                                                                                176          6.90   1.97
   scale? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank's effectiveness in Bulgaria,
                                                                                                155          6.96   1.78
   on a ten-point scale. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills
   and knowledge) to help Bulgaria solve its most complicated development                       154          7.55   1.91
   challenges, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact
   on development results in Bulgaria, in which sectoral areas do you
   believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and                        Percentage of Respondents
   resources in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)                                 (Responses Combined; N=177)
Education (incl. tertiary education)                                                              42.9%
Business environment and private sector development                                               36.7%
Economic growth                                                                                   24.9%
Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)                                                      22.6%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                                      22.0%
Research and innovation                                                                           20.3%
Public finance and administration                                                                 18.6%
Health                                                                                            15.8%
Governance (incl. anti-corruption)                                                                14.7%
Convergence of living standards with the EU                                                       14.1%
Law and justice (incl. judiciary)                                                                 13.0%
Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)                                                           11.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                              7.3%
Rural development                                                                                 7.3%
Financial markets                                                                                 5.6%
Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and
                                                                                                      5.1%
green growth
Agriculture                                                                                           5.1%
Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)                                                 3.4%
Urban development                                                                                     2.8%
Trade                                                                                                 1.1%

                                                                               Percentage of Respondents (N=172)
5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do
   you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second          Greatest       2nd Greatest
   greatest value in Bulgaria?                                                Value             Value          Combined
Knowledge and advisory services                                               31.4%            20.9%             52.3%
Financial resources                                                           28.5%            15.7%             44.2%
Studies/analyses                                                               7.0%            19.8%             26.7%
Training/capacity building                                                     7.6%            16.9%             24.4%
Coordination with EC and IFIs                                                 11.0%            12.8%             23.8%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                     4.1%             7.6%             11.6%
Policy advice                                                                  7.6%             3.5%             11.0%
Data                                                                           1.7%             2.3%              4.1%
Other                                                                          1.2%             0.6%              1.7%
Convening/facilitating                                                         0.6%             0.0%              0.6%



                                                            50
The World Bank                                          Bulgaria                               Country Survey 2012



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest            Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)                (Responses Combined; N=161)
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                    23.0%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                       22.4%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                       21.7%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                18.0%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Bulgaria                          18.0%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                 16.1%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                   13.0%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                              12.4%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                    8.7%
Not client focused                                                                          5.0%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                         4.3%
Other                                                                                       3.7%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                      3.1%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                       3.1%
Not aligned with other international partners’ work                                         1.9%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                    1.2%

7. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in          Percentage of Respondents
   helping Bulgaria improve living standards? (Choose no more than TWO)         (Responses Combined; N=176)
Investment lending                                                                          61.4%
Capacity development                                                                        44.9%
Knowledge and advisory services                                                             44.9%
Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                                      29.5%
Don’t know                                                                                  3.4%
Other                                                                                       0.6%

8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in             Percentage of Respondents
   helping Bulgaria improve living standards? (Choose no more than TWO)         (Responses Combined; N=164)
Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                                      40.2%
Don’t know                                                                                  26.8%
Capacity development                                                                        24.4%
Knowledge and advisory services                                                             19.5%
Investment lending                                                                          17.7%
Other                                                                                       2.4%

Global Development Agenda                                                                N       Mean       SD
9. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the
    global development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate
                                                                                         169      7.34     2.25
    change, communicable diseases, international financial systems, trade, etc.), on a
    ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                           51
The World Bank                                            Bulgaria                                    Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

10. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
   main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
   Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better                           Percentage of Respondents
   development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                                (Responses Combined; N=176)
Local Government                                                                                   47.2%
Private sector                                                                                     38.6%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                           30.7%
NGOs                                                                                               28.4%
Beneficiaries                                                                                      18.2%
European Institutions and IFIs                                                                     15.3%
Parliament                                                                                         8.5%
Media                                                                                              2.8%
Other                                                                                              2.8%
Foundations                                                                                        2.3%

                                                                                                Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s
work in Bulgaria, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                N      Mean        SD
11. Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Bulgaria          171     6.93       2.01
12. The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                               165      6.61      2.04
    for Bulgaria
13. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Bulgaria             64      7.05      1.95
14. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Bulgaria with respect                    160      7.84      1.94

                                                                                                        Degree
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Bulgaria,
in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)      N      Mean       SD
15. Responsiveness                                                                              142      7.20     1.96
16. Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)                           142      6.37     1.96
17. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                    137      6.05     2.00
18. Being inclusive                                                                             123      6.59     1.88
19. Openness (sharing data and other information)                                               155      7.41     1.85
20. Staff accessibility                                                                         152      7.38     2.05
21. Straightforwardness and honesty                                                             145      7.31     2.11
22. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                                         125      6.31     1.90
23. Collaboration with the Government                                                           143      8.06     1.59
24. Collaboration with EC and IFIs                                                              119      7.89     1.58
25. Follow through over time                                                                    126      7.41     1.99




                                                             52
The World Bank                                             Bulgaria                                     Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

26. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
   place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to?                          Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than TWO)                                                             (Responses Combined; N=170)
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                      35.3%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                  32.4%
The Government works inefficiently                                                                   31.8%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                29.4%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                    17.6%
The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                   17.6%
ground
The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                       11.2%
The World Bank works too slowly                                                                    5.9%
Poor coordination with international and European partners                                         2.4%
Other                                                                                              1.2%



C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the                      Effectiveness
following areas of development in Bulgaria, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                                        N       Mean         SD
1.    Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and green
                                                                                                   94      5.90     2.14
      growth
2.    Agriculture                                                                                  86      4.99     1.70
3.    Business environment and private sector development                                         127      6.17     1.85
4.    Public finance and administration                                                           119      6.71     1.76
5.    Urban development                                                                            86      5.33     1.90
6.    Economic growth                                                                             127      6.31     1.83
7.    Education (incl. tertiary education)                                                        126      5.71     2.07
8.    Convergence of living standards with the EU                                                 116      5.69     2.17
9.    Research and innovation                                                                     115      5.69     2.01
10.   Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)                                                129      6.69     1.94
11.   Trade                                                                                        89      5.30     1.92
12.   Water and sanitation                                                                        104      6.38     2.07
13.   Governance (incl. anti-corruption)                                                          115      5.78     2.11
14.   Energy and energy efficiency                                                                106      6.15     2.04
15.   Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)                                       104      5.38     2.30
16.   Law and justice (incl. judiciary)                                                            97      5.10     2.24
17.   Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)                                                     125      6.07     2.35
18.   Health                                                                                      107      5.19     2.05
19.   Financial markets                                                                            96      6.24     2.08
20.   Rural development                                                                            86      5.16     1.99


Achieve Development Results                                                                       N       Mean          SD
21. To what extent does the World Bank’s work help to achieve development results
                                                                                                  156      6.31     1.79
    in Bulgaria, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


                                                              53
The World Bank                                     Bulgaria                                Country Survey 2012


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in
    Bulgaria, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)         N       Mean       SD
22. The World Bank’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending, Development
                                                                                    149         6.62   1.87
    Policy Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of Bulgaria
23. The World Bank meets Bulgaria's needs for knowledge services (e.g., research,
                                                                                    160         6.82   1.91
    analysis, data, technical assistance)



D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research           Percentage of Respondents
   (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?                                (N=176)
Weekly                                                                                 3.4%
Monthly                                                                                25.6%
A few times a year                                                                     46.0%
Rarely                                                                                 21.6%
Never                                                                                  3.4%

2. When thinking about the development challenges in Bulgaria, where
   do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus
   its research and advisory services in the next few years?                 Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                             (Responses Combined; N=176)
Business environment and private sector development                                    34.7%
Economic growth                                                                        33.5%
Education (incl. tertiary education)                                                   29.0%
Convergence of living standards with the EU                                            24.4%
Governance (incl. anti-corruption)                                                     22.7%
Research and innovation                                                                21.0%
Health                                                                                 17.0%
Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)                                           14.8%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                           14.2%
Law and justice (incl. judiciary)                                                      11.9%
Rural development                                                                      9.7%
Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and
                                                                                         9.7%
green growth
Public finance and administration                                                        9.7%
Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)                                                  9.1%
Agriculture                                                                              8.5%
Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)                                    7.4%
Water and sanitation                                                                     6.3%
Financial markets                                                                        5.7%
Urban development                                                                        4.0%
Trade                                                                                    0.6%




                                                      54
The World Bank                                               Bulgaria                              Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

In Bulgaria, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and                   Level of Effectiveness
advisory services are at: (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                       N      Mean        SD
3. Raising your awareness of the particular topic                                          165      7.38      2.00
4.   Stimulating public debate/dialogue                                                    159      6.44      2.10
5.   Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                                                166      7.10      2.07
6.   Contributing to good policy making                                                    160      6.95      1.90
7.   Providing support for program implementation                                          153      7.04      1.93


In Bulgaria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and                     Degree
advisory services: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                 N      Mean       SD
8. Are timely                                                                              150     6.69      1.87
9.   Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation               150      6.65     1.87
10. Are relevant to Bulgaria’s development priorities                                      158      7.01     1.91
11. Provide feasible recommendations                                                       156      6.91     1.83
12. Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                   157      7.16     1.95
13. A source of relevant information on global good practices                              160      7.64     1.81
14. Are adequately disseminated                                                            156      6.54     2.16
15. Are appropriately translated                                                           139      7.35     1.98
16. Are adaptable to Bulgaria’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                           149      6.64     1.90
    circumstances


Overall Evaluations                                                                           N      Mean       SD
17. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge
    and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?          167      7.06     1.73
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
18. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's knowledge/
    research, on a ten point scale?                                                          163      7.88     1.54
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
19. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise,
    (i.e., other middle-income countries or advanced economies)?                             126      6.81     1.65
     (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                55
The World Bank                                                Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012


E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten              Level of Agreement
point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                     N      Mean     SD
1. The World Bank disburses funds promptly                                               111      5.74   1.86
2. The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                         138      7.30       1.85
    supports
3. The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                   126      7.00       1.88
4.   The World Bank’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonable                     92       6.96       1.90
5.   The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                         113      6.96       1.79
6.   Working with the World Bank increases Bulgaria’s institutional capacity             155      7.57       1.87
7.   The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes             102      7.17       2.08
8.  The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated                               131      7.56       1.85
9.  Where country systems (e.g., procurement, financial management, etc.) are
                                                                                         99       6.63       2.06
    adequate, the World Bank makes appropriate use of them
10. The World Bank provides effective implementation support (i.e., supervision of
                                                                                         125      7.12       2.04
    projects)




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Bulgaria

The Bank’s Role                                                                            N          Mean    SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank SHOULD play in Bulgaria’s
development in the near future, on a ten point scale?                                      172        7.22   1.95
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of                Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=163)
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                      42.9%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                       33.7%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bulgaria's specific challenges               24.5%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                              18.4%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                      15.3%
Work faster                                                                                   12.3%
Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                            10.4%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Bulgaria's
                                                                                               9.2%
economy
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                         8.6%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                                    3.7%
Other                                                                                          3.7%




                                                                56
The World Bank                                       Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social         Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)                (Responses Combined; N=175)
Internet                                                                               74.9%
Local newspapers                                                                       33.7%
Local television                                                                       29.7%
Periodicals                                                                            18.3%
Other                                                                                  12.6%
International newspapers                                                               6.3%
International television                                                               4.0%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                              3.4%
Local radio                                                                            2.3%
Instant messaging                                                                      1.1%
International radio                                                                    0.6%
Blogs                                                                                  0.6%
Mobile phones                                                                          0.0%

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?          Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                (Responses Combined; N=173)
World Bank website                                                                     51.4%
Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)               35.8%
e-Newsletters                                                                          33.5%
World Bank publications and other written materials                                    28.9%
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                              26.6%
Mobile phones                                                                          6.4%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                              4.0%
Instant messaging                                                                      2.3%
Blogs                                                                                  0.6%
Other                                                                                  0.6%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under
    which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession      Percentage of Respondents
    that is not a list of exceptions?                                                (N=160)
Yes                                                                                   31.9%
No                                                                                    68.1%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities     Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                                (N=166)
Yes                                                                                   24.1%
No                                                                                    75.9%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                         (N=40)
Yes                                                                                   92.5%
No                                                                                    7.5%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                               (N=163)
Yes                                                                                  100.0%
No                                                                                    0.0%



                                                       57
The World Bank                                      Bulgaria                                  Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank website?                                            (N=162)
Yes                                                                                         90.1%
No                                                                                          9.9%

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                             (N=159)
The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.bg)                                         59.7%
The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                           40.3%


Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point            Level of Agreement
scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N       Mean      SD
10. I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the organization’s Open
                                                                                      117      6.83      2.40
    Data policy
11. I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate                                   147      7.29      1.95
12. I find the information on the World Bank’s websites useful                        144      7.94      1.56
13. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it                 155      7.66      2.30
14. The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries             115      7.80      2.12



H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                      (N=175)
Employee of Ministry                                                                       24.0%
NGO                                                                                        14.3%
Diplomatic Corps                                                                           11.4%
Private Sector Organization                                                                10.3%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                     6.9%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                           6.3%
Other                                                                                      4.0%
Office of the President/Prime Minister                                                     3.4%
Office of Minister                                                                         2.9%
Media                                                                                      2.9%
Private Foundation                                                                         2.3%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                              2.3%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                  1.7%
Independent Government Institution                                                         1.7%
Consultant/Contractor on Bank-Supported Project                                            1.1%
PMU                                                                                        1.1%
EC Staff/Representative                                                                    1.1%
Trade Union                                                                                1.1%
Judiciary Branch                                                                           1.1%




                                                       58
The World Bank                                        Bulgaria                           Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                 Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                 (N=173)
Other                                                                                 16.2%
Public finance and administration                                                     12.1%
Business environment and private sector development                                   11.0%
Economic growth                                                                       9.8%
Education                                                                             6.9%
Transport infrastructure                                                              5.8%
Governance                                                                            4.6%
Social inclusion                                                                      4.6%
Financial markets                                                                     3.5%
Health                                                                                3.5%
Trade                                                                                 3.5%
Convergence of living standards with the EU                                           2.9%
Energy and energy efficiency                                                          2.9%
Climate change and green growth                                                       2.3%
Law and justice                                                                       2.3%
Research and innovation                                                               2.3%
Social protection                                                                     2.3%
Water and sanitation                                                                  1.7%
Agriculture                                                                           0.6%
Rural development                                                                     0.6%
Urban development                                                                     0.6%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World         Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in your country?                                                              (N=174)
Yes                                                                                   66.7%
No                                                                                    33.3%

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World      Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)                                        (N=172)
Use World Bank reports/data                                                           46.5%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                         41.9%
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                              37.8%
Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                          28.5%
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)             15.7%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
5. Which best represents your geographic location?                                   (N=175)
Sofia                                                                                 88.6%
Outside Sofia                                                                         11.4%




                                                        59
The World Bank                                                                                                             Bulgaria                                                                             Country Survey 2012


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

A. General Issues facing Bulgaria
In general, would you say that Bulgaria is headed in...?
                                                                                        Office of President/         Employee of a       Local         Diplomatic     Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Prime Minister/ Minister          Ministry       Government         Corps          Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 The right direction                                                                          100.0%                    87.8%           100.0%           70.0%                 72.7%              60.0%    50.0%        81.5%
 The wrong direction                                                                            0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                 22.7%              16.0%    25.0%        14.8%
 Not sure                                                                                       0.0%                    12.2%            0.0%            30.0%                  4.5%              24.0%    25.0%        3.7%

                                                                                                                st    nd         rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bulgaria. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
   st
 1 Most Important                                                                       Office of President/         Employee of a       Local         Diplomatic     Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Prime Minister/ Minister          Ministry       Government         Corps          Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Economic growth                                                                               72.7%                    56.1%           63.6%            27.8%                 47.6%              40.0%    66.7%        66.7%
 Convergence of living standards with the EU                                                    9.1%                    12.2%           18.2%            16.7%                  4.8%               8.0%     0.0%         6.7%
 Transport infrastructure                                                                       0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             5.6%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                                           0.0%                    2.4%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Energy and energy efficiency                                                                   0.0%                    2.4%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               8.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Climate change and green growth                                                                0.0%                    4.9%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Social protection                                                                              0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Social inclusion                                                                               9.1%                    2.4%             0.0%             5.6%                  0.0%               4.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Health                                                                                         0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  4.8%               0.0%     8.3%         6.7%
 Education                                                                                     18.2%                    9.8%             9.1%            11.1%                  9.5%               4.0%     0.0%        10.0%
 Research and innovation                                                                        0.0%                    2.4%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Business environment and private sector development                                            0.0%                    0.0%             9.1%             5.6%                 14.3%              12.0%     8.3%         3.3%
 Financial markets                                                                              0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Agriculture                                                                                    0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               4.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Trade                                                                                          0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Public finance and administration                                                              0.0%                    4.9%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Governance                                                                                     0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%            22.2%                  0.0%              12.0%    16.7%         6.7%
 Law and justice                                                                                0.0%                    2.4%             0.0%             5.6%                 19.0%               8.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Rural development                                                                              0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Urban development                                                                              0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%




                                                                                                                            60
The World Bank                                                                                                             Bulgaria                                                                             Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)
                                                                                                                st    nd         rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bulgaria. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
   nd
 2 Most Important                                                                       Office of President/         Employee of a       Local         Diplomatic     Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Prime Minister/ Minister          Ministry       Government         Corps          Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Economic growth                                                                               18.2%                    9.8%             9.1%             5.6%                  9.5%              12.0%     8.3%         6.7%
 Convergence of living standards with the EU                                                   27.3%                    19.5%            9.1%             5.6%                  9.5%               8.0%    16.7%        13.3%
 Transport infrastructure                                                                       9.1%                    2.4%             0.0%             5.6%                  4.8%               0.0%     0.0%         3.3%
 Water and sanitation                                                                           0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Energy and energy efficiency                                                                   0.0%                    2.4%             0.0%            16.7%                  9.5%               4.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Climate change and green growth                                                                0.0%                    2.4%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               4.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Social protection                                                                              0.0%                    7.3%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               4.0%     8.3%         3.3%
 Social inclusion                                                                               9.1%                    0.0%             9.1%             5.6%                  4.8%               0.0%     8.3%         3.3%
 Health                                                                                         0.0%                    7.3%             9.1%             5.6%                  4.8%               8.0%     8.3%        10.0%
 Education                                                                                     27.3%                    19.5%            9.1%             0.0%                 23.8%              28.0%    25.0%        16.7%
 Research and innovation                                                                        0.0%                    7.3%             0.0%             0.0%                  4.8%              16.0%     8.3%         0.0%
 Business environment and private sector development                                            9.1%                    9.8%            27.3%            11.1%                  0.0%               0.0%     8.3%        16.7%
 Financial markets                                                                              0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  4.8%               0.0%     0.0%         3.3%
 Agriculture                                                                                    0.0%                    4.9%             0.0%             0.0%                  4.8%               0.0%     0.0%         3.3%
 Trade                                                                                          0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Public finance and administration                                                              0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               4.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Governance                                                                                     0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%            16.7%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         6.7%
 Law and justice                                                                                0.0%                    7.3%            27.3%            27.8%                 14.3%              12.0%     8.3%        10.0%
 Rural development                                                                              0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  4.8%               0.0%     0.0%         3.3%
 Urban development                                                                              0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%

                                                                                                                st    nd         rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bulgaria. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
   rd
 3 Most Important                                                                       Office of President/         Employee of a       Local         Diplomatic     Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Prime Minister/ Minister          Ministry       Government         Corps          Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Economic growth                                                                                0.0%                    2.4%             9.1%            16.7%                 20.0%              12.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Convergence of living standards with the EU                                                    9.1%                    4.9%            18.2%            11.1%                  5.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Transport infrastructure                                                                       9.1%                    4.9%            18.2%             5.6%                  5.0%               0.0%     8.3%        13.3%
 Water and sanitation                                                                           9.1%                    2.4%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Energy and energy efficiency                                                                   9.1%                    4.9%             0.0%             5.6%                  0.0%               0.0%     8.3%         0.0%
 Climate change and green growth                                                                0.0%                    0.0%             9.1%             5.6%                  0.0%               8.0%     0.0%         3.3%
 Social protection                                                                              0.0%                    7.3%             0.0%             0.0%                 10.0%               0.0%     0.0%         3.3%
 Social inclusion                                                                               0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             5.6%                  5.0%               8.0%     0.0%        10.0%
 Health                                                                                         9.1%                    14.6%            9.1%             5.6%                  0.0%              16.0%    16.7%        13.3%
 Education                                                                                      0.0%                    19.5%            0.0%             5.6%                 10.0%              12.0%    33.3%        13.3%
 Research and innovation                                                                       18.2%                    12.2%            0.0%             0.0%                  5.0%               8.0%    16.7%        10.0%
 Business environment and private sector development                                            0.0%                    4.9%             9.1%            16.7%                 15.0%              20.0%     8.3%        13.3%
 Financial markets                                                                              0.0%                    0.0%             9.1%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Agriculture                                                                                    0.0%                    7.3%             0.0%             0.0%                  5.0%               4.0%     8.3%         0.0%
 Trade                                                                                          0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         3.3%
 Public finance and administration                                                              9.1%                    4.9%             0.0%             0.0%                  5.0%               4.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Governance                                                                                    18.2%                    0.0%             0.0%             5.6%                 10.0%               4.0%     0.0%         3.3%
 Law and justice                                                                                0.0%                    4.9%            18.2%            16.7%                  0.0%               4.0%     0.0%         6.7%
 Rural development                                                                              9.1%                    4.9%             0.0%             0.0%                  5.0%               0.0%     0.0%         3.3%
 Urban development                                                                              0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         3.3%




                                                                                                                            61
The World Bank                                                                                                      Bulgaria                                                                                               Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Bulgaria (continued)
Convergence of living standards with the EU encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to achieving convergence of living standards in Bulgaria
  with the EU? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Office of President/     Employee of a         Local          Diplomatic      Private Sector/ Financial
 (Responses Combined)                                                              Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry        Government          Corps           Sector/ Private Bank         NGO           Academia           Other
 Trade                                                                                        0.0%                 7.1%              9.1%              5.0%                   4.5%                  0.0%            0.0%             3.2%
 Urban development                                                                            9.1%                 11.9%             9.1%              0.0%                   9.1%                 12.0%            0.0%             9.7%
 Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)                                                     27.3%                 7.1%              9.1%             10.0%                   0.0%                  8.0%           16.7%            12.9%
 Law and justice (incl. judiciary)                                                           27.3%                 26.2%             45.5%            45.0%                  45.5%                 40.0%            8.3%            22.6%
 Rural development                                                                            0.0%                 7.1%              0.0%              5.0%                   0.0%                  8.0%            0.0%             3.2%
 Business environment and private sector development                                         36.4%                 40.5%             63.6%            40.0%                  68.2%                 24.0%           41.7%            45.2%
 Education (incl. tertiary education)                                                        36.4%                 35.7%             9.1%             20.0%                  18.2%                 56.0%           50.0%            29.0%
 Economic growth                                                                             81.8%                 54.8%             63.6%            30.0%                  31.8%                 56.0%           75.0%            54.8%
 Financial markets                                                                            0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%              0.0%                   4.5%                  0.0%            0.0%             3.2%
 Public finance and administration                                                            0.0%                 11.9%             0.0%              5.0%                   4.5%                  4.0%            8.3%             3.2%
 Health                                                                                      18.2%                 9.5%              0.0%             15.0%                  18.2%                 12.0%            8.3%            25.8%
 Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)                                                27.3%                 16.7%             18.2%            15.0%                  13.6%                 16.0%           16.7%            12.9%
 Agriculture                                                                                  9.1%                 4.8%              9.1%             15.0%                   9.1%                  0.0%            0.0%             3.2%
 Water and sanitation                                                                         0.0%                 4.8%              0.0%              5.0%                   0.0%                  0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
 Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and green
                                                                                              0.0%                 4.8%              0.0%              0.0%                   0.0%                  4.0%            0.0%            3.2%
 growth
 Energy and energy efficiency                                                                 0.0%                 7.1%              0.0%             15.0%                  13.6%                  4.0%            8.3%             6.5%
 Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)                                        0.0%                 16.7%             27.3%            15.0%                   9.1%                  8.0%           25.0%             9.7%
 Research and innovation                                                                     18.2%                 14.3%             9.1%             15.0%                  13.6%                 16.0%           33.3%            16.1%
 Governance (incl. anti-corruption)                                                           9.1%                 16.7%             27.3%            45.0%                  36.4%                 28.0%            8.3%            35.5%

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of Respondents                                                          Office of President/     Employee of a         Local         Diplomatic       Private Sector/ Financial
  (Responses Combined)                                                            Prime Minister/ Minister      Ministry         Government          Corps           Sector/ Private Bank            NGO          Academia          Other
  Energy and energy efficiency                                                              27.3%                 29.3%             18.2%            31.6%                  40.9%                    16.0%         33.3%            25.0%
  Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)                                              54.5%                 31.7%             36.4%            26.3%                  27.3%                    32.0%         16.7%            40.6%
  Research and innovation                                                                   36.4%                 56.1%             18.2%            31.6%                  31.8%                    48.0%         66.7%            56.3%
  Education (incl. tertiary education)                                                      36.4%                 39.0%             45.5%            26.3%                  22.7%                    48.0%         41.7%            34.4%
  Law and justice (incl. judiciary)                                                         18.2%                  9.8%              0.0%            31.6%                  27.3%                    24.0%          8.3%             9.4%
  Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and green
                                                                                             9.1%                  2.4%              0.0%             0.0%                   4.5%                    4.0%           0.0%            3.1%
  growth
  Agriculture                                                                               18.2%                 19.5%             18.2%            31.6%                  27.3%                    16.0%           0.0%           15.6%
  Trade                                                                                      0.0%                  4.9%             18.2%            15.8%                   9.1%                     4.0%           0.0%            6.3%
  Governance (incl. anti-corruption)                                                        27.3%                 17.1%              9.1%            42.1%                  22.7%                    32.0%          33.3%           18.8%
  Financial markets                                                                          0.0%                  4.9%              0.0%             5.3%                   4.5%                     0.0%           8.3%            3.1%
  Urban development                                                                          0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%            10.5%                   4.5%                     0.0%           0.0%            3.1%
  Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)                                                    0.0%                  2.4%              0.0%            10.5%                   0.0%                     4.0%           8.3%            0.0%
  Health                                                                                     0.0%                  0.0%              9.1%             0.0%                   0.0%                     0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
  Public finance and administration                                                          0.0%                  4.9%              0.0%            10.5%                   4.5%                     8.0%          25.0%            3.1%
  Rural development                                                                          9.1%                 12.2%             18.2%             0.0%                   9.1%                     8.0%           0.0%            3.1%
  Business environment and private sector development                                       54.5%                 53.7%             90.9%            21.1%                  68.2%                    56.0%          58.3%           75.0%
  Water and sanitation                                                                       0.0%                  2.4%              0.0%             0.0%                   0.0%                     0.0%           0.0%            3.1%
  Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)                                      0.0%                  0.0%              9.1%             0.0%                   0.0%                     0.0%           0.0%            0.0%




                                                                                                                     62
The World Bank                                                                                                                   Bulgaria                                                                               Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar, 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective; 1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Bulgaria, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in Bulgaria?
  (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Office of President/        Employee of a          Local         Diplomatic       Private Sector/ Financial
 (Responses Combined)                                                           Prime Minister/ Minister          Ministry        Government           Corps           Sector/ Private Bank           NGO          Academia     Other
 Education                                                                                27.3%                    46.3%             54.5%             30.0%                  40.9%                  52.0%           66.7%      31.3%
 Social inclusion                                                                         27.3%                    4.9%               9.1%             15.0%                  18.2%                  16.0%            8.3%       9.4%
 Transport infrastructure                                                                 27.3%                    24.4%              9.1%             30.0%                  13.6%                  12.0%            0.0%      34.4%
 Business environment and private sector development                                      27.3%                    36.6%             63.6%             35.0%                  18.2%                  44.0%           33.3%      40.6%
 Law and justice                                                                           0.0%                    19.5%              0.0%             25.0%                  27.3%                  12.0%            0.0%       3.1%
 Water and sanitation                                                                     36.4%                    9.8%               0.0%              0.0%                   0.0%                   4.0%            0.0%       9.4%
 Public finance and administration                                                         9.1%                    4.9%              36.4%             20.0%                  18.2%                  24.0%           50.0%      18.8%
 Urban development                                                                         0.0%                    2.4%               9.1%              0.0%                   4.5%                   8.0%            0.0%       0.0%
 Energy and energy efficiency                                                              9.1%                    17.1%             18.2%             35.0%                  22.7%                  32.0%           16.7%      18.8%
 Climate change and green growth                                                           9.1%                    4.9%               9.1%              5.0%                   0.0%                  12.0%            8.3%       0.0%
 Social protection                                                                         0.0%                    2.4%               0.0%             10.0%                   4.5%                   4.0%            0.0%       3.1%
 Health                                                                                    9.1%                    14.6%              9.1%             20.0%                  18.2%                  16.0%            8.3%      21.9%
 Convergence of living standards with the EU                                               9.1%                    22.0%             27.3%              5.0%                  13.6%                   8.0%            8.3%      15.6%
 Research and innovation                                                                  27.3%                    24.4%              9.1%             10.0%                  22.7%                  20.0%           41.7%      15.6%
 Financial markets                                                                         0.0%                    7.3%               9.1%              5.0%                   9.1%                   0.0%            8.3%       6.3%
 Trade                                                                                     9.1%                    2.4%               0.0%              0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%            0.0%       0.0%
 Economic growth                                                                          18.2%                    26.8%             18.2%             25.0%                  27.3%                   8.0%           41.7%      31.3%
 Rural development                                                                         9.1%                    12.2%              0.0%              0.0%                  13.6%                   4.0%            0.0%       9.4%
 Governance                                                                               36.4%                    9.8%               9.1%             20.0%                  18.2%                  16.0%            8.3%      12.5%
 Agriculture                                                                               0.0%                    4.9%               9.1%             10.0%                   9.1%                   4.0%            0.0%       3.1%




                                                                                                                                   63
The World Bank                                                                                                          Bulgaria                                                                                   Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Bulgaria?
 Greatest Value                                                                          Office of President/       Employee of a         Local             Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Prime Minister/ Minister        Ministry         Government             Corps        Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Financial resources                                                                            30.0%                  25.0%             20.0%                27.8%               31.8%              28.0%    33.3%        31.3%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                      0.0%                  5.0%              10.0%                 5.6%                4.5%               4.0%     0.0%         3.1%
 Knowledge and advisory services                                                                40.0%                  35.0%             30.0%                38.9%               36.4%              28.0%    33.3%        18.8%
 Policy advice                                                                                  20.0%                  5.0%              10.0%                16.7%                4.5%               8.0%     0.0%         6.3%
 Coordination with EC and IFIs                                                                   0.0%                  7.5%              20.0%                11.1%               13.6%               8.0%    16.7%        12.5%
 Data                                                                                           10.0%                  0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%               4.0%     0.0%         3.1%
 Training/capacity building                                                                      0.0%                  5.0%              10.0%                 0.0%                9.1%              12.0%     8.3%        12.5%
 Studies/analyses                                                                                0.0%                  12.5%              0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%              12.0%     8.3%         9.4%
 Convening/facilitating                                                                          0.0%                  2.5%               0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Other                                                                                           0.0%                  2.5%               0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         3.1%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Bulgaria?
 2nd Greatest Value                                                                      Office of President/       Employee of a         Local             Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Prime Minister/ Minister        Ministry         Government             Corps        Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Financial resources                                                                            20.0%                  30.0%             30.0%                 0.0%                9.1%               8.0%     0.0%        18.8%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                      0.0%                  2.5%              10.0%                16.7%                9.1%              12.0%     8.3%         6.3%
 Knowledge and advisory services                                                                30.0%                  25.0%             10.0%                33.3%                9.1%              24.0%    25.0%        15.6%
 Policy advice                                                                                   0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%                11.1%                0.0%               0.0%     8.3%         6.3%
 Coordination with EC and IFIs                                                                  20.0%                  5.0%              10.0%                 0.0%               22.7%              16.0%    16.7%        15.6%
 Data                                                                                            0.0%                  2.5%               0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%               8.0%     0.0%         3.1%
 Training/capacity building                                                                     10.0%                  12.5%             30.0%                27.8%                9.1%              16.0%    25.0%        15.6%
 Studies/analyses                                                                               20.0%                  22.5%             10.0%                11.1%               40.9%              12.0%    16.7%        18.8%
 Convening/facilitating                                                                          0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Other                                                                                           0.0%                  2.5%               0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                              Office of President/     Employee of a       Local                  Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
 (Responses Combined)                                                                Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry      Government                  Corps        Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                         11.1%                 15.4%          22.2%                     25.0%               30.0%              16.7%    41.7%        24.1%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                                      22.2%                 7.7%           11.1%                      6.3%               15.0%               4.2%    16.7%         3.4%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                   11.1%                 20.5%          22.2%                     12.5%               10.0%              12.5%    16.7%        17.2%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                                         0.0%                 2.6%            0.0%                      6.3%                0.0%               4.2%     0.0%         3.4%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                                       0.0%                 2.6%            0.0%                      0.0%                5.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Not client focused                                                                             0.0%                 10.3%           0.0%                      0.0%                0.0%               8.3%     0.0%         6.9%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                          0.0%                 7.7%            0.0%                      0.0%                5.0%               0.0%     0.0%         3.4%
 Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                  11.1%                 12.8%          22.2%                     25.0%               15.0%              25.0%    41.7%         6.9%
 Too influenced by developed countries                                                         11.1%                 23.1%          33.3%                     12.5%               20.0%              16.7%    16.7%        37.9%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                      22.2%                 15.4%          33.3%                     25.0%               30.0%              20.8%    25.0%        24.1%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                     11.1%                 17.9%           0.0%                     12.5%               10.0%              16.7%     8.3%        13.8%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                                            0.0%                 5.1%            0.0%                     12.5%                0.0%               0.0%     8.3%         6.9%
 Not aligned with other international partners’ work                                            0.0%                 2.6%           11.1%                      0.0%                0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         3.4%
 Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                11.1%                 5.1%           11.1%                      6.3%               20.0%              33.3%     8.3%         3.4%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Bulgaria                            22.2%                 23.1%          11.1%                      6.3%               10.0%              20.8%    16.7%        20.7%
 Other                                                                                         11.1%                 2.6%           11.1%                      0.0%               10.0%               4.2%     0.0%         0.0%




                                                                                                                         64
The World Bank                                                                                                        Bulgaria                                                                                               Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Office of President/      Employee of a           Local          Diplomatic       Private Sector/ Financial
 (Responses Combined)                                                              Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry           Government          Corps            Sector/ Private Bank          NGO          Academia           Other
 Investment lending                                                                          54.5%                 54.8%               72.7%             50.0%                   61.9%                  68.0%         33.3%             77.4%
 Capacity development                                                                        54.5%                 31.0%               27.3%             70.0%                   42.9%                  40.0%         75.0%             41.9%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                                      18.2%                 45.2%               36.4%             30.0%                   33.3%                   8.0%         25.0%             25.8%
 Knowledge and advisory services                                                             54.5%                 38.1%               54.5%             40.0%                   38.1%                  60.0%         66.7%             38.7%
 Other                                                                                        0.0%                  0.0%                0.0%              0.0%                    0.0%                   4.0%          0.0%              0.0%
 Don’t know                                                                                   0.0%                  7.1%                0.0%              0.0%                    4.8%                   8.0%          0.0%              0.0%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce poverty in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                             Office of President/      Employee of a       Local             Diplomatic       Private Sector/ Financial
 (Responses Combined)                                                               Prime Minister/ Minister        Ministry      Government             Corps            Sector/ Private Bank          NGO          Academia           Other
 Investment lending                                                                           12.5%                   8.3%          18.2%                21.1%                   25.0%                  20.0%         41.7%             13.3%
 Capacity development                                                                         37.5%                  30.6%          27.3%                15.8%                    5.0%                  36.0%         25.0%             20.0%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                                       25.0%                  33.3%          27.3%                36.8%                   30.0%                  60.0%         66.7%             40.0%
 Knowledge and advisory services                                                               0.0%                  19.4%          18.2%                26.3%                   15.0%                  20.0%         33.3%             20.0%
 Other                                                                                        12.5%                   2.8%           0.0%                 0.0%                    0.0%                   4.0%          0.0%              3.3%
 Don’t know                                                                                   12.5%                  27.8%          18.2%                26.3%                   60.0%                  20.0%         16.7%             20.0%

To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)?
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                Office of President/      Employee of a        Local          Diplomatic      Private Sector/ Financial
  (Responses Combined)                                                                  Prime Minister/ Minister        Ministry       Government          Corps            Sector/ Private Bank         NGO         Academia           Other
  NGOs                                                                                            27.3%                  17.1%            0.0%             20.0%                   22.7%                 76.0%         36.4%            21.9%
  Local Government                                                                                45.5%                  65.9%            81.8%            60.0%                   22.7%                 20.0%          9.1%            50.0%
  Beneficiaries                                                                                   54.5%                  19.5%            9.1%             10.0%                   13.6%                 12.0%          9.1%            21.9%
  Private sector                                                                                  27.3%                  24.4%            72.7%            30.0%                   50.0%                 48.0%         63.6%            31.3%
  European Institutions and IFIs                                                                   9.1%                  12.2%            9.1%             20.0%                   27.3%                  8.0%          9.1%            21.9%
  Foundations                                                                                      0.0%                  2.4%             0.0%              5.0%                    0.0%                  4.0%          0.0%             3.1%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                        27.3%                  31.7%            18.2%            20.0%                   36.4%                 28.0%         72.7%            28.1%
  Parliament                                                                                       9.1%                  14.6%            9.1%             10.0%                   13.6%                  4.0%          0.0%             3.1%
  Media                                                                                            0.0%                  4.9%             0.0%              5.0%                    4.5%                  0.0%          0.0%             3.1%
  Other                                                                                            0.0%                  0.0%             0.0%              5.0%                    9.1%                  0.0%          0.0%             6.3%




                                                                                                                       65
The World Bank                                                                                                           Bulgaria                                            Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Bulgaria, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Bulgaria in terms of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                          66
The World Bank                                                                                                            Bulgaria                                                                                       Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               Office of President/     Employee of a           Local        Diplomatic              Private Sector/ Financial
 (Responses Combined)                                                                 Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry         Government         Corps                   Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 The World Bank works too slowly                                                                27.3%                  4.9%              10.0%            0.0%                           0.0%               8.0%     0.0%         6.7%
 The Government works inefficiently                                                              9.1%                 12.2%               0.0%           50.0%                          52.4%              52.0%    36.4%        33.3%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                          27.3%                 29.3%              40.0%           16.7%                          42.9%              32.0%    18.2%        26.7%
 Poor coordination with international and European partners                                      0.0%                  4.9%               0.0%            0.0%                           4.8%               0.0%     9.1%         0.0%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                   18.2%                 14.6%               0.0%            5.6%                          14.3%              12.0%     9.1%         3.3%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                             9.1%                 12.2%              30.0%           61.1%                          38.1%              28.0%    54.5%        43.3%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                                               0.0%                 24.4%              30.0%           16.7%                           4.8%              24.0%    18.2%        16.7%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                27.3%                 56.1%              30.0%            5.6%                          28.6%              28.0%    36.4%        40.0%
 The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground             27.3%                 24.4%              40.0%           11.1%                           0.0%              12.0%    18.2%        20.0%
 Other                                                                                           0.0%                  2.4%               0.0%            0.0%                           4.8%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Bulgaria, on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                            67
The World Bank                                                                                                         Bulgaria                                                                                Country Survey 2012

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Bulgaria, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?
                                                                                       Office of President/       Employee of a          Local          Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                          Prime Minister/ Minister        Ministry          Government          Corps        Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Weekly                                                                                        0.0%                  2.4%                0.0%              5.3%                4.5%               4.0%     0.0%         6.3%
 Monthly                                                                                      36.4%                  14.6%              18.2%             15.8%               13.6%              44.0%    50.0%        28.1%
 A few times a year                                                                           36.4%                  58.5%              36.4%             57.9%               36.4%              28.0%    50.0%        46.9%
 Rarely                                                                                       27.3%                  22.0%              36.4%             21.1%               31.8%              24.0%     0.0%        15.6%
 Never                                                                                         0.0%                  2.4%                9.1%              0.0%               13.6%               0.0%     0.0%         3.1%




                                                                                                                        68
The World Bank                                                                                                             Bulgaria                                                                                      Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)
When thinking about the development challenges in Bulgaria, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                             Office of President/      Employee of a         Local          Diplomatic       Private Sector/ Financial
 (Responses Combined)                                                               Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry        Government            Corps           Sector/ Private Bank         NGO          Academia      Other
 Rural development                                                                             9.1%                 14.6%              9.1%               5.0%                   18.2%                 4.0%          0.0%         6.5%
 Social protection                                                                             0.0%                 9.8%               9.1%               0.0%                    9.1%                12.0%          8.3%         6.5%
 Convergence of living standards with the EU                                                   9.1%                 26.8%             45.5%              30.0%                   18.2%                20.0%         41.7%        16.1%
 Climate change and green growth                                                               9.1%                 12.2%             18.2%               5.0%                    9.1%                12.0%          8.3%         6.5%
 Governance                                                                                    9.1%                 22.0%             18.2%              20.0%                   40.9%                24.0%          8.3%        25.8%
 Health                                                                                       27.3%                 17.1%              0.0%              20.0%                    9.1%                 8.0%         25.0%        29.0%
 Agriculture                                                                                   9.1%                 7.3%               9.1%              20.0%                    9.1%                 8.0%          0.0%         6.5%
 Financial markets                                                                             0.0%                 7.3%              18.2%               0.0%                   18.2%                 0.0%          0.0%         3.2%
 Business environment and private sector development                                          27.3%                 24.4%             45.5%              20.0%                   31.8%                40.0%         50.0%        48.4%
 Law and justice                                                                               0.0%                 7.3%               9.1%              30.0%                   18.2%                12.0%          8.3%         9.7%
 Public finance and administration                                                             9.1%                 4.9%              18.2%              10.0%                   13.6%                 4.0%          8.3%        16.1%
 Trade                                                                                         0.0%                 2.4%               0.0%               0.0%                    0.0%                 0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
 Urban development                                                                             9.1%                 2.4%               0.0%               0.0%                    4.5%                16.0%          0.0%         0.0%
 Social inclusion                                                                             18.2%                 4.9%               0.0%              10.0%                   13.6%                12.0%          8.3%         9.7%
 Economic growth                                                                              36.4%                 36.6%             45.5%              20.0%                   22.7%                40.0%         33.3%        32.3%
 Research and innovation                                                                      36.4%                 29.3%             18.2%              10.0%                   13.6%                24.0%         41.7%         9.7%
 Transport infrastructure                                                                     27.3%                 17.1%              9.1%              20.0%                    4.5%                 4.0%          0.0%        22.6%
 Energy and energy efficiency                                                                  9.1%                 9.8%               0.0%              20.0%                   18.2%                24.0%         16.7%        12.9%
 Education                                                                                    18.2%                 31.7%             27.3%              25.0%                   22.7%                36.0%         25.0%        29.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                                         27.3%                 7.3%               0.0%              15.0%                    0.0%                 0.0%          0.0%         6.5%

In Bulgaria, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at : (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                            69
The World Bank                                                                                                                    Bulgaria                   Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

In Bulgaria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and advisory services: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                                                                   70
The World Bank                                                                                                         Bulgaria      Country Survey 2012

E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Bulgaria




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                        71
The World Bank                                                                                                          Bulgaria                                                                                      Country Survey 2012

F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Bulgaria (continued)
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                              Office of President/    Employee of a              Local          Diplomatic        Private Sector/ Financial
 (Responses Combined)                                                                Prime Minister/ Minister      Ministry             Government          Corps             Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bulgaria's specific challenges               18.2%                23.7%                 20.0%             50.0%                    20.0%              29.2%     8.3%        23.3%
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                       18.2%                26.3%                 70.0%             18.8%                    50.0%              20.8%    33.3%        43.3%
 Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                             0.0%                2.6%                   0.0%              6.3%                    20.0%              20.8%    25.0%        10.0%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                               0.0%                23.7%                 60.0%             18.8%                    20.0%               8.3%    16.7%        10.0%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                         9.1%                10.5%                  0.0%              0.0%                     0.0%              12.5%    16.7%        13.3%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Bulgaria's economy                  9.1%                10.5%                  0.0%             18.8%                    10.0%              12.5%    16.7%         0.0%
 Offer more innovative financial products                                                       9.1%                10.5%                 20.0%             18.8%                    20.0%              16.7%     8.3%        20.0%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                      63.6%                44.7%                 10.0%             25.0%                    45.0%              54.2%    41.7%        43.3%
 Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                                    0.0%                5.3%                  10.0%              6.3%                     0.0%               4.2%     8.3%         0.0%
 Work faster                                                                                   27.3%                13.2%                 10.0%             18.8%                     5.0%               4.2%    16.7%        10.0%
 Other                                                                                          9.1%                2.6%                   0.0%              0.0%                     0.0%              12.5%     0.0%         3.3%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Office of President/      Employee of a               Local          Diplomatic        Private Sector/ Financial
 (Responses Combined)                                                             Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry               Government          Corps             Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Local newspapers                                                                           18.2%                 22.5%                   36.4%             60.0%                    31.8%              33.3%    16.7%        43.8%
 International newspapers                                                                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%             15.0%                    13.6%               4.2%     0.0%         9.4%
 Local radio                                                                                 0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%             15.0%                     0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         3.1%
 International radio                                                                         0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%              5.0%                     0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Local television                                                                           18.2%                 37.5%                   63.6%             15.0%                    31.8%              33.3%    16.7%        18.8%
 International television                                                                    0.0%                  5.0%                    9.1%              0.0%                     4.5%               0.0%     0.0%         9.4%
 Periodicals                                                                                36.4%                 12.5%                    9.1%              0.0%                    22.7%              16.7%    50.0%        15.6%
 Internet                                                                                   63.6%                 85.0%                   81.8%             60.0%                    72.7%              83.3%    75.0%        75.0%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                                   0.0%                  2.5%                    0.0%              0.0%                     9.1%               4.2%    16.7%         0.0%
 Blogs                                                                                       0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%              0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%     8.3%         0.0%
 Mobile phones                                                                               0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%              0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Instant messaging                                                                           0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%              0.0%                     0.0%               4.2%     0.0%         3.1%
 Other                                                                                      18.2%                 17.5%                    9.1%             20.0%                     9.1%               4.2%    16.7%         9.4%

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Office of President/           Employee of a          Local          Diplomatic        Private Sector/ Financial
 (Responses Combined)                                                             Prime Minister/ Minister            Ministry          Government          Corps             Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 World Bank website                                                                          9.1%                      50.0%              63.6%             30.0%                    66.7%              66.7%    83.3%        45.2%
 Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)                   54.5%                      32.5%              36.4%             40.0%                    28.6%              29.2%    25.0%        41.9%
 e-Newsletters                                                                              18.2%                      35.0%              27.3%             30.0%                    28.6%              37.5%    33.3%        38.7%
 Instant messaging                                                                           0.0%                      2.5%                0.0%              5.0%                     4.8%               0.0%     0.0%         3.2%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                                  36.4%                      35.0%              36.4%             30.0%                    28.6%              25.0%     0.0%        19.4%
 World Bank publications and other written materials                                        45.5%                      35.0%               9.1%             25.0%                    33.3%              20.8%    41.7%        25.8%
 Mobile phones                                                                              18.2%                      2.5%                9.1%              0.0%                     0.0%               8.3%    16.7%         6.5%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                                   0.0%                      5.0%                0.0%             10.0%                     4.8%               4.2%     0.0%         3.2%
 Blogs                                                                                       0.0%                      0.0%                0.0%              5.0%                     0.0%               0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
 Other                                                                                       0.0%                      0.0%                0.0%              0.0%                     0.0%               4.2%     0.0%         0.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                                                       Office of President/      Employee of a            Local            Diplomatic       Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                          Prime Minister/ Minister        Ministry          Government              Corps           Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Yes                                                                                          50.0%                  30.6%               30.0%                 5.9%                  33.3%              28.0%    63.6%        32.1%
 No                                                                                           50.0%                  69.4%               70.0%                94.1%                  66.7%              72.0%    36.4%        67.9%

                                                                                                                         72
The World Bank                                                                                                         Bulgaria                                                                         Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?*
                                                                                         Office of President/      Employee of a      Local     Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
  Percentage of Respondents                                                           Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry      Government     Corps        Sector/ Private Bank      NGO      Academia      Other
  Yes                                                                                           81.8%                 17.9%          18.2%        42.1%                4.8%              12.0%     40.0%        17.9%
  No                                                                                            18.2%                 82.1%          81.8%        57.9%               95.2%              88.0%     60.0%        82.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                                                         Office of President/      Employee of a      Local     Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry      Government      Corps       Sector/ Private Bank       NGO     Academia       Other
 Yes                                                                                            77.8%                 85.7%          100.0%       100.0%              100.0%             100.0%    100.0%       100.0%
 No                                                                                             22.2%                 14.3%           0.0%         0.0%                0.0%               0.0%      0.0%         0.0%

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                                                         Office of President/      Employee of a      Local     Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry      Government      Corps       Sector/ Private Bank       NGO     Academia       Other
 Yes                                                                                           100.0%                100.0%          100.0%       100.0%              100.0%             100.0%    100.0%       100.0%
 No                                                                                              0.0%                 0.0%            0.0%         0.0%                0.0%               0.0%      0.0%         0.0%

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?
                                                                                         Office of President/      Employee of a      Local     Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry      Government     Corps        Sector/ Private Bank      NGO      Academia      Other
 Yes                                                                                           100.0%                 94.6%          90.9%        84.2%               88.9%              82.6%     90.9%        90.3%
 No                                                                                              0.0%                 5.4%            9.1%        15.8%               11.1%              17.4%      9.1%         9.7%

Which do you primarily use?
                                                                                         Office of President/      Employee of a      Local     Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Prime Minister/ Minister       Ministry      Government     Corps        Sector/ Private Bank      NGO      Academia      Other
 The World Bank's country website (www. worldbank.bg)                                           45.5%                 56.1%          80.0%        76.5%               61.1%              36.4%     44.4%        72.4%
 The World Bank's main website (www.worldbank.org)                                              54.5%                 43.9%          20.0%        23.5%               38.9%              63.6%     55.6%        27.6%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                         73
The World Bank                                                                                                    Bulgaria                                                                         Country Survey 2012

H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
                                                                                       Office of President/    Employee of a      Local     Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                          Prime Minister/ Minister     Ministry      Government     Corps        Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Yes                                                                                          90.9%               73.2%          63.6%        60.0%               54.5%              68.0%    58.3%        70.0%
 No                                                                                            9.1%               26.8%          36.4%        40.0%               45.5%              32.0%    41.7%        30.0%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                        Office of President/  Employee of a       Local     Diplomatic   Private Sector/ Financial
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           Prime Minister/ Minister   Ministry       Government     Corps        Sector/ Private Bank      NGO     Academia      Other
 Observer                                                                                       9.1%             4.8%            40.0%        21.1%               20.0%              12.0%    16.7%        20.0%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                                                   45.5%             47.6%           40.0%        36.8%               35.0%              72.0%    58.3%        36.7%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                                      27.3%             40.5%           70.0%        31.6%               40.0%              40.0%    16.7%        36.7%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                                 81.8%             52.4%            0.0%        52.6%               35.0%              20.0%    33.3%        50.0%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                                  18.2%             23.8%           20.0%        26.3%               30.0%              40.0%    50.0%        20.0%




                                                                                                                   74
The World Bank                                                              Bulgaria                                                 Country Survey 2012




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Year 1
                           FY ’05 Response Number = 300  FY ’12 Response Number = 178
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
*Significantly different between country surveys.




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between country surveys.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Bulgaria, on a ten point scale?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Bulgaria in terms of…, on a ten point scale?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.

1
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’0 5 and FY ’12 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.



                                                                              75
The World Bank                                                                                        Bulgaria                                                                      Country Survey 2012




Appendix D: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank
                                                 H3. Currently, do you
                                                                              H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              professionally collaborate/
                                              work with the World Bank?             Observer             Use WB reports/data   Engage in WB activities       Collaborate          Use WB website

Indicator Question                             No Mean         Yes Mean     No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean     Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                 6.44            7.20        6.99              7.00        6.99        7.00      7.03          6.93       6.67         7.44      7.19         6.49
World Bank’s effectiveness in Bulgaria.
The World Bank’s financial instruments
                                                 6.23            6.77        6.70              6.13        6.62        6.60      6.70          6.44       6.22         7.15      6.78         6.26
meet the needs of Bulgaria
The World Bank meets Bulgaria’s needs for
                                                 6.56            6.93        6.91              6.48        6.85        6.84      6.82          6.89       6.52         7.30      6.98         6.54
knowledge services
Overall the World Bank currently plays a
                                                 6.34            7.20        7.04              6.52        6.97        6.94      6.97          6.92       6.58         7.48      7.18         6.38
relevant role in development in Bulgaria
The World Bank’s work is aligned with
what I consider the development priorities       5.88            6.91        6.74              5.79        6.48        6.74      6.45          6.85       6.35         6.96      6.94         5.81
for Bulgaria
Responsiveness                                   6.88            7.32        7.22              6.95        7.11        7.25      7.16          7.20       6.91         7.51      7.33         6.80
Openness (sharing data and other
                                                 6.91            7.62        7.51              7.00        7.33        7.56      7.41          7.48       7.27         7.65      7.49         7.29
information)
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                 5.54            6.65        6.33              6.29        6.29        6.36      6.40          6.19       5.97         6.84      6.53         5.84
Government
Collaboration with the Government                7.73            8.19        8.14              7.68        8.11        8.04      8.16          7.94       7.71         8.55      8.21         7.74
Collaboration with EC and IFIs                   7.62            8.02        7.89              7.67        7.70        8.02      7.79          7.98       7.86         7.85      7.99         7.53
To what extent does the World Bank’s work
help to achieve development results in           5.98            6.49        6.41              6.04        6.33        6.38      6.36          6.35       6.08         6.71      6.49         6.02
Bulgaria?
Are adaptable to Bulgaria's specific
development challenges and country               6.32            6.78        6.73              6.29        6.47        6.85      6.65          6.68       6.39         7.05      6.90         6.09
circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do
you believe the World Bank’s knowledge
                                                 6.62            7.27        7.05              7.16        6.94        7.21      7.18          6.89       6.89         7.32      7.18         6.79
and research make to development results
in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank’s                      7.60            8.01        7.90              7.68        7.82        7.92      7.86          7.88       7.78         8.00      7.94         7.70
knowledge/research?
Where country systems are adequate, the
World Bank makes appropriate use of              6.24            6.79        6.60              7.00        6.33        6.94      6.85          6.29       6.60         6.76      6.72         6.55
them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.




                                                                                                        76
The World Bank                                       Bulgaria                                    Country Survey 2012



Appendix E: Bulgaria FY 2012 Questionnaire




                              World Bank Country Survey FY12 – Bulgaria


The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Bulgaria or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey is meant to give the World Bank’s team that works in Bulgaria, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank uses to assess the views of its critical stakeholders. With this
understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies, outreach and programs that support
development in Bulgaria. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm to oversee the logistics of this
effort in Bulgaria. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the survey,
please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion. If you prefer not to answer a
question, please leave it blank.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BULGARIA

 A1. In general would you say that Bulgaria is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                       77
The World Bank                                           Bulgaria                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most
 important in Bulgaria? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most
 important priority?
                                                        FIRST priority     SECOND priority      THIRD priority
 Choose only ONE for each column                      (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)
 1    Economic growth                                                                            
 2    Convergence of living standards with the EU                                                
 3    Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)                                               
 4    Water and sanitation                                                                       
 5    Energy and energy efficiency                                                               
      Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation,
 6                                                                                               
      disaster management) and green growth
      Social protection (incl. pensions, social
 7                                                                                               
      assistance)
 8    Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)                                                    
 9    Health                                                                                     
 10   Education (incl. tertiary education)                                                       
 11   Research and innovation                                                                    
      Business environment and private sector
 12                                                                                              
      development
 13   Financial markets                                                                          
 14   Agriculture                                                                                
 15   Trade                                                                                      
 16   Public finance and administration                                                          
 17   Governance (incl. anti-corruption)                                                         
 18   Law and justice (incl. judiciary)                                                          
 19   Rural development                                                                          
 20   Urban development                                                                          




                                                           78
The World Bank                                                Bulgaria                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A3. Convergence of living standards with the EU encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to achieving
 convergence of living standards in Bulgaria with the EU? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Trade
 2    Urban development
 3    Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)
 4    Law and justice (incl. judiciary)
 5    Rural development
 6    Business environment and private sector development
 7    Education (incl. tertiary education)
 8    Economic growth
 9    Financial markets
 10   Public finance and administration
 11   Health
 12   Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)
 13   Agriculture
 14   Water and sanitation
 15   Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and green growth
 16   Energy and energy efficiency
 17   Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)
 18   Research and innovation
 19   Governance (incl. anti-corruption)




                                                                79
The World Bank                                                Bulgaria                      Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
 Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy and energy efficiency
 2    Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)
 3    Research and innovation
 4    Education (incl. tertiary education)
 5    Law and justice (incl. judiciary)
 6    Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and green growth
 7    Agriculture
 8    Trade
 9    Governance (incl. anti-corruption)
 10   Financial markets
 11   Urban development
 12   Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)
 13   Health
 14   Public finance and administration
 15   Rural development
 16   Business environment and private sector development
 17   Water and sanitation
 18   Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)




                                                                80
The World Bank                                                   Bulgaria                                                Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK
 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Bulgaria, on a ten point scale?
         1              2          3       4         5       6          7       8           9               10

 Not familiar at all                                                                                Extremely familiar



 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in Bulgaria, on a
 ten point scale?
          1             2      3       4       5         6   7       8      9                10                  

 Not effective at all                                                                     Very effective    Don't know



 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Bulgaria solve its most complicated development challenges, on a ten
 point scale?
          1             2      3       4       5         6   7       8      9                10                  
                                                                                    To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                        Don't know
                                                                                                 degree



 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in
 Bulgaria, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention
 and resources in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Education (incl. tertiary education)
 2    Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)
 3    Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)
 4    Business environment and private sector development
 5    Law and justice (incl. judiciary)
 6    Water and sanitation
 7    Public finance and administration
 8    Urban development
 9    Energy and energy efficiency
 10   Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and green growth
 11   Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)
 12   Health
 13   Convergence of living standards with the EU
 14   Research and innovation
 15   Financial markets
 16   Trade
 17   Economic growth
 18   Rural development
 19   Governance (incl. anti-corruption)
 20   Agriculture




                                                                   81
The World Bank                                                Bulgaria                                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and
 which activity is of second greatest value in Bulgaria?
                                                                         Greatest Value   Second Greatest Value
                                                               (Choose only ONE) (Choose only ONE)
 1    Financial resources                                                                        
 2    Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                 
 3    Knowledge and advisory services                                                            
 4    Policy advice                                                                              
      Coordination with European Commission and
 5                                                                                               
      International Financial Institutions
 6    Data                                                                                       
 7    Training/capacity building                                                                 
 8    Studies/analyses                                                                           
 9    Convening/facilitating                                                                     
 10   Other (please specify):_______________________                                             



 B6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in
 Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 4    Staff too inaccessible
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not client focused
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12   Not aligned with country priorities
 13   Not aligned with other international partners’ work
 14   Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 15   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Bulgaria
 16   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________




                                                                82
The World Bank                                           Bulgaria                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B7. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are MOST effective in helping Bulgaria
 improve living standards? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Knowledge and advisory services
 5    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 6    Don’t know



 B8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping Bulgaria
 improve living standards? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Knowledge and advisory services
 5    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 6    Don’t know



 B9. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the global
 development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate change, communicable
 diseases, international financial systems, trade, etc.), on a ten point scale?
        1            2       3      4       5       6    7        8   9          10                
 To no degree at                                                                   To a very
                                                                                               Don't know
 all                                                                      significant degree




                                                             83
The World Bank                                              Bulgaria                                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B10. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor,
 which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your
 country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     NGOs
 2     Local Government
 3     Beneficiaries
 4     Private sector
 5     European Institutions and International Financial Institutions
 6     Foundations
 7     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 8     Parliament
 9     Media
 10    Other (please specify): __________________________



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Bulgaria, on
 a ten point scale?
                                                                    Strongly                               Strongly   Don't
                                                                    disagree                                  agree   know
        Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
 B11                                                                 1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        role in development in Bulgaria
        The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
 B12                                                                 1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        consider the development priorities for this country
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies
 B13                                                                 1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        that are realistic for Bulgaria
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
 B14                                                                 1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Bulgaria with respect




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                               84
The World Bank                                                Bulgaria                                         Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Bulgaria, in terms of each of the
 following?
                                                                     To no                                To a very
                                                                                                                       Don't
                                                                     degree at                           significant
                                                                                                                       know
                                                                     all                                    degree
 B15     Responsiveness                                               1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products
 B16                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         and services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B17                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         circumstances)
 B18     Being inclusive                                              1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       

 B19     Openness (sharing data and other information)                1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       

 B20     Staff accessibility                                          1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       

 B21     Straightforwardness and honesty                              1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B22                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B23     Collaboration with the Government                            1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Collaboration with European Commission and
 B24                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         International Financial Institutions
 B25     Follow through over time                                     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       



 B26. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank works too slowly
 2     The Government works inefficiently
 3     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4     Poor coordination with international and European partners
 5     The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 6     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 7     Political pressures and obstacles
 8     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 9     The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                85
The World Bank                                                  Bulgaria                                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
 development in Bulgaria, on a ten point scale?
                                                                         Not effective                                        Very    Don't
                                                                         at all                                           effective   know
        Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster
  C1                                                                      1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
        management) and green growth
  C2    Agriculture                                                       1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
        Business environment and private sector
  C3                                                                      1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
        development
  C4    Public finance and administration                                 1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
  C5    Urban development                                                 1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
  C6    Economic growth                                                   1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
  C7    Education (incl. tertiary education)                              1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
  C8    Convergence of living standards with the EU                       1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
  C9    Research and innovation                                           1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C10    Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)                      1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C11    Trade                                                             1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C12    Water and sanitation                                              1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C13    Governance (incl. anti-corruption)                                1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C14    Energy and energy efficiency                                      1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C15    Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)             1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C16    Law and justice (incl. judiciary)                                 1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C17    Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)                           1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C18    Health                                                            1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C19    Financial markets                                                 1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
 C20    Rural development                                                 1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      



 C21. To what extent does the World Bank’s work help to achieve development results in Bulgaria, on a
 ten point scale?
        1             2      3       4         5       6        7          8         9               10                        
 To no degree at                                                                                      To a very
                                                                                                                          Don't know
 all                                                                                         significant degree



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Bulgaria, on a ten
 point scale?
                                                                         Strongly                                         Strongly    Don't
                                                                         disagree                                            agree    know
        The World Bank’s financial instruments (i.e.,
 C22    investment lending, Development Policy Loan, Trust                1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
        Funds, etc.) meet the needs of Bulgaria
        The World Bank meets Bulgaria’s needs for
 C23    knowledge services (e.g., research, analysis, data,               1     2        3   4   5    6   7       8   9        10      
        technical assistance)




                                                                    86
The World Bank                                                Bulgaria                      Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research (e.g., data, analysis,
 reports) in the work you do?
 1    Weekly
 2    Monthly
 3    A few times a year
 4    Rarely
 5    Never



 D2. When thinking about the development challenges in Bulgaria, where do you believe it would be
 most valuable for the World Bank to focus its knowledge and advisory services in the next few
 years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Rural development
 2    Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)
 3    Convergence of living standards with the EU
 4    Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and green growth
 5    Governance (incl. anti-corruption)
 6    Health
 7    Agriculture
 8    Financial markets
 9    Business environment and private sector development
 10   Law and justice (incl. judiciary)
 11   Public finance and administration
 12   Trade
 13   Urban development
 14   Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)
 15   Economic growth
 16   Research and innovation
 17   Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)
 18   Energy and energy efficiency
 19   Education (incl. tertiary education)
 20   Water and sanitation




                                                                87
The World Bank                                               Bulgaria                                                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 In Bulgaria, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and advisory services are at:
                                                                      Not
                                                                                                                               Very    Don't
                                                                      effective
                                                                                                                           effective   know
                                                                      at all
 D3    Raising your awareness of the particular topic                  1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
 D4    Stimulating public debate/dialogue                              1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
 D5    Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                          1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
 D6    Contributing to good policy making                              1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
 D7    Providing support for program implementation                    1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      




 In Bulgaria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and advisory services:
                                                                      To no                                             To a very
                                                                                                                                       Don't
                                                                      degree at                                        significant
                                                                                                                                       know
                                                                      all                                                 degree
  D8     Are timely                                                    1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D9                                                                   1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
         involvement during preparation
 D10     Are relevant to Bulgaria’s development priorities             1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
 D11     Provide feasible recommendations                              1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
 D12     Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)          1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
         A source of relevant information on global good
 D13                                                                   1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
         practices
 D14     Are adequately disseminated                                   1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
 D15     Are appropriately translated                                  1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
         Are adaptable to Bulgaria’s specific development
 D16                                                                   1       2       3   4   5        6   7   8      9        10      
         challenges and country circumstances



 D17. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and
 research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?
           1              2    3      4      5      6        7             8       9               10                   

 Not significant at all                                                                    Very significant         Don't know




                                                                 88
The World Bank                                      Bulgaria                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 D18. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge/research,
 on a ten point scale?
         1              2   3    4      5      6      7        8   9            10                 
 Very low                                                                Very high technical
                                                                                               Don't know
 technical quality                                                                   quality




 D19. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., other
 middle-income countries or advanced economies)?
          1             2   3     4      5     6      7        8   9            10                 

 Not effective at all                                                         Very effective   Don't know




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                      89
The World Bank                                           Bulgaria                                             Country Survey 2012



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale?
                                                                   Strongly                               Strongly   Don't
                                                                   disagree                                  agree   know
  E1    The World Bank disburses funds promptly                     1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates
  E2                                                                1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        the projects and programs it supports
        The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in
  E3                                                                1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        a timely fashion
        The World Bank’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements
  E4                                                                1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        are reasonable
        The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on
  E5                                                                1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        its lending
        Working with the World Bank increases Bulgaria’s
  E6                                                                1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        institutional capacity
        The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity
  E7                                                                1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        through staff changes
        The World Bank’s teams and visits are well
  E8                                                                1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        coordinated
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement, financial
  E9    management, etc.) are adequate, the World Bank              1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        makes appropriate use of them
        The World Bank provides effective implementation
 E10                                                                1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        support (i.e., supervision of projects)




                                                              90
The World Bank                                                 Bulgaria                                     Country Survey 2012



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN BULGARIA

 F1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play in Bulgaria’s development
 in the near future, on a ten point scale?
        1            2       3       4         5    6      7          8     9           10               
 Not a significant                                                                Very significant
                                                                                                     Don't know
 role at all                                                                                  role



 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Bulgaria?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bulgaria’s specific challenges
 2    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3    Focus primarily on advocacy issues
 4    Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, and other terms)
 5    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 6    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Bulgaria’s economy
 7    Offer more innovative financial products
 8    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9    Increase availability of Fee-Based services
 10   Work faster
 11   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                                 91
The World Bank                                              Bulgaria                                    Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues
 in Bulgaria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?             (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2     Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank publications and other written materials
 7    Mobile phones
 8    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 9    Blogs
 10   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________



       Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will
 G3                                                                                               Yes        No
       now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 G4                                                                                               Yes        No
       (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                  Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                        Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?                                           Yes        No




                                                              92
The World Bank                                              Bulgaria                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use?
 1     The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.bg)
 2     The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                                       Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                       disagree                              agree   know
         I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the
 G9                                                                     1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         organization's Open Data policy
         I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only
 G10                                                                    1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used a World Bank website)
         I find the information on the World Bank’s websites
 G11     useful. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank             1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         website)
         When I need information from the World Bank I know
 G12     how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them,       1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         etc.)
         The World Bank is responsive to my information
 G13                                                                    1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                              93
The World Bank                                            Bulgaria                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?         (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government office or staff
 8    European Commission staff/representative
 9    Diplomatic corps
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 15   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 16   Trade Union
 17   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 18   Judiciary Branch
 19   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                            94
The World Bank                                                Bulgaria                      Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only ONE response)
 1    Agriculture
 2    Business environment and private sector development
 3    Climate change (incl. mitigation, adaptation, disaster management) and green growth
 4    Convergence of living standards with the EU
 5    Economic growth
 6    Education (incl. tertiary education)
 7    Energy and energy efficiency
 8    Financial markets
 9    Governance (incl. anti-corruption)
 10   Health
 11   Law and justice (incl. judiciary)
 12   Public finance and administration
 13   Research and innovation
 14   Rural development
 15   Social inclusion (incl. Roma inclusion)
 16   Social protection (incl. pensions, social assistance)
 17   Trade
 18   Transport infrastructure (incl. roads, rail)
 19   Urban development
 20   Water and sanitation
 21   Other (please specify): _____________________________________________




                                                                95
The World Bank                                               Bulgaria                         Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No



 H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Bulgaria?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.



 H5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Sofia
 2    Outside Sofia




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               96
