                             88148




Cameroon Country Opinion
     Survey Report

   (July 2013 - June 2014)
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                                     Country Survey 2013




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5

         IV. General Issues Facing Cameroon ...............................................10

          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank .................................15

         VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................21

        VII. How the World Bank Operates ..................................................25

       VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Cameroon ......................28

         IX. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments ..................................32

          X. Communication and Openness..................................................40

         XI. Appendices ................................................................................47




                                                          2
The World Bank                              Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:
       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in
        Cameroon perceive the World Bank Group;
       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Cameroon regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Cameroon;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank Group in Cameroon;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness and results,
               project/program related issues, knowledge work and activities, and
               communication and information sharing in Cameroon; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank Group’s future role in Cameroon.
       Use data to help inform Cameroon country team’s strategy.


II. Methodology
In June and July 2013, 571 stakeholders of the World Bank in Cameroon were invited to provide
their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country survey.
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime Minister;
the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial
department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World Bank-
supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a
project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral agencies; private
sector organizations; private foundations; the financial sector/private banks; NGOs; community-
based organizations (CBOs); the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-
based groups; academia/research institutes/think tanks; and the judiciary branch. A total of 403
stakeholders participated in the country survey (71% response rate).
Respondents either completed questionnaires with a representative of the fielding agency or they
received the questionnaire via courier or email and returned it accordingly. Respondents were
asked about: general issues facing Cameroon; their overall attitudes toward the World Bank; the
World Bank’s effectiveness and results; the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities;
working with the World Bank; the Bank’s future role in Cameroon; and the Bank’s
communication and information sharing in Cameroon.
Every country that engages in the Country Survey must include specific indicator questions that
will be aggregated for the World Bank’s annual Corporate Scorecard. These questions are
identified throughout the survey report.

A. General Issues Facing Cameroon: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Cameroon is
   headed in the right direction, what they thought were the top three most important
   development priorities, and which areas would contribute most to reducing poverty,
   generating economic growth, and achieving “shared prosperity” in Cameroon.



                                                3
The World Bank                              Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their familiarity
   with the World Bank, the Bank’s effectiveness in Cameroon, Bank staff preparedness to help
   Cameroon solve its development challenges, the extent to which the Bank should seek to
   influence the global development agenda, their agreement with various statements regarding
   the Bank’s work, and the extent to which the Bank is an effective development partner.
   Respondents were also asked to indicate the sectoral areas on which it would be most
   productive for the Bank to focus its resources, the Bank’s greatest values and greatest
   weaknesses in its work, with which stakeholder groups the Bank should collaborate more,
   and to what reasons respondents attributed failed or slow reform efforts.
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
   the Bank’s work helps achieve development results in Cameroon, the extent to which the
   Bank meets Cameroon’s needs for knowledge services and financial instruments, and the
   Bank’s level of effectiveness across thirty development areas, such as economic growth.
D. The World Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Respondents were asked to indicate
   how frequently they consult Bank knowledge work and activities, the areas on which the
   Bank should focus its knowledge work and activities, and to rate the effectiveness and
   quality of the Bank’s knowledge work and activities, including how significant of a
   contribution it makes to development results and its technical quality.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement with
   a series of statements regarding working with the Bank, such as working with the World
   Bank increasing Cameroon’s institutional capacity.

F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Cameroon: Respondents were asked to rate how
   significant a role the Bank should play in Cameroon’s development in the near future and to
   indicate what the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Cameroon.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate how they get
   information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their Internet access, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s websites. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s Access to
   Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of agreement
   that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data policy .
   Respondents were also asked about their level of agreement that they know how to find
   information from the Bank and that the Bank is responsive to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank, their exposure
   to the Bank in Cameroon, and their geographic location.

In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 258 respondents (55% response rate) who completed the
survey in FY 2009 and the 170 respondents (40% response rate) who completed the country
survey in FY 2005. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were possible.


                                               4
The World Bank                              Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position
       For further analyses, respondents from the office of a Ministry were combined with those
        from the office of the President/Prime Minister; the few respondents from private
        foundations were combined with those from NGOs; respondents from bilateral agencies
        and multilateral agencies were combined; the one respondent from the financial
        sector/private banks were combined with those from the private sector; and the few
        respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and the judiciary branch were included
        in the “Other” category.




                                                5
The World Bank                              Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization

       Comparisons of ratings for the WBG’s sector effectiveness across respondents’
        specializations can be found in the Appendix (see page 104).




                                               6
The World Bank                              Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       Responses across geographic locations for all country survey questions can be found in
        the Appendix (see page 87). Only significant differences between geographic locations in
        response to indicator questions will be discussed in the body of this report.




                                                7
The World Bank                               Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Collaboration with and Exposure to the World Bank

       Differences in responses to the indicator questions, based on levels of collaboration and
        exposure to the World Bank in Cameroon, can be found in the Appendix (see page 105).
        Please note that where these two factors appear to have a significant relationship with
        overall views of the Bank, it is highlighted in yellow in that table.




                                                8
The World Bank                              Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank Group

       Respondents’ familiarity with the World Bank in Cameroon in this country survey was
        statistically similar to that of respondents in the FY ’09 country survey (6.0), but
        significantly lower than that of respondents in the FY ’05 country survey (6.3).
       Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest levels of
        familiarity with the World Bank in Cameroon whereas respondents from trade unions had
        significantly lower levels of familiarity.
       Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the World Bank were significantly, moderately
        correlated with their perceptions of the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Cameroon,
        the World Bank’s relevance to Cameroon’s development, and perceptions of the World
        Bank’s ability to help achieve development results in Cameroon.




                                                9
The World Bank                               Cameroon                              Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues Facing Cameroon

Cameroon Heading in the Right Direction

       The majority of employees of ministries, consultants on Bank-supported projects, and
        respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister, PMUs, bilateral or
        multilateral agencies, CBOs, independent government institutions, trade unions, and
        other organizations indicated that Cameroon was headed in the right direction.
       In contrast, the majority of respondents from local government indicated that Cameroon
        was headed in the wrong direction.
       The majority of respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, the
        media, faith-based groups, and academia indicated that they were not sure whether
        Cameroon was headed in the right or wrong direction.
       A plurality of respondents from NGOs/private foundations indicated that Cameroon was
        headed in the right direction; however, more than a third of respondents from this
        stakeholder group indicated that they were not sure.




                                                10
The World Bank                             Cameroon                           Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)

Development Priority
       Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that improving governance (52%),
        reducing corruption (28%), and improving the investment/business climate (24%) were
        the most important development priorities for Cameroon.




                                              11
The World Bank                             Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)

Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction
       Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that improving governance (29%),
        agriculture development (26%), infrastructure development (22%), reducing corruption
        (19%), and increasing employment (19%) would contribute most to poverty reduction
        in Cameroon.




                                              12
The World Bank                              Cameroon                           Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)

Factors Contributing to Economic Growth
       Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that increasing agricultural
        productivity (45%), improving governance (35%), improving infrastructure (30%),
        enhancing the environment for private sector growth (26%), and reducing corruption
        (24%) would contribute most to generating economic growth in Cameroon.




                                               13
The World Bank                      Cameroon     Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)

Factors Contributing to “Shared Prosperity”




                                       14
The World Bank                              Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank
As noted in the “Methodology” section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Survey. These
will be aggregated for the World Bank’s annual Corporate Scorecard.


Focusing World Bank Resources
       Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that it would be most productive for
        the Bank to focus most of its resources on governance (31%) and improving basic
        infrastructure (29%) in Cameroon.




                                               15
The World Bank                               Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents’ ratings for the World Bank’s effectiveness in this country survey were
        significantly higher than that of respondents in the FY ’09 country survey (5.2), but
        statistically similar to that of respondents in the FY ’05 country survey ( 5.6).
       Respondents from PMUs and bilateral or multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings
        for the World Bank’s effectiveness in Cameroon whereas responde nts from trade unions
        and NGOs/private foundations gave significantly lower effectiveness ratings. Similarly,
        respondents from PMUs and bilateral or multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings for
        the extent to which the World Bank’s work achieves development results in Cameroon
        whereas respondents from trade unions gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Yaoundé gave the highest ratings for the World Bank’s effectiveness
        in Cameroon whereas respondents from Douala and Other Cities gave significantly lower
        effectiveness ratings. Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically
        similar ratings for the extent to which the World Bank’s work achieves development
        results in Cameroon.




                                                16
The World Bank                              Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Staff Preparedness (Indicator Question)
       Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies and PMUs gave the highest ratings
        for the extent to which the World Bank’s staff is well prepared to help Cameroon solve
        its most complicated development challenges whereas respondents from trade unions
        gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Yaoundé gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the World
        Bank’s staff is well prepared to help Cameroon solve its most complicated development
        challenges whereas respondents from Rural Areas gave significantly lower ratings.




                                               17
The World Bank                              Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions
       Respondents from PMUs gave the highest ratings across all of the country survey
        indicator questions whereas respondents from trade unions and local government gave
        significantly lower ratings.
       Responses for individual indicator questions by stakeholder groups can be found in the
        Appendix (see page 106).




                                               18
The World Bank                              Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value
       Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that the Bank’s greatest values to
        Cameroon were its financial resources (36%), policy and economic advice (32%),
        knowledge (24%) and lending when others won’t (20%).




                                               19
The World Bank                              Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses
        in its work in Cameroon were imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
        realities (44%) and being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
        (41%).
       Respondents from trade unions, CBOs, and local government were significantly more
        likely to indicate that the World Bank’s greatest weakness was its staff being too
        inaccessible compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                               20
The World Bank                    Cameroon   Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Specific Areas of Effectiveness




                                     21
The World Bank                               Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences across all but three of
        these thirty areas of development. For the most part, respondents from PMUs, bilateral or
        multilateral agencies, and other organizations tended to give the highest ratings for the
        World Bank’s effectiveness across these areas whereas respondents from trade unions,
        independent government institutions, and the private sector/financial sector/private banks
        tended to give significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness. Tho se areas with
        significant stakeholder group differences were:
                Information and communications technology;
                Transport;
                Urban development;
                Environmental sustainability;
                Regulatory framework;
                Basic infrastructure;
                Poverty reduction;
                Gender equity;
                Domestic private sector development;
                Foreign direct investment;
                Water and sanitation;
                Trade and exports;
                Economic growth;
                Energy;
                Disaster management;
                Public sector governance/reform;
                Job creation/employment;
                Financial markets;
                Equality of opportunity;
                Health;
                Rural development;
                Global/regional integration;
                Food security;
                Social protection;
                Climate change;
                Agricultural development; and
                Natural resource management.




                                                22
The World Bank                               Cameroon                              Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)
Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)
       For those areas of development that could be compared, respondents in this year’s
        country survey tended to give lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness in some areas,
        but higher ratings in others, compared to respondents from the FY ’05 and FY ’09
        surveys. Those differences that reached statistical significance are noted in the chart.




                                                23
The World Bank                                Cameroon                              Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness and
ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Cameroon, bivariate correlational
analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty specific areas of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve development
results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area increase,
respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of effectiveness in
one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help achieve development results increa se.
Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one specific area are
related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or perceptions
of the Bank’s ability to help achieve development result s.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Cameroon. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
                The Bank’s effectiveness at rural development;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at food security;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at basic infrastructure; and
                The Bank’s effectiveness at job creation/employment.

       Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
        Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
        Bank’s ability to help achieve development results in Cameroon, suggesting that ratings
        of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s ability to
        help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
        analyses were:
                The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at health;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at poverty reduction; and
                The Bank’s effectiveness at basic infrastructure.




                                                 24
The World Bank                               Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



VII. How the World Bank Operates

The World Bank’s Work in Cameroon

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the World Bank supports realistic programs and strategies for Cameroon and that the
        World Bank is aligned with their development priorities for Cameroon compared to
        respondents from the FY ’09 country survey.
       Respondents from PMUs had the highest levels of agreement that the World Bank plays a
        relevant role in development whereas respondents from local government and the private
        sector/financial sector/private banks had significantly lower levels of agreement.
        Respondents from PMUs had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank’s work is
        aligned with their development priorities and that the Bank supports realistic programs
        whereas respondents from trade unions had significantly lower levels of agreement.
        Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies had the highest levels of agreement
        that the Bank treats stakeholders with respect whereas respondents from trade unions had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from Yaoundé had the highest levels of agreement that the World Bank
        plays a relevant role in development and that the Bank treats stakeholders with respect
        whereas respondents from Douala had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                25
The World Bank                               Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



VII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions
       Respondents in this country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement that the
        Bank effectively monitors and evaluates its projects compared to respondents from the
        FY ’05 and FY ’09 country surveys (6.8 and 6.6, respectively). In addition, respondents
        in this country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement that conditions on the
        Bank’s lending are reasonable compared to respondents from the FY ’09 country survey
        (6.0) and significantly lower levels of agreement that working with the Bank increases
        institutional capacity compared to respondents from the FY ’05 country survey (6.8) .
       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their ratings across all of these
        areas, except that the Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes. For
        the most part, respondents from PMUs and bilateral or multilateral agencies tended to
        have the highest levels of agreement whereas respondents from trade unions and local
        government tended to have significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from Yaoundé had the highest levels of agreement for the indicator question
        that, where country systems are adequate, the World Bank makes use of them whereas
        respondents from Rural Areas had significantly lower levels of agreement. Differences
        between geographic locations for the other statements can be found in the Appendix.




                                                26
The World Bank                               Cameroon                              Country Survey 2013



VII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)
The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner
       Respondents in this country survey gave significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s staff
        accessibility and straightforwardness and honesty compared to respondents from the FY
        ’05 (5.6 and 6.4, respectively) and FY ’09 country surveys (5.2 and 6.6, respectively).
       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their ratings across all of these
        areas, except the Bank’s collaboration with groups outside of government. For the most
        part, respondents from PMUs tended to give the highest ratings whereas respondents
        from trade unions and local government tended to give significantly lower ratings.
       There were significant differences between geographic locations in their ratings across all
        of these areas, except the Bank’s collaboration with groups o utside of government. For
        the most part, respondents from Yaoundé tended to give the highest ratings whereas
        respondents from Douala and Rural Areas tended to give significantly lower ratings.




                                                27
The World Bank                              Cameroon                           Country Survey 2013



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Cameroon

Role Significance

       Respondents from faith-based groups gave the highest ratings for the role the World
        Bank should play in Cameroon’s development in the near future whereas respondents
        from local government and the media gave significantly lower ratings.




                                               28
The World Bank                              Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Cameroon (continued)

Making the World Bank of Greater Value
       Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that the Bank should reduce the
        complexity of obtaining Bank financing (30%) and improve the quality of its experts as
        related to Cameroon’s specific challenges to make itself of greater value in Cameroon
        (27%).




                                               29
The World Bank                               Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Cameroon (continued)
Collaborating with Stakeholders in Cameroon
       Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/
        Minister, PMUs, local government and other organizations indicated that the Bank should
        collaborate more with local government in Cameroon.
       Consultants on Bank-supported programs and respondents from trade unions indicated
        that the Bank should collaborate more with NGOs and local government in Cameroon.
       Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies indicated that the Bank should
        collaborate more with local government, beneficiaries, private sector, and the donor
        community in Cameroon.
       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks indicated that the Bank
        should collaborate more with local government and private sector in Cameroon.
       Respondents from NGOs indicated that the Bank should collaborate more with NGOs.
       Respondents from CBOs and faith-based groups indicated that the Bank should
        collaborate more with CBOs.
       Respondents from media indicated that the Bank should collaborate more with media.
       Respondents from independent government institutions indicated that the Bank should
        collaborate more with the private sector in Cameroon.
       Respondents from academia indicated that the Bank should collaborate more with
        academia/research institutes/think tanks in Cameroon.




                                                30
The World Bank                       Cameroon         Country Survey 2013



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Cameroon (continued)

Influencing the Global Development Agenda




Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts




                                        31
The World Bank                             Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013



IX. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments

Frequency of Consulting World Bank Knowledge Work and Activities

       Consultants on Bank-supported programs indicated the most frequent usage of World
        Bank knowledge work and activities (41% indicated weekly usage) whereas respondents
        from local government indicated significantly less frequent usage (47% indicated that
        they never consulted World Bank knowledge work and activities).




                                              32
The World Bank                               Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



IX. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Cameroon’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies and PMUs had the highest levels of
        agreement that the Bank meets Cameroon’s needs for knowledge services whereas
        respondents from local government, faith-based groups, and trade unions had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar levels of agreement
        that the Bank meets Cameroon’s needs for knowledge services.




                                                33
The World Bank                               Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



IX. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Focusing World Bank Research
       Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that it would be most valuable for
        the Bank to focus its research efforts on governance (24%) and agri-business/agricultural
        productivity (20%) in Cameroon.




                                                34
The World Bank                               Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



IX. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Effectiveness of the Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities

       Respondents from PMUs gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s
        knowledge work and activities to provide support for program implementation whereas
        respondents from local government and trade unions gave significantly lower ratings.
       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from independent government
        institutions gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge work
        and activities to contribute to good policy making whereas respondents from local
        government, the private sector/financial sector/private banks, CBOs, trade unions, and
        faith-based groups gave significantly lower ratings.
       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from bilateral or multilateral
        agencies and PMUs gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s
        knowledge work and activities to enhance knowledge and skills whereas respondents
        from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and faith-based groups gave
        significantly lower ratings.




                                                35
The World Bank                               Cameroon                              Country Survey 2013



IX. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Qualities of the Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities
       Respondents in this country survey gave significantly higher ratings that the Bank’s
        knowledge work and acivities are adaptable to Cameroon’s circumstances compared to
        respondents from the FY ’05 and FY ’09 country surveys (5.3 and 5.0, respectively), but
        significantly lower ratings that the Bank’s knowledge work and acivities are a source on
        global good practices compared to respondents from the FY ’05 and FY ’09 country
        surveys (7.1 and 6.5, respectively). Respondents in this country survey also gave
        significantly lower ratings that the Bank’s knowledge work and acivities are useful and
        adequately disseminated compared to respondents from the FY ’09 country survey (7.7
        and 6.4, respectively).
       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their ratings across all of these
        aspects of the Bank’s knowledge, except that they are appropriately translated. For the
        most part, consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from PMUs and
        bilateral or multilateral agencies tended to give the highest ratings whereas respondents
        from trade unions and local government tended to give significantly lower ratings.




                                                 36
The World Bank                              Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



IX. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Contribution of the Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from PMUs gave the highest
        ratings for the significance of the contribution that the Bank’s knowledge work and
        activities make to development results in Cameroon whereas respondents from CBOs,
        academia, and the private sector/financial sector/private banks gave significantly
        lower ratings.
       Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for the
        significance of the contribution that the Bank’s knowledge work and activities make to
        development results in Cameroon.




                                               37
The World Bank                              Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



IX. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Technical Quality of the Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from bilateral or multilateral
        agencies, PMUs, and the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister gave the highest
        ratings for the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge work and activities whereas
        respondents from faith-based groups and local government gave significantly
        lower ratings.
       Respondents from Yaoundé gave significantly higher ratings for the technical quality of
        the Bank’s knowledge work and activities compared to respondents from other
        geographic locations.




                                               38
The World Bank                             Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013



IX. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Cameroon’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from PMUs had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank’s financial
        instruments meet the needs of Cameroon whereas respondents from the private sector/
        financial sector/private banks had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from Yaoundé had significantly higher levels of agreement that the Bank’s
        financial instruments meet the needs of Cameroon compared to respondents from other
        geographic locations.




                                              39
The World Bank                             Cameroon                           Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that they got most of their
        information about economic and social development issues in Cameroon from local
        newspapers (50%) and the Internet (30%).




                                              40
The World Bank                  Cameroon    Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Preferred Information Sources




                                   41
The World Bank                              Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from independent government
        institutions and the media were the most likely to be aware of the Bank’s Access to
        Information Policy whereas respondents from CBOs were completely unaware.




       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from the office of the President/
        Prime Minister/Minister, PMUs, bilateral or multilateral agencies, and academia were
        significantly more likely to have received the information they requested compared to
        respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                               42
The World Bank                                Cameroon                               Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from PMUs had the highest
        levels of agreement that they use Bank data more often whereas respondents from local
        government and trade unions had significantly lower levels of agreement.




Internet Access

       Respondents in this year’s country survey indicated statistically similar rates of Internet
        access compared to respondents from the FY ’09 country survey.
       Respondents from local government were significantly less likely to have Internet access
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                 43
The World Bank                                Cameroon                              Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage

       Respondents in this year’s survey indicated significantly higher rates of usage for the
        World Bank’s website compared to respondents from the FY ’05 and FY ’09 surveys.
       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from PMUs, bilateral or
        multilateral agencies, the private sector/financial sector/private banks, the media, and
        independent government institutions were the most likely to have used the World Bank’s
        websites whereas respondents from local government, CBOs, and trade unions were
        significantly less likely to have used the World Bank’s websites.




       Respondents in this year’s country survey indicated statistically similar usage for the
        Bank’s country and main websites compared to respondents from the FY ’09 survey.
       The majority of consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from
        NGOs/private foundations and CBOs indicated that they used the World Bank’s country
        website, significantly more than respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                 44
The World Bank                               Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage (continued)
       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from PMUs, bilateral or
        multilateral agencies, and independent government institutions were significantly more
        likely to have used a high speed Internet connection when visitng the World Bank’s
        websites compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




Website Evaluation
       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement
        that they find the information on the Bank’s websites useful compared to respondents
        from the FY ’09 country survey (7.8)
       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from PMUs, bilateral or
        multilateral agencies, and independent government institutions had the highest levels of
        agreement that they find the information on the Bank’s websites useful whereas
        respondents from local government had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Consultants on Bank-supported projects had the highest levels of agreement that they find
        the Bank’s websites easy to navigate whereas respondents from local government had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                45
The World Bank                              Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from PMUs had the highest
        levels of agreement that the World Bank is responsive to their information requests
        whereas respondents from local government and trade unions had significantly lower
        levels of agreement.
       Respondents from PMUs had the highest levels of agreement that, when they need
        information from the Bank, they know how to find it whereas respondents from local
        government and trade unions had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                               46
The World Bank                             Cameroon                          Country Survey 2013



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 48


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 64


          C. Responses to All Questions by Geographic Locations ................... 84


          D. Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys ..................... 98


          E. Responses to Sector Effectiveness Questions by Specialization . 101


          F. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank ........ 102


          G. Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Groups .......... 103


          H. World Bank Country Survey 2013 – Cameroon Questionnaire .. 104



                                        CAMEROON




                                              47
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                                  Country Survey 2013


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=403)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know” (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).



A. General Issues Facing Cameroon

                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Cameroon is headed in...?                                    (N=385)
The right direction                                                                            49.4%
The wrong direction                                                                            14.0%
Not sure                                                                                       36.6%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Cameroon.
   Please identify which of the following you consider the most important            Percentage of Respondents
   development priorities in Cameroon. (Choose no more than THREE)                   (Responses Combined; N=393)
Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                               45.3%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Education                                                                                      27.5%
Anti-corruption                                                                                26.2%
Health                                                                                         25.2%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                               22.1%
Job creation/employment                                                                        18.3%
Poverty reduction                                                                              17.0%
Agricultural development                                                                       13.7%
Energy                                                                                         12.2%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                 11.7%
Rural development                                                                              11.2%
Economic growth                                                                                 8.9%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                         7.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                             6.9%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                            6.9%
Basic infrastructure                                                                            5.6%
Gender equity                                                                                   5.3%
Water and sanitation                                                                            4.8%
Urban development                                                                               4.1%
Environmental sustainability                                                                    3.3%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                          3.3%
Food security                                                                                   2.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                            2.0%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                   1.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                                       1.5%
Information and communications technology                                                       1.3%
Global/regional integration                                                                     1.0%
Trade and exports                                                                               1.0%
Financial markets                                                                               0.5%
Disaster management                                                                             0.5%




                                                         48
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                                  Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
   areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe
   would contribute most to reducing poverty in Cameroon?                            Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                                       (Responses Combined; N=402)
Job creation/employment                                                                        34.3%
Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                               31.1%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Anti-corruption                                                                                24.6%
Agricultural development                                                                       22.6%
Rural development                                                                              21.1%
Education                                                                                      20.6%
Economic growth                                                                                17.9%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                               15.9%
Basic infrastructure                                                                           11.9%
Health                                                                                         11.4%
Domestic private sector development                                                             9.7%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                            9.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                            8.7%
Gender equity                                                                                   8.7%
Energy                                                                                          8.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                            8.7%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                          7.7%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                         7.7%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                          7.7%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                  7.0%
Food security                                                                                   4.7%
Global/regional integration                                                                     3.5%
Urban development                                                                               2.2%
Information and communications technology                                                       2.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                                    2.0%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                   1.5%
Foreign direct investment                                                                       1.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                            1.0%
Financial markets                                                                               0.7%
Disaster management                                                                             0.5%
Trade and exports                                                                               0.5%




                                                         49
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                                  Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas
   below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth          Percentage of Respondents
   in Cameroon? (Choose no more than THREE)                                          (Responses Combined; N=401)
Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                               33.4%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Energy                                                                                         32.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                                28.4%
Agricultural development                                                                       25.7%
Domestic private sector development                                                            25.4%
Job creation/employment                                                                        21.9%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                               17.0%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                           14.2%
Rural development                                                                              11.2%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                         10.0%
Education                                                                                       9.7%
Foreign direct investment                                                                       9.2%
Trade and exports                                                                               9.2%
Basic infrastructure                                                                            9.2%
Health                                                                                          7.2%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                         7.0%
Global/regional integration                                                                     3.5%
Gender equity                                                                                   3.2%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                  3.2%
Regulatory framework                                                                            3.2%
Financial markets                                                                               3.2%
Information and communications technology                                                       3.0%
Food security                                                                                   2.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                                    1.7%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                   1.5%
Water and sanitation                                                                            1.5%
Disaster management                                                                             0.7%
Urban development                                                                               0.5%




                                                        50
The World Bank                                                 Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)

5. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity” in your country, which
   of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in                    Percentage of Respondents
   Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                   (Responses Combined; N=365)
Better employment opportunities for young people                                                   41.6%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                          21.9%
Improved access to basic services                                                                  19.5%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                 18.1%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized
                                                                                                   16.2%
businesses)
Consistent economic growth                                                                         15.6%
A growing middle class                                                                             14.8%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                          11.8%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                       11.2%
Better quality public services                                                                      8.8%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                             8.2%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                     7.7%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                             2.2%
More effective risk management                                                                      1.4%
Other                                                                                               0.8%



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Familiarity                                                                          N       DK      Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Cameroon?
                                                                                 396          1       5.65     2.05
    (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

Overall Effectiveness                                                                N       DK      Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank's effectiveness
                                                                                 369          23      5.52     1.88
   in Cameroon. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness                                                                   N       DK      Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank’s staff is well prepared
    (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Cameroon solve its most
                                                                                 332          55      5.86     1.99
    complicated development challenges?
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                  51
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                                  Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on
   development results in Cameroon, in which sectoral areas do you believe
   the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in                Percentage of Respondents
   Cameroon? (Choose no more than THREE)                                             (Responses Combined; N=402)
Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                               40.0%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Health                                                                                         28.4%
Education                                                                                      26.4%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                               23.1%
Poverty reduction                                                                              17.4%
Agricultural development                                                                       16.4%
Anti-corruption                                                                                15.7%
Energy                                                                                         13.4%
Job creation/employment                                                                        13.2%
Rural development                                                                              12.4%
Basic infrastructure                                                                           12.2%
Domestic private sector development                                                            10.0%
Economic growth                                                                                 8.2%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                            8.0%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                          7.5%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                         7.5%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                  7.0%
Gender equity                                                                                   6.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                            5.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                                    4.2%
Urban development                                                                               4.0%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                   3.0%
Food security                                                                                   2.7%
Foreign direct investment                                                                       1.7%
Regulatory framework                                                                            1.7%
Information and communications technology                                                       1.7%
Trade and exports                                                                               1.2%
Global/regional integration                                                                     0.7%
Financial markets                                                                               0.7%
Disaster management                                                                             0.0%




                                                         52
The World Bank                                                 Cameroon                                    Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do                Percentage of Respondents (N=272)
                                                                                              nd
   you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of               Greatest          2 Greatest
   second greatest value in Cameroon?                                       Value              Value            Combined
Financial resources: investment lending                                     39.5%              11.8%              51.2%
Financial resources: policy based lending / budget support to the
                                                                               19.5%               9.9%             29.4%
Government
Training/capacity building                                                     12.1%               15.1%            27.2%
Technical assistance                                                            7.7%               15.8%            23.5%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge
                                                                               4.0%                10.7%            14.7%
sharing)
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                     5.5%                8.8%             14.3%
Policy advice                                                                  4.4%                7.4%             11.8%
Studies/analyses                                                               2.2%                8.8%             11.0%
Donor coordination                                                             1.1%                7.7%              8.8%
Data and information                                                           2.9%                1.8%              4.8%
Other                                                                          1.1%                1.1%              2.2%
Convening/facilitating                                                         0.0%                1.1%              1.1%

6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest                       Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)                             (Responses Combined; N=391)
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Cameroon                                         29.7%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                             24.6%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                                      23.3%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                               21.7%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                                     18.9%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                                   17.1%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                                  14.6%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                                      14.3%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                                6.9%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                                        6.6%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                                   5.6%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                                   3.8%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                                        2.8%
Other                                                                                                      2.3%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                                      2.0%
Not client focused                                                                                         0.5%


Global Development Agenda                                                              N            DK      Mean       SD
7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to
   influence the global development agenda as related to “global public
   goods” (e.g., climate change, communicable diseases, international                  374          20       7.35      2.15
   financial systems, trade, etc.)?
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                  53
The World Bank                                             Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

 8. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
    interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
    Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development         Percentage of Respondents
    results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                                         (Responses Combined; N=401)
Local Government                                                                               45.1%
NGOs                                                                                           38.4%
Private Sector                                                                                 22.7%
Community-Based Organizations                                                                  21.7%
Beneficiaries                                                                                  21.4%
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                                       18.5%
Donor Community                                                                                9.2%
Media                                                                                          7.5%
Parliament                                                                                     5.2%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                                      4.0%
Foundations                                                                                    2.0%
Other                                                                                          1.7%

                                                                                     Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the
World Bank’s work in Cameroon? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)         N        DK     Mean       SD
9. Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                               370       14      5.89     2.25
    in Cameroon*
10. The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development
                                                                               357       18      5.37     2.21
    priorities for Cameroon *
11. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for
                                                                               365       15      5.65     2.15
    Cameroon
12. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Cameroon with
                                                                               322       52      5.71     2.22
    respect

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in                       Degree
Cameroon, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                        N        DK     Mean       SD
13. Responsiveness*                                                            305       62      5.10     1.92
14. Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products and services)           310       59      4.82     1.86
15. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                   305       62      4.99     1.86
16. Being inclusive                                                            283       80      5.45     2.02
17. Openness (sharing data and other information)*                             333       30      5.84     2.22
18. Staff accessibility                                                        334       38      4.61     2.41
19. Straightforwardness and honesty                                            305       60      5.55     2.52
20. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government (e.g., NGOs,
                                                                               332       42      5.17     1.98
    academia, private sector)*
21. Collaboration with the Government*                                         348       21      7.19     2.00
22. Collaboration with other donors*                                           304       62      6.67     2.09
23. The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground               305       65      4.91     1.94
24. Follow through over time                                                   307       63      5.75     2.05



                                                              54
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                                  Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

25. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place,
    which of the following would you attribute this to?                              Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than TWO)                                                        (Responses Combined; N=390)
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                          42.8%
The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground             36.2%
The Government works inefficiently                                                             26.2%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                26.2%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                              22.1%
The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                   13.3%
The World Bank works too slowly                                                                11.8%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                            11.8%
Poor donor coordination                                                                        6.2%
Other                                                                                          0.8%




                                                         55
The World Bank                                               Cameroon                      Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the                 Effectiveness
work it does in the following areas of development in Cameroon?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                     N    DK      Mean      SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                          343    28     4.98     2.24
2.    Information and communications technology                                291    71     5.03     1.95
3.    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                         334    32     5.72     2.05
4.    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                  280    77     4.67     1.95
5.    Urban development                                                        315    44     5.47     1.92
6.    Environmental sustainability                                             320    40     5.78     1.94
7.    Regulatory framework                                                     279    75     5.36     1.85
8.    Basic infrastructure                                                     323    34     5.44     1.99
9.    Poverty reduction                                                        334    28     5.33     2.04
10.   Gender equity                                                            279    75     5.05     2.25
11.   Domestic private sector development                                      279    68     4.47     1.80
12.   Foreign direct investment                                                253    97     5.10     1.93
13.   Water and sanitation                                                     302    59     5.25     1.98
14.   Trade and exports                                                        259   100     4.88     1.82
15.   Economic growth                                                          314    50     5.31     1.99
16.   Energy                                                                   324    40     5.60     2.16
17.   Disaster management                                                      262    93     4.77     2.07
18.   Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness,
                                                                               334   27      5.38     2.17
      public financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
19.   Job creation/employment                                                  311    52     4.29     1.90
20.   Financial markets                                                        242   110     4.53     1.86
21.   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                   273    77     4.38     2.17
22.   Health                                                                   328    29     5.73     2.08
23.   Rural development                                                        330    31     5.22     2.09
24.   Global/regional integration                                              286    71     5.31     2.19
25.   Food security                                                            305    48     5.14     2.04
26.   Education                                                                329    32     5.71     2.05
27.   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)           278    80     4.11     1.95
28.   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                            291    65     5.35     2.14
29.   Agricultural development                                                 319    41     5.52     2.09
30.   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                     303    58     5.28     2.08


Achieving Development Results                                                  N     DK      Mean      SD
31. To what extent does the World Bank’s work help to achieve
    development results in Cameroon?*                                          364   24      5.71     1.78
      (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                 56
The World Bank                                          Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the
World Bank Group in Cameroon? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)        N      DK       Mean       SD
32. The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
    Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.) meet the    357     30       5.32     2.06
    needs of Cameroon*
33. The World Bank Group meets Cameroon’s needs for knowledge
                                                                              351     33       5.36     1.99
    services (e.g., research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*



D. The World Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities
(i.e., Analysis, Studies, Data, Reports, Conferences)

1.  How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge work and                Percentage of Respondents
    activities in the work you do?                                                      (N=392)
Weekly                                                                                     9.4%
Monthly                                                                                    19.1%
A few times a year                                                                         40.3%
Rarely                                                                                     24.0%
Never                                                                                      7.1%




                                                           57
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                                    Country Survey 2013


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

2.  When thinking about the development challenges in Cameroon, where do
    you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its             Percentage of Respondents
    knowledge work and activities in the next few years? (Choose no more than 3)      (Responses Combined; N=396)
Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                                 44.7%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Education                                                                                        24.5%
Anti-corruption                                                                                  20.2%
Poverty reduction                                                                                14.9%
Health                                                                                           14.9%
Job creation/employment                                                                          14.6%
Domestic private sector development                                                              14.4%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                 14.4%
Agricultural development                                                                         14.1%
Energy                                                                                           13.1%
Economic growth                                                                                  10.9%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                             10.6%
Rural development                                                                                10.1%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                   9.8%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                          9.1%
Basic infrastructure                                                                             8.8%
Gender equity                                                                                    6.3%
Urban development                                                                                5.8%
Water and sanitation                                                                             5.6%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                    4.8%
Environmental sustainability                                                                     4.5%
Information and communications technology                                                        4.3%
Foreign direct investment                                                                        4.0%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                           3.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                             2.3%
Trade and exports                                                                                2.0%
Global/regional integration                                                                      1.8%
Financial markets                                                                                1.5%
Food security                                                                                    1.5%
Disaster management                                                                              0.5%

In Cameroon, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge                  Level of Effectiveness
work and activities are at: (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)          N        DK       Mean       SD
3. Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                                       354       27        5.31     2.12
4.   Contributing to good policy making                                         339       40       5.60     1.98
5.   Providing support for program implementation                               358       26       6.04     1.93




                                                        58
The World Bank                                               Cameroon                        Country Survey 2013


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Cameroon, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s                          Degree
knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                        N       DK     Mean      SD
6.    Are timely                                                               322      54     4.90     1.82
7.    Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during
                                                                               347      32      4.97    1.97
      preparation
8.    Are relevant to Cameroon’s development priorities                        358      23      5.65    1.97
9.    Provide feasible recommendations                                         336      37      5.63    1.99
10.   Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                     351      27      5.58    2.00
11.   Are source of relevant information on global good practices              345      32      6.21    2.08
12.   Are useful in terms of the work you do                                   351      24      6.05    2.24
13.   Are adequately disseminated                                              346      23      4.79    2.00
14.   Are translated enough into local language                                324      47      4.44    2.63
15.   Are adaptable to Cameroon’s specific development challenges and
                                                                               349      30      5.77    2.16
      country circumstances*


Overall Evaluations                                                             N       DK     Mean      SD
16. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank ’s
    knowledge work and activities make to development results in your          362      25      5.94    1.83
    country?* (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
17. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank’s
    knowledge work and activities?*                                            358      27      6.42    1.80
      (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?                  Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N       DK      Mean     SD
1.    The World Bank disburses funds promptly                                  314      64       4.45   2.04
2.    The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                               364      23     6.08     2.14
      programs it supports
3.    The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion      328      56     5.06     1.89
4.    The World Bank’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonable          299      76     5.45     2.09
5.  The World Bank’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                  303      76     5.07     2.20
6.  Working with the World Bank increases Cameroon’s institutional
                                                                               363      23     6.18     2.17
    capacity
7. The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                               261     117     5.40     2.11
    changes
8. The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated                      294      86     6.06     2.19
9. Where country systems (e.g., procurement, financial management,
                                                                               297      83     6.24     2.04
    etc.) are adequate, the World Bank makes appropriate use of them*
10. The World Bank provides effective implementation support (i.e.,
                                                                               339      48     6.20     2.16
    supervision of projects)




                                                                 59
The World Bank                                                     Cameroon                   Country Survey 2013


F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Cameroon

The Bank’s Role                                                               N        DK     Mean        SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank Group SHOULD
    play in Cameroon’s development in the near future?                        385       6      7.58      2.05
     (1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

2.  Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater       Percentage of Respondents
    value in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)                                    (Responses Combined; N=390)
Reach out more to groups outside of government                                                54.4%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                       41.0%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Cameroon’s specific challenges               35.6%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Cameroon’s
                                                                                              11.3%
economy
Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                            10.8%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost,
                                                                                              10.8%
timeliness, and other terms)
Work faster                                                                                   10.5%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                      8.5%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                      7.2%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                        3.6%
Other                                                                                         1.5%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                                   0.5%


G. Communication and Information Sharing

1.  How do you get most of your information about economic and social               Percentage of Respondents
    development issues in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)                       (Responses Combined; N=396)
Local newspapers                                                                              50.8%
Internet                                                                                      42.7%
Local television                                                                              19.9%
International television                                                                      19.4%
International newspapers                                                                      18.2%
Local radio                                                                                   12.4%
International radio                                                                           12.1%
Periodicals                                                                                   11.1%
Other                                                                                         4.0%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                                     3.5%
Mobile phones                                                                                 1.8%
Blogs                                                                                         0.3%
Instant messaging                                                                             0.3%




                                                                      60
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                            Country Survey 2013


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
2.    How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?         Percentage of Respondents
      (Choose no more than TWO)                                                (Responses Combined; N=392)
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                                43.9%
World Bank website                                                                       33.4%
e-Newsletters                                                                            32.4%
Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)                 29.8%
World Bank publications and other written materials                                      23.0%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                                8.7%
Mobile phones                                                                            8.2%
World Bank Public Information Center                                                     6.9%
Instant messaging                                                                        5.1%
Blogs                                                                                    0.8%
Other                                                                                    0.0%

3.    Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under
      which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession     Percentage of Respondents
      that is not a list of exceptions?                                               (N=370)
Yes                                                                                    25.9%
No                                                                                     74.1%

4.    Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities   Percentage of Respondents
      in the past year?                                                               (N=358)
Yes                                                                                    14.0%
No                                                                                     86.0%

                                                                             Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                          (N=110)
Yes                                                                                    41.8%
No                                                                                     58.2%

                                                                             Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                (N=368)
Yes                                                                                    94.3%
No                                                                                     5.7%

                                                                             Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank website?                                       (N=370)
Yes                                                                                    66.2%
No                                                                                     33.8%

                                                                             Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                        (N=300)
The World Bank’s country website
                                                                                      41.3%
(www.worldbank.org/en/country/cameroon)
The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                     58.7%

9.  Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World     Percentage of Respondents
    Bank website?                                                                     (N=327)
Dial-up                                                                                52.6%
High speed                                                                             47.4%



                                                         61
The World Bank                                         Cameroon                              Country Survey 2013


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                       Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                       N        DK     Mean       SD
10. I use/consult World Bank data more currently than I did a few years ago   344       16     5.32      2.52
11. I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate.                          288       26     6.01      2.22
12. I find the information on the World Bank’s websites useful.               289       22     6.91      2.12
13. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it
                                                                              314       29     5.26      2.67
    (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them, etc.)
14. The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries     262       70     5.40      2.53




H. Background Information
1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                     Percentage of Respondents
    (Please mark only ONE response)                                                          (N=388)
NGO                                                                                          25.3%
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                      20.6%
Project Management Unit                                                                      6.2%
Media                                                                                        5.4%
Other                                                                                        5.2%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                       4.9%
Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank-supported Project                                4.4%
Private Sector Organization                                                                  4.1%
Local Government Office of Staff                                                             3.9%
Bilateral Agency                                                                             3.4%
Community-Based Organization                                                                 2.8%
Trade Union                                                                                  2.8%
Office of Minister                                                                           2.3%
Faith-Based Group                                                                            1.8%
Office of the President, Prime Minister                                                      1.5%
Multilateral Agency                                                                          1.5%
Independent Government Institution                                                           1.3%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                     .8%
Private Foundation                                                                            .8%
Judiciary Branch                                                                              .8%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                                 .3%




                                                          62
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                             Country Survey 2013


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                      Percentage of Respondents
    (Please mark only ONE response)                                                       (N=377)
Public sector governance/Public financial management/anti-corruption                      12.7%
Other                                                                                     11.9%
Education                                                                                 11.4%
Agriculture/ rural development / food security                                            10.9%
Law and justice/regulatory framework                                                      8.5%
Health/Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                             6.9%
Natural resource management/environmental sustainability                                  6.6%
Information and communications technology                                                 5.0%
Gender equity / equality of opportunity                                                   4.8%
Energy                                                                                    4.2%
Urban development                                                                         3.7%
Social protection                                                                         3.2%
Job creation/employment                                                                   2.4%
Transport                                                                                 2.4%
Water and sanitation                                                                      2.4%
Private sector development/foreign direct investment                                      1.9%
Financial markets/banking                                                                  .8%
Climate change / disaster management                                                       .3%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in      Percentage of Respondents
  your country?                                                                           (N=385)
Yes                                                                                       34.5%
No                                                                                        65.5%

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in   Percentage of Respondents
  Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                     (N=374)
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                             32.4%
Observer                                                                                  32.1%
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                                  31.8%
Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                              31.8%
Use World Bank reports/data                                                               31.0%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
5. Which best represents your geographic location?                                        (N=385)
Yaoundé                                                                                   63.1%
Other cities                                                                              20.8%
Rural areas                                                                               9.1%
Douala                                                                                    7.0%




                                                        63
The World Bank                                                                                    Cameroon                                                                          Country Survey 2013


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups
A. General Issues Facing Cameroon
In general, how would you say that Cameroon is headed in...?*
                                      Office of                 Consultant                                     Private/
                                     President/     Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.            Faith-
                                        PM/            of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.    Trade   Based
Percentage of Respondents             Minister       Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group    Academia      Other
The right direction                    92.3%          55.8%       64.7%      72.7%   13.3%      68.4%            29.4%      46.9%     63.6%   19.0%   60.0%    60.0%   14.3%      17.6%       52.2%
The wrong direction                       -           11.7%       11.8%       4.5%   53.3%       5.3%            17.6%      17.3%     18.2%    9.5%   20.0%    10.0%   14.3%      11.8%        8.7%
Not sure                                7.7%          32.5%       23.5%      22.7%   33.3%      26.3%            52.9%      35.7%     18.2%   71.4%   20.0%    30.0%   71.4%      70.6%       39.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Cameroon. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Cameroon. (Choose no more than 3)
                                      Office of                 Consultant                                     Private/
                                     President/    Employee      on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.            Faith-
Percentage of Respondents               PM/            of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.    Trade   Based
(Responses Combined)                  Minister       Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group    Academia      Other
Social protection*                      0.0%          21.8%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%             5.9%      18.8%     18.2%    4.8%    0.0%    18.2%   0.0%       10.5%       11.5%
Transport                              14.3%          17.9%       23.5%      54.2%   26.7%      27.8%            11.8%      22.9%      0.0%   19.0%   20.0%    18.2%   33.3%      26.3%       19.2%
Public sector governance/reform        28.6%          38.5%       47.1%      41.7%   26.7%      61.1%            47.1%      50.0%     45.5%   42.9%   60.0%    36.4%   33.3%      47.4%       57.7%
Global/regional integration             7.1%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%    6.7%       0.0%             0.0%       1.0%      0.0%    4.8%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
Gender equity*                         21.4%           3.8%        0.0%       0.0%   26.7%       0.0%             0.0%       4.2%      0.0%   14.3%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
Domestic private sector dev.           14.3%          10.3%       11.8%       0.0%    6.7%      11.1%             5.9%       5.2%      0.0%    4.8%    0.0%    18.2%   0.0%        0.0%       11.5%
Foreign direct investment               7.1%           0.0%        0.0%       4.2%    0.0%       0.0%             5.9%       2.1%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        5.3%        0.0%
Water and sanitation                    0.0%           9.0%        5.9%       8.3%    0.0%       5.6%             5.9%       3.1%      9.1%   14.3%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
Anti-corruption                        21.4%          28.2%       29.4%      16.7%   20.0%      27.8%            11.8%      20.8%     54.5%   42.9%   20.0%    27.3%   16.7%      42.1%       30.8%
Job creation/employment                35.7%          21.8%       23.5%      12.5%   13.3%      22.2%            11.8%      13.5%     18.2%    9.5%   20.0%     9.1%   33.3%      21.1%       23.1%
Rural development                       7.1%          10.3%        5.9%      20.8%   13.3%      11.1%             5.9%      14.6%      9.1%    4.8%    0.0%    18.2%   16.7%       0.0%        7.7%
Financial markets                       0.0%           1.3%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%             5.9%       0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
Urban development                       0.0%           6.4%        0.0%      12.5%    0.0%       0.0%             5.9%       2.1%      9.1%    0.0%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%       15.8%        0.0%
Environmental sustainability            0.0%           2.6%        5.9%       4.2%    0.0%       5.6%             5.9%       4.2%      9.1%    0.0%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%        5.3%        0.0%
Equality of opportunity                 0.0%           6.4%        0.0%       0.0%    6.7%       0.0%             0.0%       2.1%      0.0%    9.5%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%       11.5%
Health                                 35.7%          15.4%       17.6%      20.8%   26.7%      33.3%            23.5%      25.0%     45.5%   33.3%   20.0%    27.3%   33.3%      31.6%       23.1%
Education                              42.9%          24.4%       11.8%      25.0%   33.3%      16.7%            41.2%      25.0%     27.3%   33.3%    0.0%    18.2%   66.7%      42.1%       26.9%
Poverty reduction                       0.0%          15.4%       23.5%       8.3%   26.7%      11.1%            29.4%      15.6%     18.2%   19.0%   40.0%     9.1%   33.3%      15.8%       23.1%
Energy*                                 0.0%          14.1%       35.3%      25.0%    0.0%       0.0%            17.6%       7.3%      9.1%    9.5%   40.0%     0.0%   0.0%       15.8%       19.2%
Food security                           0.0%           2.6%        0.0%       4.2%    0.0%       5.6%             0.0%       5.2%      9.1%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
Climate change*                         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%   20.0%       0.0%             0.0%       1.0%      0.0%    4.8%   20.0%     9.1%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
Agricultural development                7.1%          14.1%       35.3%      12.5%   13.3%       5.6%            17.6%      17.7%      9.1%    0.0%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%        5.3%       19.2%
Trade and exports                       0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%    6.7%       0.0%             5.9%       1.0%      0.0%    4.8%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
Economic growth*                       21.4%          10.3%       11.8%       8.3%    0.0%      27.8%            17.6%       5.2%      0.0%    4.8%   60.0%     0.0%   16.7%       5.3%        0.0%
Law and justice                         0.0%           3.8%        0.0%       4.2%    0.0%      11.1%             5.9%      15.6%      0.0%    9.5%    0.0%    27.3%   0.0%        5.3%       11.5%
Regulatory framework                    0.0%           1.3%        5.9%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%             5.9%       4.2%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
Basic infrastructure*                  28.6%           7.7%        5.9%      12.5%    0.0%      16.7%             0.0%       2.1%      9.1%    0.0%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
Natural resource management             7.1%           7.7%        0.0%       4.2%   26.7%       0.0%             5.9%       6.3%      0.0%    9.5%    0.0%    18.2%   16.7%       5.3%        3.8%
Disaster management                     0.0%           2.6%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%             0.0%       0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
Information & comm. tech.               0.0%           2.6%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%             0.0%       3.1%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
 *Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                     64
The World Bank                                                                                      Cameroon                                                                         Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Cameroon? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                     Office of                    Consultant                                     Private/
                                    President/        Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.            Faith-
Percentage of Respondents              PM/               of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.    Trade   Based
(Responses Combined)                 Minister          Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group    Academia     Other
Water and sanitation*                  6.7%              7.5%        0.0%      33.3%    6.7%       0.0%             0.0%       7.9%      0.0%   19.0%   20.0%     0.0%   14.3%      21.1%       0.0%
Equality of opportunity*               6.7%             10.0%        5.9%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%             0.0%       7.9%      9.1%   23.8%   20.0%    27.3%   28.6%       0.0%       3.8%
Economic growth                        6.7%             17.5%        5.9%      25.0%    0.0%      33.3%            29.4%      21.8%     36.4%   19.0%   40.0%     0.0%   28.6%      15.8%       3.8%
Climate change                         6.7%              1.3%        0.0%       0.0%    6.7%       0.0%             0.0%       0.0%      0.0%    4.8%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%        0.0%       3.8%
Global/regional integration*           0.0%              1.3%        0.0%       0.0%   13.3%       0.0%            23.5%       0.0%      0.0%   14.3%    0.0%     0.0%   14.3%       5.3%       3.8%
Gender equity*                        13.3%              5.0%        5.9%       4.2%   33.3%       0.0%            17.6%       4.0%      0.0%   23.8%   20.0%     9.1%   28.6%      21.1%       0.0%
Rural development                     40.0%             17.5%       23.5%      29.2%   13.3%      27.8%            17.6%      23.8%     27.3%    9.5%   40.0%    18.2%   0.0%        5.3%      19.2%
Urban development                      6.7%              2.5%        5.9%       8.3%    0.0%       0.0%             5.9%       2.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
Regulatory framework                   0.0%              0.0%        0.0%       4.2%    0.0%       0.0%             0.0%       2.0%      9.1%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
Basic infrastructure                  13.3%             15.0%       17.6%      16.7%    0.0%      27.8%             5.9%       9.9%      9.1%    4.8%   20.0%     0.0%   28.6%       5.3%      11.5%
Social protection                      6.7%             10.0%       11.8%       0.0%    6.7%       5.6%             5.9%       5.9%      9.1%    9.5%   20.0%     0.0%   0.0%       15.8%       3.8%
Law and justice                        0.0%             10.0%       17.6%       0.0%   13.3%       5.6%             5.9%       6.9%      0.0%    9.5%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        5.3%      23.1%
Transport                             13.3%             20.0%       11.8%      33.3%   20.0%       5.6%            11.8%      15.8%     18.2%    9.5%   20.0%     0.0%   0.0%       10.5%      19.2%
Information and
                                       0.0%             2.5%        5.9%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         2.0%     9.1%    0.0%    0.0%     9.1%    0.0%       0.0%        3.8%
communications technology
Anti-corruption                        13.3%           23.8%        29.4%      16.7%   26.7%     27.8%            23.5%       30.7%     27.3%   23.8%   0.0%     36.4%   14.3%     15.8%       26.9%
Domestic private sector
                                       13.3%           13.8%        17.6%      0.0%    0.0%      11.1%            17.6%        8.9%     9.1%    19.0%   0.0%     9.1%    0.0%      10.5%        3.8%
development
Foreign direct investment              0.0%             1.3%        0.0%        8.3%    0.0%      0.0%             5.9%       2.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Education                              26.7%           17.5%        17.6%      20.8%   46.7%     11.1%            17.6%       14.9%     18.2%   23.8%   20.0%    36.4%   28.6%     36.8%       23.1%
Energy                                 0.0%             8.8%        5.9%       20.8%    6.7%      0.0%            11.8%       5.0%      18.2%    4.8%    0.0%    18.2%   28.6%     10.5%        3.8%
Public sector governance/
                                       26.7%           27.5%        5.9%       16.7%   40.0%     38.9%            41.2%       29.7%     27.3%   47.6%   40.0%    54.5%   0.0%      36.8%       46.2%
reform
Natural resource management            20.0%           10.0%        11.8%       0.0%    6.7%      0.0%             0.0%       11.9%      9.1%   9.5%     0.0%    18.2%   14.3%     21.1%        7.7%
Environmental sustainability*          0.0%             2.5%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       1.0%       9.1%   0.0%    20.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%       11.5%
Disaster management                    0.0%             1.3%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       0.0%       0.0%   0.0%     0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        3.8%
Health                                 20.0%            6.3%        0.0%       12.5%    0.0%     22.2%            11.8%       10.9%     27.3%   4.8%    20.0%     0.0%   0.0%      15.8%        7.7%
Agricultural development               13.3%           21.3%        35.3%      20.8%   20.0%     16.7%            11.8%       30.7%     18.2%   4.8%     0.0%    18.2%   28.6%     10.5%       30.8%
Job creation/employment                40.0%           41.3%        41.2%      25.0%   26.7%     61.1%            29.4%       37.6%      9.1%   9.5%     0.0%    27.3%   42.9%     31.6%       34.6%
Financial markets                      0.0%             2.5%        0.0%        0.0%    6.7%      0.0%             0.0%       0.0%       0.0%   0.0%     0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Trade and exports                      0.0%             0.0%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       2.0%       0.0%   0.0%     0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Food security                          6.7%             2.5%        23.5%       4.2%    6.7%      5.6%             5.9%       4.0%       0.0%   4.8%     0.0%     9.1%   0.0%       5.3%        3.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                       65
The World Bank                                                                                      Cameroon                                                                         Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Cameroon?
(Choose no more than THREE)
                                     Office of                    Consultant                                     Private/
                                    President/        Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.            Faith-
Percentage of Respondents              PM/               of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.    Trade   Based
(Responses Combined)                 Minister          Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group    Academia     Other
Energy                                33.3%             34.6%       47.1%      58.3%    6.7%      31.6%            29.4%      28.7%     45.5%   23.8%   60.0%    36.4%   0.0%       31.6%      26.9%
Gender equity                          6.7%              2.6%        0.0%       4.2%   13.3%       0.0%             5.9%       2.0%      0.0%    4.8%    0.0%     0.0%   14.3%       0.0%       0.0%
Equality of opportunity*               0.0%              6.4%        5.9%       0.0%   40.0%       0.0%            11.8%       6.9%      9.1%   33.3%   20.0%     0.0%   42.9%      21.1%      11.5%
Social protection                      6.7%              5.1%        5.9%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%             5.9%       2.0%      9.1%    0.0%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%        5.3%       3.8%
Global/regional integration           13.3%              2.6%        0.0%       8.3%    0.0%       0.0%             0.0%       3.0%      0.0%    4.8%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%        5.3%       7.7%
Climate change*                        0.0%              2.6%        0.0%       0.0%    6.7%       0.0%             0.0%       1.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    18.2%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
Anti-corruption                        6.7%             25.6%       17.6%      12.5%   40.0%      26.3%            23.5%      32.7%     27.3%   38.1%   20.0%    45.5%   28.6%      36.8%      30.8%
Disaster management                    0.0%              1.3%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%             0.0%       0.0%      0.0%    4.8%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        5.3%       0.0%
Rural development                      6.7%             11.5%        5.9%       8.3%    6.7%       0.0%             0.0%      17.8%     18.2%    4.8%   20.0%    18.2%   14.3%       5.3%      11.5%
Foreign direct investment             20.0%              9.0%       17.6%      12.5%    6.7%      15.8%            17.6%       6.9%      9.1%    0.0%   20.0%     0.0%   14.3%       0.0%       7.7%
Urban development                      0.0%              0.0%        0.0%       4.2%    0.0%       0.0%             0.0%       0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        5.3%       0.0%
Water and sanitation                   0.0%              1.3%        0.0%       4.2%    0.0%       0.0%             0.0%       0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   14.3%       5.3%       7.7%
Education                             13.3%              7.7%        5.9%       8.3%   20.0%       5.3%            11.8%       8.9%     18.2%    9.5%    0.0%     9.1%   28.6%      15.8%       7.7%
Information and
                                       0.0%             3.8%        0.0%       0.0%    6.7%       0.0%            5.9%         3.0%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%      10.5%        7.7%
communications technology
Regulatory framework                   0.0%             5.1%        0.0%       4.2%     0.0%      5.3%             5.9%       2.0%      18.2%   0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        3.8%
Trade and exports                      20.0%           10.3%        5.9%       8.3%    13.3%      5.3%            11.8%       12.9%      0.0%   0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.3%        3.8%
Public sector governance/
                                       40.0%           33.3%        35.3%      25.0%   33.3%     42.1%            23.5%       31.7%     36.4%   52.4%   40.0%    27.3%   42.9%     31.6%       38.5%
reform
Domestic private sector
                                       26.7%           32.1%        35.3%      25.0%   0.0%      42.1%            23.5%       25.7%     18.2%   23.8%   40.0%    27.3%   0.0%      15.8%       15.4%
development
Job creation/employment                13.3%           20.5%        29.4%      20.8%   13.3%     26.3%            17.6%       23.8%      9.1%    9.5%   20.0%    18.2%   42.9%     21.1%       11.5%
Agricultural development               0.0%            33.3%        23.5%      37.5%   13.3%     36.8%             5.9%       27.7%     27.3%   28.6%   20.0%    18.2%   28.6%     26.3%       15.4%
Food security                          6.7%             1.3%        0.0%        0.0%    6.7%      0.0%             5.9%       2.0%       9.1%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%       11.5%
Transport                              26.7%           12.8%        23.5%      41.7%   26.7%     10.5%            17.6%       15.8%     18.2%    9.5%    0.0%     9.1%   28.6%     21.1%       15.4%
Natural resource management            13.3%           15.4%        17.6%       0.0%    6.7%     10.5%            29.4%       17.8%      0.0%   19.0%    0.0%    18.2%   0.0%       5.3%       15.4%
Environmental sustainability*          0.0%             0.0%        5.9%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%            17.6%       0.0%       0.0%    4.8%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%       5.3%        0.0%
Health                                 13.3%            5.1%        0.0%        8.3%   13.3%      5.3%            11.8%       8.9%      18.2%    4.8%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%      15.8%        0.0%
Basic infrastructure*                  26.7%           10.3%        11.8%       8.3%    0.0%     26.3%             5.9%       5.9%       9.1%    4.8%   40.0%     9.1%   0.0%       0.0%       11.5%
Law and justice*                       6.7%             2.6%        5.9%        0.0%   20.0%      5.3%             5.9%       5.9%       0.0%   19.0%    0.0%    18.2%   0.0%       0.0%       26.9%
Financial markets                      0.0%             3.8%        0.0%        0.0%    6.7%      5.3%             5.9%       4.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       5.3%        7.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                       66
The World Bank                                                                                      Cameroon                                                                        Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)
When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity” in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this woul d be achieved in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                     Office of                    Consultant                                     Private/
                                    President/        Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.           Faith-
Percentage of Respondents              PM/              of a      supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.   Trade   Based
(Responses Combined)                 Minister          Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.    CBO     Media   Inst.   Union   Group    Academia     Other
Better employment                                                                      100.0
                                       50.0%           40.6%        35.3%      31.8%             27.8%            52.9%       32.6%     33.3%   50.0%   20.0%   36.4%   66.7%     62.5%       28.0%
opportunities for young people*                                                          %
Better employment
                                       14.3%            2.9%        5.9%       0.0%    57.1%      0.0%            29.4%        5.6%     0.0%    38.9%   20.0%   0.0%    66.7%     25.0%       12.0%
opportunities for women*
Greater access to micro-finance
                                       7.1%             7.2%        11.8%      18.2%   7.1%       5.6%            0.0%        15.7%     33.3%   5.6%    0.0%    18.2%   0.0%       6.3%       16.0%
for the poor
Greater voice and participation
for citizens to help ensure            7.1%            11.6%        11.8%      18.2%   7.1%      11.1%            5.9%        28.1%     33.3%   22.2%   20.0%   45.5%   16.7%      0.0%       28.0%
greater accountability*
Better entrepreneurial
                                       0.0%            23.2%        29.4%      13.6%   0.0%      27.8%            5.9%        19.1%     0.0%    33.3%   0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      12.5%       12.0%
opportunities*
A growing middle class*                21.4%           15.9%        5.9%       18.2%   0.0%      27.8%            11.8%       14.6%     0.0%    0.0%    60.0%   36.4%   16.7%     12.5%        8.0%
Better opportunity for the poor
                                       7.1%             2.9%        5.9%       9.1%    7.1%      11.1%            11.8%       10.1%     22.2%   5.6%    20.0%   9.1%    0.0%       6.3%       12.0%
who live in rural areas
Better opportunity for the poor
                                       0.0%             0.0%        0.0%       9.1%    0.0%       0.0%            5.9%         1.1%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       6.3%        8.0%
who live in urban areas
Consistent economic growth*            35.7%           14.5%        29.4%      31.8%   7.1%      16.7%            17.6%        9.0%     11.1%   0.0%    40.0%   0.0%    16.7%     12.5%       16.0%
More effective risk
                                       0.0%             2.9%        5.9%       4.5%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       6.3%        0.0%
management
Greater equity of fiscal policy*       28.6%           13.0%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       5.6%            17.6%        9.0%     22.2%   5.6%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Education and training that
                                       7.1%            27.5%        23.5%      31.8%   7.1%       0.0%            29.4%       23.6%     22.2%   22.2%   0.0%    18.2%   16.7%     25.0%       20.0%
better ensure job opportunity
Improved access to basic
                                       7.1%            24.6%        29.4%      9.1%    7.1%      50.0%            5.9%        22.5%     0.0%    11.1%   20.0%   9.1%    0.0%      12.5%       28.0%
services*
Better quality public services         14.3%           11.6%        5.9%       4.5%    0.0%      16.7%            5.9%         7.9%     22.2%   5.6%    0.0%    18.2%   0.0%      12.5%        8.0%
Other                                  0.0%             1.4%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%      0.0%   0.0%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%       0.0%        4.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                       67
The World Bank                                                                                                            Cameroon                                                                                                 Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

                                                                              Consultant                                      Private /
                                                    Office of the              on Bank-                        Bilateral or   Financial                                           Independent
                                                     President/ Employee of   supported                Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                              Government               Faith-Based
                                                    PM/Minister a Ministry      Project      PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation             CBO       Media    Institution Trade Union    Group           Academia       Other
                                                      N    Mean   N   Mean     N    Mean   N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean         N      Mean   N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean        N    Mean     N   Mean
How familiar are you with the work of the World
                                                     15   5.33   79    5.91   17    6.53   24    6.87    15   5.33   19    6.32   16   5.63   99   5.08    11     5.36   20   5.65     5    7.60   11   4.45     7    5.71    18     5.61   26   5.58
Bank in Cameroon?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                              Consultant                                      Private /
                                                    Office of the              on Bank-                        Bilateral or   Financial                                           Independent
                                                     President/ Employee of   supported                Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                              Government               Faith-Based
                                                    PM/Minister a Ministry      Project      PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation             CBO       Media    Institution Trade Union    Group           Academia       Other
                                                      N    Mean   N   Mean     N    Mean   N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean         N      Mean   N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean        N    Mean     N   Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                     15   5.53   73    5.75   16    6.06   21    6.90    14   5.50   18    6.50   17   5.41   93   4.88    10     5.40   21   5.19     5    6.20   9    4.67     7    5.29    17     6.00   21   5.57
Bank’s effectiveness in Cameroon.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                              Consultant                                          Private /
                                                    Office of the              on Bank-                            Bilateral or   Financial                                          Independent
                                                     President/ Employee of   supported                    Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                             Government                 Faith-Based
                                                    PM/Minister a Ministry      Project        PMU      Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation         CBO       Media       Institution Trade Union      Group      Academia       Other
                                                     N    Mean    N   Mean     N   Mean    N    Mean     N    Mean    N   Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean    N      Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean    N    Mean     N    Mean    N     Mean    N    Mean
To what extent do you believe the World Bank's
staff is well prepared to help Cameroon solve its    15   6.07   65    6.11   16    6.44   21    7.05    14   5.21   15    7.07   17   5.53   77   5.40    10     5.40   18   5.78     5    6.60   10    4.10    4     6.00   16     5.69   18   6.22
most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                            68
The World Bank                                                                                      Cameroon                                                                         Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Cameroon, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its
attention and resources in Cameroon? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                     Office of                    Consultant                                     Private/
                                    President/        Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.            Faith-
Percentage of Respondents              PM/              of a      supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.    Trade   Based
(Responses Combined)                 Minister          Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group    Academia     Other
Social protection                      6.7%             7.5%         0.0%      0.0%    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%       11.0%     27.3%   4.8%    20.0%    9.1%    14.3%      10.5%      3.8%
Public sector governance/
                                       46.7%           33.8%        64.7%      29.2%   33.3%     52.6%            35.3%       48.0%     27.3%   57.1%   40.0%    27.3%   0.0%      26.3%       34.6%
reform
Transport                              26.7%           22.5%        17.6%      45.8%    6.7%     47.4%            11.8%       24.0%      9.1%   19.0%   20.0%    27.3%   28.6%     21.1%       19.2%
Poverty reduction                      13.3%           21.3%        29.4%      12.5%    6.7%     10.5%            23.5%       19.0%     18.2%   14.3%    0.0%    27.3%   14.3%     26.3%       11.5%
Global/regional integration            0.0%             1.3%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       1.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   14.3%      0.0%        0.0%
Gender equity                          13.3%            3.8%        0.0%        0.0%   20.0%      0.0%            17.6%       4.0%       0.0%    9.5%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%       5.3%        7.7%
Domestic private sector
                                       20.0%           11.3%        5.9%       0.0%    0.0%      21.1%            23.5%        9.0%     0.0%    14.3%   0.0%     18.2%   0.0%       5.3%       11.5%
development
Rural development                      13.3%           12.5%        11.8%      16.7%   13.3%     10.5%            11.8%       17.0%     36.4%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        7.7%
Foreign direct investment              0.0%             1.3%        0.0%        4.2%    0.0%      5.3%             5.9%       1.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   14.3%      5.3%        0.0%
Water and sanitation                   0.0%             3.8%        5.9%       16.7%    6.7%     10.5%             0.0%       5.0%       9.1%    4.8%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       5.3%        3.8%
Energy*                                13.3%           13.8%        23.5%      29.2%    0.0%     15.8%            17.6%       11.0%     36.4%    0.0%   40.0%    18.2%   0.0%       0.0%       11.5%
Job creation/employment                13.3%           15.0%        23.5%       4.2%   20.0%     21.1%             0.0%       7.0%       0.0%    9.5%    0.0%    18.2%   0.0%      15.8%       30.8%
Financial markets                      0.0%             0.0%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       0.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        3.8%
Urban development                      6.7%             8.8%        0.0%        8.3%    0.0%      0.0%             5.9%       4.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       5.3%        0.0%
Environmental sustainability           0.0%             6.3%        5.9%        4.2%    6.7%      5.3%             0.0%       5.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   28.6%      5.3%        0.0%
Equality of opportunity*               0.0%             6.3%        5.9%        0.0%   20.0%      0.0%             5.9%       3.0%       0.0%   33.3%    0.0%     9.1%   28.6%     15.8%        7.7%
Health*                                20.0%           26.3%        23.5%      25.0%   60.0%     10.5%            35.3%       20.0%     27.3%   66.7%   40.0%    27.3%   28.6%     42.1%       19.2%
Education                              13.3%           27.5%        5.9%       29.2%   46.7%     10.5%            29.4%       23.0%     27.3%   19.0%   40.0%    27.3%   57.1%     42.1%       34.6%
Food security                          0.0%             1.3%        5.9%        0.0%    0.0%      5.3%             0.0%       4.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%       5.3%        3.8%
Climate change                         6.7%             2.5%        0.0%        0.0%    6.7%      5.3%             0.0%       3.0%       0.0%    9.5%    0.0%    18.2%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Agricultural development               20.0%           20.0%        23.5%      16.7%   20.0%     15.8%            11.8%       18.0%      9.1%    4.8%   20.0%     0.0%   57.1%     10.5%       11.5%
Trade and exports*                     0.0%             0.0%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%            11.8%       0.0%       9.1%    4.8%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        3.8%
Economic growth*                       13.3%           11.3%        11.8%       8.3%    0.0%     10.5%             5.9%       5.0%      18.2%    0.0%   60.0%     9.1%   0.0%       5.3%        3.8%
Law and justice                        6.7%             5.0%        5.9%        0.0%   13.3%      0.0%            11.8%       11.0%      0.0%    9.5%    0.0%     9.1%   14.3%      0.0%       19.2%
Regulatory framework                   0.0%             1.3%        0.0%        4.2%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       5.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Basic infrastructure                   26.7%           12.5%        5.9%       16.7%    0.0%     26.3%             5.9%       13.0%     18.2%    4.8%   20.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%       11.5%
Natural resource management            13.3%            7.5%        0.0%       16.7%    0.0%     10.5%            11.8%       8.0%       0.0%    4.8%    0.0%     9.1%   0.0%      15.8%        7.7%
Anti-corruption                        6.7%            12.5%        23.5%      12.5%   20.0%      5.3%            17.6%       16.0%     27.3%    9.5%    0.0%    27.3%   0.0%      31.6%       26.9%
Information and
                                       0.0%             2.5%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         4.0%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        3.8%
communications technology
Disaster management                    0.0%             0.0%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                       69
The World Bank                                                                                 Cameroon                                                                        Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Cameroon?
                                    Office of                Consultant                                     Private/
                                   President/    Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.           Faith-
Greatest Value
                                      PM/          of a      supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.   Trade   Based
Percentage of Respondents           Minister      Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.    CBO     Media   Inst.   Union   Group    Academia     Other
Financial resources: investment
                                       25.0%        44.2%      40.0%      55.0%   33.3%     40.0%            37.5%       36.9%     50.0%   28.6%   33.3%   25.0%   50.0%     50.0%       23.8%
lending
Financial resources: policy
based lending / budget support         33.3%        19.2%      0.0%       10.0%   33.3%     20.0%            12.5%       21.4%     0.0%    28.6%   66.7%   50.0%   0.0%       0.0%       23.8%
to the Government
Mobilizing third party financial
                                       16.7%         3.8%      0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            25.0%        3.6%     16.7%   0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       23.8%
resources*
Technical assistance                   0.0%          5.8%      10.0%      15.0%    0.0%      6.7%             0.0%       8.3%       0.0%   28.6%   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%      18.2%        0.0%
Policy advice*                         16.7%         3.8%      0.0%        0.0%   33.3%     13.3%             0.0%       1.2%      16.7%   14.3%   0.0%     0.0%   25.0%      0.0%        4.8%
Donor coordination*                    8.3%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      6.7%             0.0%       0.0%       0.0%    0.0%   0.0%    25.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Data and information                   0.0%          3.8%      10.0%       0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       3.6%       0.0%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%      18.2%        0.0%
Training/capacity building             0.0%         15.4%      30.0%      20.0%    0.0%     13.3%            12.5%       13.1%     16.7%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%   25.0%      9.1%        4.8%
Studies/analyses                       0.0%          0.0%      10.0%       0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       6.0%       0.0%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Convening/facilitating                 0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       0.0%       0.0%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise          0.0%          3.8%      0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%            12.5%       3.6%       0.0%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       9.1%       14.3%
Other                                  0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       2.4%       0.0%    0.0%   0.0%     0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        4.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                    Office of                Consultant                                     Private/
 nd                                President/    Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.           Faith-
2 Greatest Value
                                      PM/          of a      supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.   Trade   Based
Percentage of Respondents           Minister      Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.    CBO     Media   Inst.   Union   Group    Academia     Other
Financial resources: investment
                                     8.3%          9.8%        30.0%      14.3%   33.3%     25.0%            12.5%        7.2%     0.0%    16.7%   0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      18.2%       13.6%
lending
Financial resources: policy
based lending / budget support       0.0%          13.7%       20.0%      14.3%   0.0%      12.5%            12.5%        4.8%     16.7%   0.0%    0.0%    25.0%   25.0%     18.2%        4.5%
to the Government
Mobilizing third party financial
                                     0.0%          9.8%        0.0%       14.3%   0.0%       6.3%            12.5%       10.8%     33.3%   0.0%    33.3%   0.0%    0.0%       9.1%        0.0%
resources
Technical assistance                 8.3%          17.6%       0.0%       19.0%   33.3%     25.0%            25.0%       15.7%     16.7%   16.7%    0.0%   25.0%   0.0%      18.2%        9.1%
Policy advice                        8.3%           3.9%       0.0%        0.0%    0.0%     12.5%            12.5%       9.6%      16.7%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%       9.1%       18.2%
Donor coordination                   16.7%          5.9%       10.0%      14.3%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       9.6%       0.0%    0.0%   33.3%   25.0%   25.0%      0.0%        4.5%
Data and information                 0.0%           0.0%       0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      6.3%             0.0%       2.4%       0.0%   16.7%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Training/capacity building           25.0%         19.6%       20.0%      14.3%    0.0%      0.0%            12.5%       16.9%      0.0%   50.0%    0.0%    0.0%   25.0%      9.1%        9.1%
Studies/analyses                     16.7%          9.8%       0.0%        0.0%    0.0%     12.5%            12.5%       10.8%      0.0%    0.0%   33.3%    0.0%   0.0%      18.2%        4.5%
Convening/facilitating               0.0%           0.0%       0.0%        4.8%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       2.4%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise        16.7%          9.8%       10.0%       4.8%   33.3%      0.0%             0.0%       9.6%      16.7%    0.0%    0.0%   25.0%   25.0%      0.0%       27.3%
Other                                0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       0.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        9.1%




                                                                                                  70
The World Bank                                                                                                                  Cameroon                                                                                                        Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                             Office of                          Consultant                                                     Private/
                                            President/          Employee         on Bank-                                Bilateral or          Financial        NGO/                                     Ind.                 Faith-
Percentage of Respondents                      PM/                 of a         supported                    Local       Multilateral           Sector/        Private                                  Govt.       Trade     Based
(Responses Combined)                         Minister            Ministry         Project          PMU       Govt.         Agency            Private Bank      Found.           CBO        Media        Inst.       Union     Group        Academia       Other
Staff too inaccessible*                       13.3%               13.9%           12.5%            0.0%      40.0%           5.6%                20.0%         20.4%           50.0%       19.0%        0.0%        54.5%     14.3%          22.2%        8.0%
Not exploring alternative policy
                                       13.3%                      6.3%               0.0%          4.2%      6.7%          11.1%                6.7%            2.0%           0.0%        14.3%         0.0%       9.1%       0.0%            5.6%          8.0%
options
Not adequately sensitive to
political/social realities in          53.3%                     40.5%            43.8%            20.8%     40.0%         16.7%                26.7%          19.4%           20.0%       23.8%        20.0%       36.4%     28.6%         44.4%         28.0%
Cameroon
Not enough public disclosure of
                                       20.0%                     10.1%               6.3%          16.7%     0.0%          16.7%                13.3%          23.5%           30.0%       19.0%        20.0%       9.1%      14.3%         22.2%         32.0%
its work
Arrogant in its approach               0.0%                       5.1%               0.0%          0.0%      6.7%              5.6%             6.7%            4.1%           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       18.2%      0.0%            0.0%          4.0%
Not aligned with country
                                       0.0%                      16.5%               0.0%          8.3%      0.0%              0.0%             6.7%            5.1%           0.0%         4.8%        40.0%       0.0%       0.0%            5.6%          4.0%
priorities*
The credibility of its
                                       0.0%                       1.3%               0.0%          0.0%      0.0%              5.6%             13.3%           0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%       0.0%            5.6%          0.0%
knowledge/data*
Not willing to honestly criticize
policies and reform efforts in         0.0%                      22.8%            18.8%            8.3%      20.0%         11.1%                40.0%          25.5%           10.0%       57.1%         0.0%       0.0%      28.6%         33.3%         20.0%
the country*
Too influenced by developed
                                       26.7%                     26.6%               6.3%          16.7%     46.7%             5.6%             26.7%          15.3%           10.0%       38.1%        40.0%       27.3%     28.6%         33.3%         28.0%
countries
Imposing technocratic solutions
without regard to political            46.7%                     15.2%            12.5%            20.8%     20.0%             5.6%             13.3%           8.2%           20.0%       14.3%        20.0%       9.1%      14.3%            0.0%       28.0%
realities*
World Bank processes too slow
                                       20.0%                     15.2%            37.5%            50.0%     20.0%         22.2%                6.7%           10.2%           20.0%        4.8%         0.0%       0.0%       0.0%            5.6%          4.0%
and complex*
Too bureaucratic in its
operational policies and               0.0%                       5.1%            18.8%            16.7%     0.0%          16.7%                6.7%            8.2%           0.0%         0.0%        40.0%       0.0%      14.3%            5.6%          0.0%
procedures*
Not aligned with other donors’
                                       0.0%                       2.5%               0.0%          12.5%     0.0%          27.8%                0.0%            1.0%           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%       0.0%            0.0%          0.0%
work*
Not collaborating enough with
                                       0.0%                      12.7%            37.5%            8.3%      0.0%          16.7%                13.3%          53.1%           40.0%        0.0%         0.0%       18.2%     28.6%         16.7%         28.0%
non-state actors*
Not client focused*                    0.0%                       0.0%               0.0%          0.0%      0.0%              0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%     14.3%            0.0%          4.0%
Other                                  0.0%                       1.3%               6.3%          0.0%      0.0%              5.6%             0.0%            2.0%           0.0%         4.8%         0.0%       18.2%     0.0%             0.0%          4.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                Consultant                                            Private /
                                                  Office of the                  on Bank-                              Bilateral or   Financial                                                   Independent
                                                   President/ Employee of       supported                      Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                                      Government                 Faith-Based
                                                  PM/Minister a Ministry          Project         PMU       Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation              CBO           Media       Institution Trade Union      Group      Academia       Other
                                                   N    Mean      N      Mean    N    Mean    N      Mean    N    Mean     N     Mean   N      Mean     N    Mean   N      Mean        N   Mean    N    Mean    N    Mean     N    Mean    N     Mean    N     Mean
To what extent do you believe the World Bank
SHOULD seek to influence the global
                                                   14    7.07     72     7.54   16     7.44   24     7.92    14   5.93    18     7.56   17     6.35     95   7.73   10     8.10       21   6.95     5    8.20   9     6.22    6     8.33   16     7.06   24    7.33
development agenda as related to “global public
goods”?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                                                                                  71
The World Bank                                                                                                                   Cameroon                                                                                                  Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to
ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                Office of                          Consultant                                                    Private/
                                               President/          Employee         on Bank-                               Bilateral or          Financial        NGO/                                Ind.                 Faith-
Percentage of Respondents                         PM/                 of a         supported                   Local       Multilateral           Sector/        Private                             Govt.        Trade    Based
(Responses Combined)                            Minister            Ministry         Project          PMU      Govt.         Agency            Private Bank      Found.       CBO        Media        Inst.       Union    Group      Academia       Other
NGOs*                                             6.7%               15.2%           41.2%             8.3%    46.7%          15.8%                23.5%         82.2%       27.3%       28.6%       40.0%        45.5%    14.3%        26.3%        34.6%
Local Government*                                86.7%               48.1%           47.1%            75.0%    60.0%          42.1%                41.2%         35.6%       45.5%       33.3%       40.0%        45.5%    28.6%        31.6%        42.3%
Beneficiaries                                    20.0%               21.5%           23.5%            37.5%     6.7%          36.8%                11.8%         22.8%       27.3%       14.3%        0.0%         9.1%    28.6%        31.6%        19.2%
Private Sector*                                  20.0%               32.9%           29.4%            29.2%    13.3%          36.8%                47.1%         10.9%        9.1%        9.5%       80.0%         9.1%    0.0%         26.3%        15.4%
Community-Based
                                       33.3%                        21.5%            17.6%            12.5%    20.0%         15.8%                23.5%          22.8%       81.8%       23.8%       0.0%         18.2%    57.1%        0.0%         15.4%
Organizations*
Donor Community*                       6.7%                         11.4%               5.9%          12.5%    13.3%         36.8%                11.8%           4.0%       9.1%         9.5%       20.0%        9.1%     0.0%         0.0%          3.8%
Foundations*                           0.0%                          0.0%               0.0%           0.0%    13.3%          0.0%                 5.9%           1.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
Academia/Think Tanks/Research
                                       13.3%                        21.5%            17.6%            8.3%     20.0%          5.3%                17.6%          10.9%       0.0%        28.6%       20.0%        18.2%    42.9%       57.9%         23.1%
Institutes*
Parliament                             0.0%                         11.4%               0.0%          0.0%     0.0%           0.0%                11.8%           2.0%       0.0%         4.8%       0.0%          0.0%    0.0%         5.3%         15.4%
Media*                                 6.7%                         10.1%               0.0%          0.0%     6.7%           5.3%                 0.0%           5.0%       0.0%        42.9%       0.0%         18.2%    14.3%       10.5%          0.0%
Faith-Based Organizations              0.0%                          2.5%               5.9%          8.3%     0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%           3.0%       0.0%         4.8%       0.0%          9.1%    14.3%        5.3%         15.4%
Other*                                 0.0%                          0.0%               5.9%          0.0%     0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         18.2%    0.0%         0.0%         15.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Cameroon? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                   Consultant                                       Private /
                                                    Office of the                   on Bank-                         Bilateral or   Financial                                                 Independent
                                                     President/ Employee of        supported                 Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                                    Government               Faith-Based
                                                    PM/Minister a Ministry           Project       PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation                 CBO         Media    Institution Trade Union    Group       Academia       Other
                                                      N    Mean   N   Mean          N    Mean    N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean              N     Mean     N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean     N   Mean
Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
                                                     14     6.93     77     5.64   16     7.06   23     7.48   13   5.08    19    7.11    17     5.06     93   5.60   9     5.67    20   5.20    5   6.80     9     5.22   6   5.33   18     5.44   22   6.09
role in development in Cameroon*
The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
consider the development priorities for              14     6.43     74     5.00   16     6.38   22     7.23   13   4.77    19    6.63    17     4.71     86   5.15   9     4.78    20   4.85    5   5.80     8     3.75   6   5.67   18     4.72   21   5.62
Cameroon*
The World Bank supports programs and strategies
                                                     14     6.43     75     5.41   16     7.12   24     7.50   13   4.38    19    6.58    17     4.59     91   5.43   9     5.22    20   5.35    5   5.40     8     4.13   6   5.33   17     4.65   22   6.00
that are realistic for Cameroon*
The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
                                                     13     6.62     69     5.43   15     6.13   21     7.14   13   4.85    17    7.41    17     5.47     72   5.63   9     5.56    18   4.83    3   5.33     9     3.56   6   5.50   13     5.62   18   5.83
Cameroon with respect*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                   72
The World Bank                                                                                                                   Cameroon                                                                                                 Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Cameroon, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                   Consultant                                       Private /
                                                     Office of the                  on Bank-                         Bilateral or   Financial                                                 Independent
                                                      President/ Employee of       supported                 Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                                    Government               Faith-Based
                                                     PM/Minister a Ministry          Project       PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation                 CBO         Media    Institution Trade Union    Group      Academia       Other
                                                       N    Mean   N   Mean         N    Mean    N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean              N     Mean     N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean   N    Mean     N   Mean
Responsiveness*                                       10    5.20     62     5.24   14     5.43   21     6.10   15   4.33    15    5.87    17     4.47     73   4.70   8     4.38    19   4.89    3   4.33    4     3.00   4   5.00   13     6.08   19   5.63
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products
                                                      10    5.50     69     4.77   15     5.27   22     6.18   14   4.14    15    5.67    16     4.19     72   4.69   8     3.63    19   4.74    3   5.00    7     3.57   5   5.20   10     4.80   16   4.63
and services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                      10    5.20     69     4.70   14     5.50   19     5.79   14   4.21    18    6.06    17     4.59     71   5.00   8     4.38    19   5.37    4   5.00    6     3.67   3   4.67   10     5.10   16   5.00
circumstances)
Being inclusive*                                      10    5.60     61     5.25   11     6.55   16     7.06   14   4.07    16    6.25    16     4.56     66   5.70   7     5.29    19   5.16    3   5.00    6     3.17   4   4.50   12     5.08   15   5.93
Openness (sharing data and other information)*        12    5.50     72     5.72   14     7.29   19     7.26   12   3.92    19    6.26    17     5.18     83   6.07   9     4.78    19   5.63    3   7.33    7     3.86   7   6.00   16     5.56   17   6.00
Staff accessibility*                                  11    5.09     70     4.60   14     6.29   23     6.87   14   2.71    19    6.26    17     4.41     80   4.05   9     3.11    17   4.71    4   6.00    7     2.86   6   4.17   16     3.69   18   5.06
Straightforwardness and honesty*                       9    5.78     66     5.45   12     6.33   21     7.81   14   3.07    16    7.06    16     4.88     75   5.67   8     6.13    18   4.89    4   5.25    6     4.17   4   3.75   15     3.93   14   6.21
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                      10    6.00     68     5.38   11     5.91   19     6.37   14   5.07    17    5.76    17     4.88     88   4.69   9     4.89    19   5.05    1   5.00    7     3.57   5   5.20   15     5.47   22   5.32
Government
Collaboration with the Government*                    14    7.21     71     6.94   15     7.80   22     8.36   14   5.36    18    7.67    16     5.75     85   7.86   9     7.22    18   5.89    4   7.50    7     5.86   6   7.17   17     7.29   22   6.64
Collaboration with other donors*                      13    7.23     66     6.65   13     7.31   20     7.30   12   4.92    18    6.94    16     5.69     67   6.94   8     7.13    18   5.11    2   6.50    6     6.17   6   7.00   13     6.77   18   7.22
The speed in which it gets things accomplished
                                                      10    5.20     67     5.12   14     5.50   22     6.77   15   4.20    15    5.80    17     4.76     66   4.47   8     4.25    19   4.42    3   4.67    7     3.00   4   5.50   14     4.07   16   4.88
on the ground*
Follow through over time*                             11    5.64     68     5.79   15     6.27   22     7.32   15   4.60    17    6.41    15     5.13     68   5.37   9     5.56    17   6.06    4   5.50    6     3.33   3   5.00   11     5.55   18   6.22
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                Office of                          Consultant                                                    Private/
                                               President/          Employee         on Bank-                               Bilateral or          Financial        NGO/                                Ind.                Faith-
Percentage of Respondents                         PM/                of a          supported                   Local       Multilateral           Sector/        Private                             Govt.       Trade    Based
(Responses Combined)                            Minister            Ministry         Project          PMU      Govt.         Agency            Private Bank      Found.       CBO        Media       Inst.       Union    Group      Academia       Other
The World Bank works too
                                        7.1%                        11.3%            18.8%            9.5%     14.3%         15.8%                5.9%           11.1%       10.0%        4.8%       40.0%       9.1%     14.3%        5.6%         12.5%
slowly
The Government works
                                        14.3%                       21.3%            56.3%            28.6%    0.0%          57.9%                11.8%          24.2%       50.0%       23.8%       20.0%       9.1%     28.6%       44.4%         29.2%
inefficiently*
There is not an adequate level
of citizen/civil society                28.6%                       30.0%            43.8%            19.0%    28.6%         31.6%                35.3%          67.7%       50.0%       19.0%       40.0%       54.5%    57.1%       44.4%         54.2%
participation*
Poor donor coordination                 0.0%                        12.5%               6.3%          14.3%    7.1%          10.5%                0.0%            2.0%       0.0%         4.8%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%        11.1%          8.3%
The World Bank does not do
adequate follow                         21.4%                       13.8%            12.5%            9.5%     7.1%          10.5%                11.8%          14.1%       20.0%        9.5%       0.0%        9.1%     0.0%        16.7%         16.7%
through/follow-up
Lack of/inadequate levels of
                                        35.7%                       13.8%               6.3%          19.0%    14.3%         21.1%                17.6%           5.1%       0.0%        14.3%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%        11.1%          8.3%
capacity in Government
Political pressures and obstacles       14.3%                       23.8%               0.0%          38.1%    14.3%         36.8%                17.6%          22.2%       10.0%       23.8%       0.0%        18.2%    14.3%       22.2%         20.8%
Reforms are not well thought
out in light of country                 28.6%                       28.8%            12.5%            23.8%    57.1%          5.3%                47.1%          17.2%       20.0%       47.6%       40.0%       45.5%    28.6%       22.2%         20.8%
challenges*
The World Bank is not sensitive
enough to political/social              42.9%                       38.8%            37.5%            28.6%    57.1%          5.3%                52.9%          35.4%       40.0%       52.4%       40.0%       54.5%    57.1%       22.2%         25.0%
realities on the ground
Other                                   0.0%                         1.3%               6.3%          0.0%     0.0%           0.0%                0.0%            0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%          4.2%
 *Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                                   73
The World Bank                                                                                                          Cameroon                                                                                                Country Survey 2013

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Cameroon? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                           Consultant                                           Private /
                                                 Office of the              on Bank-                             Bilateral or   Financial                                         Independent
                                                  President/ Employee of   supported                     Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                            Government                 Faith-Based
                                                 PM/Minister a Ministry      Project         PMU      Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation        CBO       Media       Institution Trade Union      Group      Academia       Other
                                                  N    Mean    N   Mean     N   Mean    N     Mean     N    Mean    N   Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean    N    Mean     N    Mean    N     Mean    N    Mean
Anti-corruption                                   10   5.40   72    5.19   11    4.64   20     6.40    14   4.71   15    5.40   17   3.94   87   4.86    9     6.33   18   4.83     2    5.00   10    4.60    6     4.50   18     4.28   22   4.77
Information and communications technology*         5   5.60   58    5.03   10    5.20   17     6.41    14   5.43   10    5.50   16   4.13   76   5.12    7     4.86   18   4.44     3    4.00   8     3.63    5     6.40   17     4.06   15   5.40
Transport*                                        13   6.46   65    5.42   11    6.27   22     7.05    13   5.92   15    7.20   17   4.41   81   5.67    8     5.13   19   5.84     3    7.00   10    4.20    5     5.80   18     4.72   23   6.48
Law and justice                                   7    5.14   54    4.65   11    4.55   13     5.62    13   5.54   11    4.27   15   4.07   69   4.42    8     5.25   20   4.70     1    7.00   9     4.00    4     5.50   17     4.41   18   4.56
Urban development*                                11   6.09   62    5.32   12    5.92   17     7.29    14   5.71   12    6.08   15   4.53   79   5.44    8     4.75   18   5.33     2    6.00   10    4.40    5     5.00   18     5.11   20   5.65
Environmental sustainability*                     11   6.27   64    5.92   12    5.92   21     7.52    13   5.85   15    6.80   17   5.18   75   5.53    8     5.13   19   5.00     3    5.67   9     4.11    7     5.29   17     5.00   18   6.28
Regulatory framework*                             9    5.33   58    5.48   10    5.60   15     7.20    13   5.54   11    5.73   14   5.29   71   5.18    7     4.86   17   4.59     2    4.00   9     3.89    3     5.33   14     5.00   16   5.88
Basic infrastructure*                             11   5.91   69    5.59   12    5.50   20     7.00    13   5.62   13    6.77   17   4.71   76   5.16    8     5.75   18   5.00     2    7.50   9     4.11    7     5.71   18     4.78   19   5.42
Poverty reduction*                                11   6.36   65    5.35   12    5.58   22     7.09    13   5.23   15    6.60   17   4.41   83   5.18    8     5.37   19   4.63     4    5.75   10    3.30    6     5.00   19     4.21   20   5.90
Gender equity*                                    8    5.37   61    5.46   11    5.64   17     6.82    13   3.00    9    6.22   16   3.25   68   5.16    7     4.14   18   4.06     2    3.50   9     3.89    5     5.20   12     4.00   14   6.00
Domestic private sector development*              11   5.18   55    4.75   11    4.18   15     5.80    13   3.54   11    5.64   14   3.86   63   4.33    7     3.71   18   3.94     3    4.00   10    3.30    4     4.25   16     3.38   17   5.24
Foreign direct investment*                         9   5.22   53    5.68   9     4.56   14     6.36    13   4.77   9     5.44   14   4.00   54   5.06    8     5.25   15   4.53     2    4.00   9     4.22    4     5.25   15     3.80   16   6.13
Water and sanitation*                             11   5.27   64    5.38   11    5.55   19     6.74    14   5.43   11    5.82   16   4.25   75   5.13    7     4.86   15   5.20     2    6.00   9     3.78    7     5.29   17     4.47   16   6.00
Trade and exports*                                 9   4.89   51    5.06   9     4.56   12     6.00    13   5.46   7     5.43   15   4.00   67   4.90    7     4.86   15   4.87     2    4.50   10    2.80    3     5.33   15     4.47   14   5.71
Economic growth*                                  11   5.64   68    5.44   11    5.64   18     7.06    13   5.38   13    6.08   16   4.38   74   5.23    9     5.33   18   4.67     3    4.67   10    3.40    5     5.00   18     4.83   16   5.88
Energy*                                           11   5.73   64    5.58   13    6.31   24     7.21    13   5.38   14    6.64   17   4.71   79   5.53    6     6.00   18   5.61     4    5.00   9     3.67    7     5.00   15     4.47   20   6.15
Disaster management*                               8   5.88   56    5.00   11    4.18   15     5.93    14   5.43   8     6.63   16   4.37   58   4.05    7     4.00   18   4.83     2    4.00   9     3.67    5     5.20   15     4.67   13   5.85
Public sector governance/ reform*                 11   5.64   71    5.51   12    5.42   19     6.68    13   5.31   15    6.13   15   5.20   83   5.40    7     5.43   20   4.45     4    6.75   10    3.70    5     5.20   19     4.37   20   5.50
Job creation/employment*                          11   4.91   70    4.73   11    4.82   21     5.52    14   4.71   10    4.60   15   3.60   71   3.70    8     3.63   19   4.16     2    2.50   10    2.90    5     4.60   17     3.76   17   5.18
Financial markets*                                8    4.75   50    4.62    9    4.56   13     5.54    12   4.67    9    5.56   14   4.07   54   4.39    7     5.00   15   4.60     2    2.50   8     3.50    4     3.75   15     3.27   12   5.83
Equality of opportunity*                           8   5.13   62    4.56   11    5.45   16     6.81    13   2.92   8     5.25   15   3.07   65   4.29    6     4.17   16   3.75     2    2.00   9     3.00    4     3.75   16     3.62   13   5.46
Health*                                           14   6.36   71    5.83   11    5.91   22     7.14    12   5.17   13    6.46   15   4.53   81   5.78    8     5.75   17   5.71     4    6.25   9     3.89    5     5.40   15     4.40   21   6.29
Rural development*                                11   5.45   69    5.64   12    6.08   23     6.74    14   5.71   12    5.67   17   3.82   79   5.11    8     4.13   19   4.79     4    6.00   10    3.10    6     4.33   17     4.24   19   5.63
Global/regional integration*                       9   5.56   62    5.45   12    5.92   15     6.53    13   5.23   11    4.73   15   4.27   66   5.45    7     5.86   17   5.29     3    5.33   9     3.56    4     5.75   16     4.00   17   6.35
Food security*                                    10   5.40   64    5.44   11    5.64   17     6.35    14   5.21   13    5.38   17   4.24   73   4.96    8     4.88   19   4.84     3    5.33   10    3.40    5     4.60   16     4.69   16   6.31
Education                                         11   6.18   71    6.11   11    5.64   17     5.82    14   6.00   12    6.25   17   4.71   80   5.73    9     5.78   19   5.53     4    6.25   10    4.70    6     5.83   18     4.67   19   6.26
Social protection*                                 8   4.88   64    4.39   10    4.10   13     4.77    13   4.92   7     5.71   17   3.29   69   3.51    7     4.00   17   4.71     3    4.67   10    2.90    4     4.00   17     3.71   10   4.90
Climate change*                                   11   5.73   62    5.52   13    5.85   20     6.40    14   6.00   13    5.54   16   4.44   63   5.13    7     4.43   18   5.50     2    3.50   8     3.50    6     5.67   15     4.13   15   6.00
Agricultural development*                         11   5.45   67    5.90   12    6.17   16     6.56    14   5.79   14    5.79   17   4.18   79   5.49    9     4.44   16   5.63     4    6.25   10    3.40    6     5.33   17     5.24   18   6.17
Natural resource management*                      8    4.75   66    5.35   11    5.27   16     6.00    14   5.57   12    6.42   17   4.35   74   5.50    7     5.43   18   5.39     3    5.00   10    3.10    5     5.20   17     4.71   15   5.40
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                           Consultant                                      Private /
                                                 Office of the              on Bank-                        Bilateral or   Financial                                           Independent
                                                  President/ Employee of   supported                Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                              Government               Faith-Based
                                                 PM/Minister a Ministry      Project      PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation             CBO       Media    Institution Trade Union    Group           Academia       Other
                                                   N    Mean   N   Mean     N    Mean   N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean          N     Mean   N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean        N    Mean     N   Mean
To what extent does the World Bank’s work help
                                                  14   5.64   73   5.81    16    6.00   23     6.87    15   5.33   18    6.56   16   5.25   91   5.45    8     5.75   18   5.61     5    5.60   9    4.11     7    6.29    17     5.24   22   6.09
to achieve development results in Cameroon?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                          74
The World Bank                                                                                                           Cameroon                                                                                                 Country Survey 2013

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Cameroon? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                            Consultant                                      Private /
                                                  Office of the              on Bank-                        Bilateral or   Financial                                                Independent
                                                   President/ Employee of   supported                Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                                   Government               Faith-Based
                                                  PM/Minister a Ministry      Project      PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation                CBO         Media    Institution Trade Union    Group       Academia       Other
                                                    N    Mean   N   Mean     N    Mean   N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean             N     Mean     N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean     N   Mean
The World Bank's financial instruments meet the
                                                   15   5.80   73   5.64    16   5.81    21     6.81   15   4.53    17    6.29    16     4.13   91    5.04   8     4.50   19    4.95    4   5.25     9     4.78   5   5.40   18     4.83   18   5.50
needs of Cameroon*
The World Bank meets Cameroon’s needs for
                                                   14   5.86   72   5.28    15   5.67    21     6.24   15   4.47    15    6.47    16     4.63   85    5.60   8     5.13   19    5.21    5   5.00     8     4.00   5   4.40   19     4.63   22   5.55
knowledge services*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
                                      Office of                             Consultant                                                   Private/
                                     President/     Employee                 on Bank-                              Bilateral or          Financial       NGO/                                Ind.                 Faith-
                                        PM/            of a                 supported                  Local       Multilateral           Sector/       Private                             Govt.        Trade    Based
Percentage of Respondents             Minister       Ministry                 Project         PMU      Govt.         Agency            Private Bank     Found.       CBO        Media        Inst.       Union    Group      Academia       Other
Weekly                                    -           10.4%                   41.2%           26.1%      -               -                 11.8%         7.1%         -         19.0%          -            -        -           -           4.0%
Monthly                                13.3%          22.1%                   17.6%           17.4%      -            47.4%                 5.9%        24.2%       22.2%       14.3%       40.0%         9.1%       -         11.1%        16.0%
A few times a year                     46.7%          36.4%                   35.3%           43.5%    13.3%          36.8%                41.2%        52.5%       33.3%       14.3%       40.0%        45.5%    28.6%        44.4%        40.0%
Rarely                                 20.0%          22.1%                    5.9%            8.7%    40.0%          15.8%                35.3%        15.2%       33.3%       52.4%       20.0%        27.3%    57.1%        33.3%        32.0%
Never                                  20.0%           9.1%                      -             4.3%    46.7%             -                  5.9%         1.0%       11.1%         -            -         18.2%    14.3%        11.1%         8.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                           75
The World Bank                                                                                      Cameroon                                                                        Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)
When thinking about the development challenges in Cameroon, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its knowledge work and activities in the next few
 years? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                     Office of                    Consultant                                     Private/
                                    President/        Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.           Faith-
Percentage of Respondents              PM/              of a      supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.   Trade   Based
(Responses Combined)                 Minister          Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.    CBO     Media   Inst.   Union   Group    Academia     Other
Public sector governance/
                                       40.0%           42.9%        64.7%      41.7%   46.7%     63.2%            35.3%       49.0%     54.5%   42.9%   40.0%   27.3%   28.6%     36.8%       42.3%
reform
Gender equity*                         13.3%            2.6%        0.0%       0.0%    20.0%      0.0%            0.0%         6.1%     0.0%    23.8%   0.0%    9.1%    14.3%     10.5%        7.7%
Domestic private sector
                                       6.7%            14.3%        23.5%      4.2%    6.7%      21.1%            11.8%       16.3%     9.1%    23.8%   20.0%   18.2%   28.6%      5.3%       19.2%
development
Foreign direct investment*             6.7%             3.9%        5.9%        4.2%    0.0%      0.0%            17.6%       2.0%       0.0%    9.5%    0.0%    0.0%   28.6%      0.0%        3.8%
Water and sanitation                   0.0%             6.5%        0.0%       12.5%    0.0%      0.0%             5.9%       10.2%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   14.3%     10.5%        0.0%
Trade and exports*                     0.0%             3.9%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%            17.6%       1.0%       9.1%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Energy                                 13.3%           16.9%        11.8%      16.7%    6.7%      5.3%            29.4%       7.1%      27.3%    9.5%   40.0%   27.3%   0.0%      15.8%        7.7%
Disaster management                    0.0%             1.3%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             0.0%       0.0%       0.0%    4.8%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Social protection                      0.0%            14.3%        0.0%        8.3%   13.3%      0.0%             0.0%       10.2%      9.1%    4.8%   20.0%   27.3%   0.0%      15.8%        7.7%
Climate change                         6.7%             2.6%        0.0%        8.3%    0.0%      5.3%            11.8%       5.1%       0.0%    4.8%    0.0%   18.2%   0.0%       0.0%       11.5%
Poverty reduction*                     40.0%           13.0%        11.8%       8.3%    6.7%     15.8%            11.8%       11.2%     45.5%    9.5%    0.0%   18.2%   28.6%     26.3%       11.5%
Law and justice*                       6.7%             5.2%        0.0%        8.3%   20.0%      0.0%             5.9%       12.2%      0.0%   14.3%    0.0%    0.0%   14.3%      5.3%       30.8%
Anti-corruption                        6.7%            18.2%        17.6%      12.5%   26.7%     26.3%            11.8%       24.5%     18.2%   28.6%    0.0%   36.4%   0.0%      26.3%       19.2%
Financial markets                      0.0%             1.3%        5.9%        0.0%    0.0%      5.3%             5.9%       2.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Equality of opportunity                0.0%             6.5%        0.0%        0.0%   13.3%      0.0%             5.9%       2.0%       0.0%    4.8%   20.0%    0.0%   14.3%      5.3%        0.0%
Urban development                      0.0%             3.9%        0.0%        8.3%   13.3%      5.3%            11.8%       5.1%       0.0%   14.3%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%      21.1%        3.8%
Education                              13.3%           28.6%        5.9%       16.7%   46.7%     10.5%            35.3%       23.5%     18.2%   28.6%    0.0%    9.1%   0.0%      36.8%       26.9%
Global/regional integration*           0.0%             0.0%        0.0%        0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             5.9%       1.0%       0.0%    9.5%    0.0%    0.0%   14.3%      0.0%        7.7%
Information and
                                       13.3%            2.6%        11.8%      4.2%    6.7%       5.3%            5.9%         5.1%     0.0%    4.8%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       5.3%        0.0%
communications technology
Transport                              26.7%           14.3%        0.0%       20.8%   20.0%     15.8%             5.9%       13.3%      9.1%   14.3%   20.0%    9.1%   28.6%     15.8%       11.5%
Agricultural development               26.7%           13.0%        11.8%      20.8%   13.3%     15.8%             5.9%       17.3%     18.2%    4.8%    0.0%    9.1%   14.3%     15.8%        7.7%
Natural resource management            13.3%           10.4%        11.8%       4.2%   13.3%     10.5%            11.8%       8.2%       0.0%   19.0%   20.0%   27.3%   0.0%      15.8%        7.7%
Job creation/employment*               20.0%           19.5%        35.3%       4.2%    0.0%     21.1%             0.0%       16.3%     18.2%    0.0%    0.0%    9.1%   0.0%       5.3%       23.1%
Health                                 6.7%            13.0%        0.0%       20.8%   13.3%     15.8%            17.6%       11.2%     27.3%   14.3%   20.0%   27.3%   28.6%     15.8%       19.2%
Economic growth*                       6.7%            15.6%        17.6%      20.8%    0.0%     10.5%            11.8%       6.1%       9.1%    0.0%   80.0%   18.2%   28.6%      5.3%        3.8%
Rural development                      6.7%            10.4%        17.6%      20.8%    6.7%      5.3%            17.6%       10.2%      9.1%    4.8%    0.0%    9.1%   0.0%       0.0%       11.5%
Food security                          0.0%             1.3%        0.0%        0.0%    6.7%      5.3%             0.0%       2.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%       5.3%        0.0%
Environmental sustainability           0.0%             1.3%        11.8%      12.5%    0.0%      5.3%             0.0%       8.2%       9.1%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   14.3%      0.0%        3.8%
Regulatory framework                   0.0%             3.9%        5.9%        4.2%    0.0%      5.3%             0.0%       3.1%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Basic infrastructure                   26.7%            7.8%        23.5%      12.5%    0.0%     15.8%             0.0%       7.1%       9.1%    4.8%   20.0%    0.0%   0.0%       0.0%       11.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                       76
The World Bank                                                                                                          Cameroon                                                                                         Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Cameroon, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities are at: (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                              Consultant                                      Private /
                                                    Office of the              on Bank-                        Bilateral or   Financial                                      Independent
                                                     President/ Employee of   supported                Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                         Government               Faith-Based
                                                    PM/Minister a Ministry      Project      PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation        CBO       Media    Institution Trade Union    Group      Academia       Other
                                                      N    Mean   N   Mean     N    Mean   N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean     N     Mean   N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean   N    Mean     N   Mean
Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills*              12   5.58   71   5.34    15   6.47    23   6.61   13   4.69   17   6.18   17   4.06   93   5.29   9     5.11   19   5.11   4   5.50    9   4.44    6    4.00   16     4.50   19   5.05
Contributing to good policy making*                  12   5.25   72   5.50    12   7.17    20   6.25   14   4.57   16   6.69   16   4.69   86   5.87   8     4.88   17   5.47   4   7.00    9   4.44    6    4.67   17     5.00   18   5.89
Providing support for program implementation*        13   5.62   74   6.09    16   6.81    23   7.48   14   4.64   17   6.94   15   5.27   90   6.24   9     6.00   19   5.74   4   6.50    9   4.22    7    5.00   17     5.35   19   6.05
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


In Cameroon, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                              Consultant                                      Private /
                                                    Office of the              on Bank-                        Bilateral or   Financial                                      Independent
                                                     President/ Employee of   supported                Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                         Government               Faith-Based
                                                    PM/Minister a Ministry      Project      PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation        CBO       Media    Institution Trade Union    Group      Academia       Other
                                                      N    Mean   N   Mean     N    Mean   N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean     N     Mean   N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean   N    Mean     N   Mean
Are timely*                                          12   4.92   68   5.07    15   5.40    17   6.71   15   4.20   14   6.21   15   4.87   82   4.77   8     4.25   18   4.39   3   6.33    9    3.22   4    5.00   14     3.71   18   4.72
Include appropriate level of stakeholder
                                                     12   5.17   72   5.22    15   5.93    19   6.95   15   4.27   18   6.00   17   4.65   89   4.64   9     4.22   18   4.50   5   6.40    9    3.00   5    4.00   15     3.73   19   5.05
involvement during preparation*
Are relevant to Cameroon's development
                                                     12   5.75   72   5.71    15   6.60    20   6.95   15   4.67   19   6.89   16   5.19   90   5.54   9     5.11   21   5.29   5   5.80    8    5.25   6    5.17   18     4.94   21   5.57
priorities*
Provide feasible recommendations*                    12   6.08   70   5.97    15   6.47    21   6.62   15   4.53   18   6.44   16   5.19   81   5.58   9     5.11   17   5.18   5   5.80    9    3.33   4    4.75   16     5.06   18   5.61
Are accessible (well written and easy to
                                                     11   5.73   71   5.94    15   6.27    20   6.75   15   4.20   19   6.37   15   4.80   88   5.51   9     4.89   20   4.70   5   6.80    9    5.11   6    4.67   17     5.41   20   5.65
understand)*
Are source of relevant information on global good
                                                     12   6.08   70   6.57    15   7.27    20   7.20   15   4.53   19   6.63   14   5.64   85   6.42   8     5.13   19   6.16   5   6.40    8    5.38   7    5.29   17     5.47   20   6.15
practices*
Are useful in terms of the work you do*              12   6.00   71   6.13    15   7.33    19   7.58   15   4.07   19   6.74   15   4.67   90   6.29   9     5.44   20   5.80   5   5.00    9    5.11   6    6.33   17     4.94   21   6.67
Are adequately disseminated*                         12   5.58   69   4.96    15   6.00    20   5.75   15   3.93   17   5.53   16   4.25   86   4.76   8     3.88   18   5.17   5   6.20    9    3.11   6    4.50   17     3.59   22   4.36
Are appropriately translated                         10   4.30   66   4.64    13   5.23    18   4.33   15   3.60   13   6.69   14   4.43   83   4.53   9     2.78   18   4.33   5   5.60    9    2.89   7    3.86   16     3.63   19   4.47
Are adaptable to Cameroon’s specific
development challenges and country                   12   7.33   72   5.92    14   6.71    18   7.22   15   4.47   18   6.44   14   5.14   90   5.72   9     5.56   20   5.95   5   5.00    9    4.78   6    4.17   16     4.50   21   6.00
circumstances*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                              Consultant                                      Private /
                                                    Office of the              on Bank-                        Bilateral or   Financial                                      Independent
                                                     President/ Employee of   supported                Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                         Government               Faith-Based
                                                    PM/Minister a Ministry      Project      PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation        CBO       Media    Institution Trade Union    Group      Academia       Other
                                                      N    Mean   N   Mean     N    Mean   N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean     N     Mean   N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean   N    Mean     N   Mean
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the World Bank's knowledge work and
                                                     13   6.62   75   5.88    16   7.12    22   7.09   15   5.33   17   6.35   14   5.00   87   5.95   9     5.22   20   5.75   5   6.00    9   5.56    7    5.43   19     5.16   21   6.19
activities make to development results in your
country?*
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality
of the World Bank's knowledge work and               14   7.07   75   6.40    14   7.21    21   7.29   14   5.29   18   7.33   15   5.67   88   6.56   9     6.11   20   6.00   5   6.00    9   6.00    6    5.50   17     5.76   21   6.33
activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                         77
The World Bank                                                                                                         Cameroon                                                                                          Country Survey 2013

E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                             Consultant                                      Private /
                                                   Office of the              on Bank-                        Bilateral or   Financial                                       Independent
                                                    President/ Employee of   supported                Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                          Government               Faith-Based
                                                   PM/Minister a Ministry      Project      PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation         CBO       Media    Institution Trade Union    Group      Academia       Other
                                                     N    Mean   N   Mean     N    Mean   N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean     N      Mean   N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean   N    Mean     N   Mean
The World Bank disburses funds promptly*            10   4.50   71   4.90    16   6.06    21   6.71   15   3.73   13   5.23   14   3.93   69   3.61   7      3.00   17   4.41   4    4.75   9    2.67   4    4.75   14     4.21   17   4.06
The World Bank effectively monitors and
                                                    13   6.15   74   6.30    16   6.63    24   7.83   15   4.47   17   7.06   15   5.20   88   6.05   10     5.90   19   5.89   5    6.40   9    4.56   5    6.20   18     5.22   23   6.04
evaluates the projects and programs it supports*
The World Bank's approvals and reviews are done
                                                    11   5.00   72   5.25    15   5.27    24   6.29   15   4.07   11   5.64   14   4.86   77   4.96   9      5.67   18   4.61   4    4.75   9    3.78   4    5.25   16     4.50   19   5.32
in a timely fashion*
The World Bank's “Safeguard Policy”
                                                    7    5.00   65   5.62    15   6.60    20   6.80   15   4.00   12   7.00   13   5.54   69   5.23   8      5.00   18   4.78   3    4.33   7    4.57   4    5.25   16     5.50   18   5.44
requirements are reasonable*
The World Bank's conditions on its lending are
                                                    10   5.30   66   5.36    12   6.42    19   6.74   15   3.73   17   7.00   15   4.87   66   4.39   8      3.50   19   4.63   2    7.00   8    4.25   4    4.00   14     4.71   16   5.19
reasonable*
Working with the World Bank increases
                                                    13   6.92   73   6.16    15   7.27    24   7.71   15   4.40   19   6.84   15   5.33   91   6.46   9      5.33   19   5.32   5    5.40   8    4.63   6    6.33   17     5.35   23   6.04
Cameroon's institutional capacity*
The World Bank ensures consistency and
                                                    8    5.38   55   5.60    14   6.29    18   6.56   15   4.40   10   6.30   13   5.00   57   5.37   7      3.86   15   5.07   2    6.50   8    4.88   3    5.00   12     4.58   15   5.53
continuity through staff changes
The World Bank's teams and visits are well
                                                    11   6.82   64   6.39    14   6.86    23   7.52   15   4.47   12   7.17   14   5.29   63   6.05   8      6.00   15   4.73   3    7.00   8    5.63   4    5.00   14     5.29   16   5.44
coordinated*
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                    10   5.70   67   6.48    14   6.79    23   7.57   15   4.67   10   6.70   14   5.86   65   6.38   8      5.88   17   5.53   3    6.67   8    5.63   5    5.80   14     5.29   16   6.50
Bank makes appropriate use of them*
The World Bank provides effective
                                                    11   5.73   72   6.24    16   7.13    24   8.08   15   4.47   15   7.20   12   5.33   81   6.46   10     6.10   19   5.95   4    6.25   6    5.17   4    5.75   16     5.37   22   5.59
implementation support*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Cameroon

                                                                             Consultant                                      Private /
                                                   Office of the              on Bank-                        Bilateral or   Financial                                       Independent
                                                    President/ Employee of   supported                Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                          Government               Faith-Based
                                                   PM/Minister a Ministry      Project      PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation         CBO       Media    Institution Trade Union    Group      Academia       Other
                                                     N    Mean   N   Mean     N    Mean   N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean     N      Mean   N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean   N    Mean     N   Mean
How significant a role do you believe the World
Bank SHOULD play in Cameroon’s development in       14   7.79   77   7.43    17   8.18    24   8.33   15   6.20   19   7.84   17   6.65   95   8.12   11     8.09   19   6.05   5   6.80    11   7.55   7    8.57   18     7.06   25   7.72
the near future?*
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                        78
The World Bank                                                                                      Cameroon                                                                        Country Survey 2013

F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Cameroon (continued)

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                     Office of                    Consultant                                     Private/
                                    President/        Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.           Faith-
Percentage of Respondents              PM/              of a      supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.   Trade   Based
(Responses Combined)                 Minister          Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.    CBO     Media   Inst.   Union   Group    Academia     Other
Improve the quality of its
experts as related to                  46.7%           40.8%        23.5%      33.3%   40.0%     15.8%            41.2%       22.7%     20.0%   71.4%   20.0%   54.5%   42.9%     64.7%       34.6%
Cameroon’s specific challenges*
Reduce the complexity of
                                       40.0%           42.1%        64.7%      62.5%   26.7%     21.1%            29.4%       44.3%     50.0%   33.3%   60.0%   36.4%   57.1%     23.5%       34.6%
obtaining World Bank financing
Focus primarily on advocacy
                                       0.0%            10.5%        17.6%      8.3%    26.7%     10.5%            5.9%         8.2%     20.0%   14.3%   0.0%    36.4%   14.3%      5.9%       11.5%
issues
Improve the competitiveness of
its financing compared to              26.7%           13.2%        0.0%       8.3%    20.0%      0.0%            29.4%        6.2%     20.0%   19.0%   0.0%    0.0%    14.3%      5.9%       15.4%
markets
Reach out more to groups
                                       26.7%           40.8%        58.8%      16.7%   46.7%     52.6%            52.9%       81.4%     80.0%   42.9%   40.0%   45.5%   57.1%     58.8%       57.7%
outside of government*
Ensure greater selectivity in its
                                       0.0%             2.6%        0.0%       8.3%    6.7%      10.5%            5.9%         2.1%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        7.7%
work
Provide more adequate
data/knowledge/statistics/             40.0%            7.9%        0.0%       12.5%   20.0%     21.1%            17.6%       11.3%     0.0%    9.5%    20.0%   9.1%    0.0%      17.6%        3.8%
figures on Cameroon’s economy
Offer more innovative financial
                                       6.7%             9.2%        0.0%       8.3%    6.7%      21.1%            11.8%        5.2%     10.0%   4.8%    20.0%   9.1%    0.0%       5.9%       15.4%
products
Offer more innovative
                                       0.0%             7.9%        0.0%       4.2%    6.7%      10.5%            0.0%         8.2%     0.0%    0.0%    20.0%   0.0%    0.0%      17.6%       11.5%
knowledge services
Increase availability of Fee-
                                       0.0%             0.0%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         2.1%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Based services
Work faster*                           6.7%            19.7%        29.4%      25.0%   0.0%      21.1%            5.9%         4.1%     0.0%    0.0%    20.0%   9.1%    0.0%       0.0%        3.8%
Other                                  0.0%             1.3%        0.0%        4.2%   0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         1.0%     0.0%    4.8%     0.0%   0.0%    14.3%      0.0%        3.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                       79
The World Bank                                                                                      Cameroon                                                                         Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                     Office of                    Consultant                                     Private/
                                    President/        Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.            Faith-
Percentage of Respondents              PM/               of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.    Trade   Based
(Responses Combined)                 Minister          Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group    Academia     Other
Local newspapers                      53.3%             44.9%       64.7%      56.5%   60.0%      52.6%            58.8%      51.0%     63.6%   61.9%   60.0%    45.5%   57.1%      35.3%      46.2%
International newspapers              26.7%             23.1%       11.8%       4.3%   13.3%      21.1%            17.6%       8.0%     18.2%   19.0%   20.0%    27.3%   28.6%      29.4%      19.2%
Local radio                           26.7%              9.0%        0.0%      17.4%   20.0%       5.3%            17.6%      16.0%     27.3%    9.5%    0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        5.9%      15.4%
International radio                    6.7%             14.1%        0.0%       4.3%   26.7%       5.3%            17.6%      10.0%      0.0%    4.8%   20.0%    36.4%   14.3%      23.5%      19.2%
Local television                      26.7%             26.9%       29.4%      17.4%   13.3%       5.3%            17.6%      20.0%     27.3%   33.3%   20.0%     9.1%   14.3%       5.9%      19.2%
International television*              6.7%             28.2%        5.9%      30.4%   46.7%       5.3%            23.5%      10.0%      9.1%   28.6%   20.0%     9.1%   14.3%      17.6%      23.1%
Periodicals*                          26.7%              6.4%        5.9%      26.1%    0.0%      21.1%            11.8%      10.0%     18.2%    9.5%    0.0%    27.3%   42.9%      11.8%       0.0%
Internet*                             26.7%             35.9%       58.8%      39.1%    6.7%      47.4%            29.4%      61.0%     36.4%   14.3%   60.0%    36.4%   28.6%      58.8%      42.3%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter,
                                       0.0%             3.8%        5.9%       0.0%    6.7%       0.0%            0.0%         5.0%     0.0%    9.5%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.9%        3.8%
YouTube)
Blogs                                  0.0%             0.0%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.9%        0.0%
Mobile phones                          0.0%             0.0%        5.9%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            5.9%         3.0%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     9.1%    0.0%       0.0%        3.8%
Instant messaging                      0.0%             0.0%        5.9%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
Other                                  0.0%             6.4%        5.9%       0.0%    0.0%      21.1%            0.0%         3.0%     0.0%    4.8%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        3.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                     Office of                    Consultant                                     Private/
                                    President/        Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.            Faith-
Percentage of Respondents              PM/               of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.    Trade   Based
(Responses Combined)                 Minister          Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group    Academia     Other
World Bank website*                   26.7%             34.6%       58.8%      30.4%   16.7%      57.9%            70.6%      25.0%     18.2%   61.9%   60.0%    18.2%   14.3%      26.3%      15.4%
Direct contact with World Bank        26.7%             23.1%       35.3%      17.4%   33.3%      42.1%            23.5%      39.0%     36.4%   33.3%    0.0%    45.5%   14.3%      21.1%      23.1%
e-Newsletters*                        33.3%             29.5%       23.5%      47.8%    0.0%      36.8%            17.6%      42.0%     27.3%    9.5%   40.0%     9.1%   28.6%      42.1%      42.3%
Instant messaging                      6.7%              9.0%       11.8%       4.3%    0.0%       0.0%             0.0%       6.0%      0.0%    4.8%   20.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
World Bank seminars/
                                       40.0%        44.9%           47.1%      39.1%   41.7%     21.1%            11.8%       47.0%     63.6%   38.1%   60.0%    81.8%   71.4%     26.3%       57.7%
workshops/conferences*
World Bank Public Information
                                       13.3%         5.1%           0.0%       8.7%    0.0%       5.3%            17.6%        6.0%     9.1%    9.5%    0.0%     9.1%    0.0%      10.5%        7.7%
Center
World Bank publications and
                                       40.0%        28.2%           11.8%      43.5%   33.3%     15.8%            23.5%       16.0%     18.2%   9.5%    20.0%    9.1%    0.0%      26.3%       26.9%
other written materials
Mobile phones                          0.0%          7.7%           11.8%      4.3%    16.7%      0.0%            5.9%        11.0%     18.2%   0.0%    0.0%     18.2%   14.3%     15.8%        3.8%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter,
                                       13.3%        11.5%           0.0%       0.0%    8.3%       5.3%            5.9%         5.0%     9.1%    19.0%   0.0%     0.0%    28.6%     21.1%       15.4%
YouTube)
Blogs*                                 0.0%          0.0%           0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     9.1%    14.3%      0.0%        3.8%
Other                                  0.0%          0.0%           0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                       80
The World Bank                                                                                    Cameroon                                                                           Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
                                      Office of                 Consultant                                     Private/
                                     President/     Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                       Ind.            Faith-
                                        PM/            of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                    Govt.    Trade   Based
Percentage of Respondents             Minister       Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.    CBO     Media     Inst.   Union   Group     Academia     Other
Yes                                    28.6%          22.7%       42.9%      27.3%   23.1%      33.3%            26.7%      16.8%       -     60.0%    60.0%    18.2%   20.0%       42.1%      29.2%
No                                     71.4%          77.3%       57.1%      72.7%   76.9%      66.7%            73.3%      83.2%     100%    40.0%    40.0%    81.8%   80.0%       57.9%      70.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
                                     Office of                  Consultant                                     Private/
                                    President/     Employee      on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                       Ind.             Faith-
                                       PM/            of a      supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                    Govt.    Trade    Based
Percentage of Respondents            Minister       Ministry      Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.    CBO     Media     Inst.   Union   Group     Academia     Other
Yes                                   14.3%           9.7%        38.5%       8.7%     -        35.3%            13.3%      17.6%       -     10.5%    20.0%     9.1%       -       11.1%       8.7%
No                                    85.7%          90.3%        61.5%      91.3%   100%       64.7%            86.7%      82.4%     100%    89.5%    80.0%    90.9%   100.0%      88.9%      91.3%

Were you able to obtain this information?*
                                      Office of                 Consultant                                     Private/
                                     President/     Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                       Ind.             Faith-
                                        PM/            of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                    Govt.    Trade    Based
Percentage of Respondents             Minister       Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media     Inst.   Union   Group     Academia     Other
Yes                                   100.0%          35.3%       100.0%     100%      -        75.0%            40.0%      40.7%     25.0%   33.3%    50.0%    16.7%       -       66.7%      20.0%
No                                        -           64.7%          -         -     100%       25.0%            60.0%      59.3%     75.0%   66.7%    50.0%    83.3%   100.0%      33.3%      80.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you have access to the Internet?*
                                      Office of                 Consultant                                     Private/
                                     President/     Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                       Ind.            Faith-
                                        PM/            of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                    Govt.    Trade   Based
Percentage of Respondents             Minister       Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media    Inst.    Union   Group     Academia     Other
Yes                                    90.9%          93.1%       100.0%     100%    53.8%     100.0%           100.0%      95.8%     88.9%   100.0%   100%     80.0%   83.3%      100.0%      96.0%
No                                      9.1%           6.9%          -         -     46.2%         -               -         4.2%     11.1%      -        -     20.0%   16.7%         -         4.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*
                                      Office of                 Consultant                                     Private/
                                     President/     Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                       Ind.            Faith-
                                        PM/            of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                    Govt.    Trade   Based
Percentage of Respondents             Minister       Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media     Inst.   Union   Group     Academia     Other
Yes                                    50.0%          53.4%       86.7%      91.7%   30.8%      88.9%            80.0%      65.6%     44.4%   90.0%    80.0%    18.2%   50.0%       72.2%      72.0%
No                                     50.0%          46.6%       13.3%       8.3%   69.2%      11.1%            20.0%      34.4%     55.6%   10.0%    20.0%    81.8%   50.0%       27.8%      28.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     81
The World Bank                                                                                                              Cameroon                                                                                                   Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which do you primarily use?*
                                              Office of                        Consultant                                                   Private/
                                             President/          Employee       on Bank-                              Bilateral or          Financial        NGO/                                 Ind.                 Faith-
                                                PM/                of a        supported                  Local       Multilateral           Sector/        Private                              Govt.        Trade    Based
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister            Ministry       Project         PMU      Govt.         Agency            Private Bank      Found.       CBO        Media        Inst.        Union    Group      Academia       Other
The World Bank’s country
                                       28.6%        24.5%                        56.3%           21.7%    33.3%         44.4%                40.0%          60.5%       62.5%        25.0%       25.0%          -      40.0%       14.3%         47.4%
website
The World Bank’s main website          71.4%        75.5%                        43.8%           78.3%    66.7%         55.6%                60.0%          39.5%       37.5%        75.0%       75.0%        100%     60.0%       85.7%         52.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank website?*
                                      Office of                                Consultant                                                   Private/
                                     President/     Employee                    on Bank-                              Bilateral or          Financial        NGO/                                 Ind.                 Faith-
                                        PM/            of a                    supported                  Local       Multilateral           Sector/        Private                              Govt.        Trade    Based
Percentage of Respondents             Minister       Ministry                    Project         PMU      Govt.         Agency            Private Bank      Found.       CBO        Media         Inst.       Union    Group      Academia       Other
High speed                             57.1%          46.0%                      86.7%           68.2%    12.5%          94.7%                50.0%         47.8%       22.2%       25.0%        75.0%        40.0%                 18.8%        30.0%
Dial-up                                42.9%          54.0%                      13.3%           31.8%    87.5%           5.3%                50.0%         52.2%       77.8%       75.0%        25.0%        60.0%    100.0%       81.3%        70.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                               Consultant                                      Private /
                                                    Office of the               on Bank-                        Bilateral or   Financial                                                 Independent
                                                     President/ Employee of    supported                Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                                    Government               Faith-Based
                                                    PM/Minister a Ministry       Project      PMU    Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation                 CBO         Media    Institution Trade Union    Group        Academia       Other
                                                      N    Mean   N   Mean      N    Mean   N   Mean  N    Mean  N     Mean    N    Mean   N   Mean              N     Mean     N   Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean  N     Mean     N    Mean     N   Mean
I use/consult World Bank data more often than I
                                                     13   4.46     69   5.57   16   7.19    21     6.90   11   3.18    16    5.94    14     5.36     90   5.24   8     4.88    21   4.71     4   5.75     9     3.11   6   4.00   16     5.44   24   4.92
did a few years ago.*
I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate.*    7    5.14     50   6.70   14   7.00    21     6.62   9    3.22    17    6.65    15     5.93     73   6.11   6     5.17    20   4.95     4   6.50     8     3.87   5   5.20   15     5.87   19   5.53
I find the information on the World Bank’s
                                                     7    6.43     52   7.23   13   7.77    23     7.96   9    3.33    17    7.94    14     6.43     76   7.07   6     6.67    20   6.00     4   7.75     5     5.40   5   6.80   16     6.38   18   6.39
websites useful.*
When I need information from the World Bank I
                                                     12   4.08     60   6.27   15   5.93    20     6.90   10   3.40    19    5.79    14     5.79     83   4.54   6     5.17    18   5.33     5   4.00     6     2.33   4   4.75   17     5.35   21   4.62
know how to find it.*
The World Bank is responsive to my information
                                                     8    4.50     50   6.04   12   7.33    16     7.31   9    3.33    13    6.54    10     5.00     67   4.79   7     5.57    20   4.80     4   6.25     4     2.75   3   5.00   14     4.50   20   4.95
requests and inquiries.*

*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                              82
The World Bank                                                                                    Cameroon                                                                          Country Survey 2013

H. Background Information

Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?*
                                      Office of                 Consultant                                     Private/
                                     President/     Employee     on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.             Faith-
                                        PM/            of a     supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.    Trade    Based
Percentage of Respondents             Minister       Ministry     Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia     Other
Yes                                    28.6%          34.6%       81.3%      91.3%    7.1%      77.8%            23.5%      30.0%     27.3%    4.8%   40.0%    27.3%       -        5.3%      20.8%
No                                     71.4%          65.4%       18.8%       8.7%   92.9%      22.2%            76.5%      70.0%     72.7%   95.2%   60.0%    72.7%   100.0%      94.7%      79.2%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                     Office of                  Consultant                                     Private/
                                    President/     Employee      on Bank-                    Bilateral or      Financial     NGO/                      Ind.            Faith-
Percentage of Respondents              PM/            of a      supported            Local   Multilateral       Sector/     Private                   Govt.    Trade   Based
(Responses Combined)                 Minister       Ministry      Project    PMU     Govt.     Agency        Private Bank   Found.     CBO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia     Other
Observer*                             15.4%          38.5%         0.0%      8.7%    63.6%      16.7%            31.3%      29.3%     63.6%   25.0%   40.0%    40.0%   66.7%       63.2%      31.8%
Use World Bank reports/data*          23.1%          33.3%        12.5%      8.7%    18.2%      50.0%            12.5%      39.4%     27.3%   40.0%    0.0%     0.0%   33.3%       36.8%      36.4%
Engage in World Bank
related/sponsored                      53.8%        24.4%         56.3%      52.2%   18.2%     22.2%            25.0%       41.4%     27.3%   5.0%    0.0%     40.0%   33.3%      15.8%       27.3%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my
                                       30.8%        41.0%         56.3%      69.6%   18.2%     66.7%            12.5%       18.2%     27.3%   10.0%   60.0%    60.0%    0.0%      10.5%       27.3%
professional duties*
Use World Bank website for
                                       46.2%        19.2%         25.0%      21.7%   9.1%      22.2%            50.0%       35.4%     18.2%   80.0%   20.0%    20.0%   16.7%      42.1%       45.5%
information, data, research, etc.*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     83
The World Bank                                                    Cameroon                                    Country Survey 2013




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location
A. General Issues Facing Cameroon
In general, how would you say that Cameroon is headed in...?*

Percentage of Respondents                             Yaoundé       Douala    Other cities   Rural areas
The right direction                                    56.3%        44.4%       39.7%          28.6%
The wrong direction                                    11.3%        14.8%       16.7%          25.7%
Not sure                                               32.5%        40.7%       43.6%          45.7%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Cameroon. Please identify which of the following you
consider the most important development priorities in Cameroon. (Choose no more than 3)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé      Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Social protection                                        12.7%       15.4%      14.1%           2.9%
Transport                                                21.6%       19.2%      25.6%          20.0%
Public sector governance/ reform                         46.6%       50.0%      46.2%          40.0%
Global/regional integration                               0.8%        3.8%       1.3%           0.0%
Gender equity*                                            4.2%        0.0%       5.1%          14.3%
Domestic private sector development                       7.6%        7.7%       7.7%           0.0%
Foreign direct investment                                 2.1%        0.0%       1.3%           0.0%
Water and sanitation                                      6.4%       11.5%       1.3%           0.0%
Anti-corruption                                          27.1%       23.1%      26.9%          28.6%
Job creation/employment                                  18.6%        7.7%      24.4%           5.7%
Rural development                                         8.1%       11.5%      14.1%          20.0%
Financial markets                                         0.4%        0.0%       1.3%           0.0%
Urban development                                         4.2%        3.8%       5.1%           0.0%
Environmental sustainability                              3.0%        3.8%       6.4%           0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                   3.0%        3.8%       3.8%           5.7%
Health                                                   22.9%       34.6%      20.5%          34.3%
Education*                                               24.2%       38.5%      20.5%          48.6%
Poverty reduction                                        15.7%       15.4%      16.7%          20.0%
Energy                                                   14.4%       11.5%       9.0%           5.7%
Food security                                             3.4%        0.0%       1.3%           2.9%
Climate change*                                           0.4%        0.0%       3.8%           8.6%
Agricultural development                                 14.4%        0.0%      17.9%          14.3%
Trade and exports                                         0.4%        3.8%       0.0%           2.9%
Economic growth                                          11.9%        7.7%       3.8%           2.9%
Law and justice                                           7.6%       19.2%       9.0%           2.9%
Regulatory framework                                      2.5%        0.0%       1.3%           0.0%
Basic infrastructure*                                     8.1%        0.0%       1.3%           0.0%
Natural resource management                               5.9%        7.7%       6.4%          17.1%
Disaster management                                       0.4%        0.0%       1.3%           0.0%
Information and communications technology                 0.8%        0.0%       2.6%           2.9%
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                    84
The World Bank                                                    Cameroon                                 Country Survey 2013




A. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of
development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Cameroon?
(Choose no more than THREE)

Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé      Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Water and sanitation                                     10.3%       11.1%       3.8%           5.7%
Equality of opportunity                                   8.3%       11.1%       7.5%           5.7%
Economic growth                                          19.4%       11.1%      23.8%           8.6%
Climate change                                            2.1%        0.0%       0.0%           2.9%
Global/regional integration*                              1.2%       18.5%       2.5%           8.6%
Gender equity*                                            5.0%       14.8%      11.3%          20.0%
Rural development                                        20.2%       14.8%      22.5%          22.9%
Urban development                                         3.3%        0.0%       1.3%           0.0%
Regulatory framework                                      1.2%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%
Basic infrastructure                                     12.8%        3.7%       8.8%           8.6%
Social protection                                         8.7%        0.0%       6.3%           5.7%
Law and justice                                           7.0%       11.1%       7.5%          11.4%
Transport                                                16.1%       22.2%      15.0%          14.3%
Information and communications technology                 1.7%        0.0%       3.8%           0.0%
Anti-corruption                                          26.0%       25.9%      23.8%          25.7%
Domestic private sector development                      10.3%       11.1%      13.8%           0.0%
Foreign direct investment                                 2.1%        0.0%       1.3%           0.0%
Education*                                               18.2%       44.4%      13.8%          28.6%
Energy*                                                   6.6%       22.2%       8.8%          11.4%
Public sector governance/ reform                         29.8%       33.3%      36.3%          34.3%
Natural resource management                               9.1%        0.0%      13.8%          17.1%
Environmental sustainability                              1.7%        0.0%       2.5%           2.9%
Disaster management                                       0.4%        3.7%       0.0%           0.0%
Health                                                   10.3%       11.1%       7.5%          14.3%
Agricultural development                                 24.4%        3.7%      25.0%          22.9%
Job creation/employment                                  38.0%       18.5%      32.5%          22.9%
Financial markets                                         0.8%        0.0%       0.0%           2.9%
Trade and exports                                         0.4%        3.7%       0.0%           0.0%
Food security                                             4.1%        3.7%       7.5%           2.9%
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                    85
The World Bank                                                    Cameroon                                 Country Survey 2013




A. General Issues Facing Cameroon (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would
contribute most to generating economic growth in Cameroon? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé      Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Energy                                                   35.7%       29.6%      28.8%          22.9%
Gender equity                                             2.9%        0.0%       2.5%           8.6%
Equality of opportunity*                                  4.6%       25.9%      16.3%          20.0%
Social protection                                         4.1%        3.7%       1.3%           0.0%
Global/regional integration                               5.0%        3.7%       1.3%           0.0%
Climate change                                            1.2%        0.0%       2.5%           2.9%
Anti-corruption                                          27.4%       40.7%      27.5%          25.7%
Disaster management                                       0.0%        0.0%       2.5%           2.9%
Rural development*                                        8.7%        7.4%      17.5%          22.9%
Foreign direct investment*                                9.5%       22.2%       6.3%           2.9%
Urban development                                         0.8%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%
Water and sanitation                                      2.1%        0.0%       1.3%           0.0%
Education                                                 8.7%       14.8%       8.8%          20.0%
Information and communications technology                 3.7%        3.7%       2.5%           0.0%
Regulatory framework                                      3.3%        3.7%       2.5%           2.9%
Trade and exports                                        10.4%        3.7%       6.3%           5.7%
Public sector governance/ reform                         34.0%       33.3%      37.5%          37.1%
Domestic private sector development*                     30.7%        7.4%      22.5%           8.6%
Job creation/employment                                  19.5%       11.1%      22.5%          20.0%
Agricultural development                                 29.5%       14.8%      20.0%          25.7%
Food security*                                            1.2%        0.0%       5.0%           8.6%
Transport                                                15.4%       11.1%      21.3%          17.1%
Natural resource management                              13.7%       14.8%      15.0%          17.1%
Environmental sustainability*                             0.8%       11.1%       1.3%           2.9%
Health*                                                   6.2%       22.2%       3.8%          11.4%
Basic infrastructure                                     12.0%        3.7%       5.0%           2.9%
Law and justice                                           5.0%       11.1%      11.3%           8.6%
Financial markets                                         3.3%        0.0%       5.0%           2.9%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity” in your country, which of the following TWO best
illustrate how this would be achieved in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé      Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Better employment opportunities for young
                                                         38.1%        42.3%     39.4%          56.3%
people
Better employment opportunities for women*               4.6%         26.9%     15.5%          40.6%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor             11.0%        3.8%      11.3%          15.6%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to
                                                         17.4%        11.5%     22.5%          28.1%
help ensure greater accountability
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                     17.0%        15.4%     15.5%          15.6%
A growing middle class*                                  17.4%        23.1%     7.0%           0.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in
                                                         7.3%         3.8%      14.1%           9.4%
rural areas
Better opportunity for the poor who live in
                                                         2.3%         3.8%       2.8%           0.0%
urban areas
Consistent economic growth*                              17.9%        0.0%      18.3%           3.1%
More effective risk management                           2.3%         0.0%      0.0%            0.0%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                          8.7%         7.7%      9.9%            0.0%
Education and training that better ensure job
                                                         22.5%        30.8%     18.3%           9.4%
opportunity
Improved access to basic services                        22.9%        11.5%     16.9%          15.6%
Better quality public services                           8.7%         19.2%     8.5%           6.3%
Other                                                    1.4%         0.0%      0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                    86
The World Bank                                                        Cameroon                                                   Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank


                                                              Yaoundé                 Douala                Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                        N      Mean SD           N    Mean     SD      N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
 How familiar are you with the work of the World
                                                        240    5.86    2.09      27    5.56    2.78    78      5.15   1.68   34      5.41    1.93
 Bank in Cameroon?
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                              Yaoundé                 Douala                Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                        N      Mean SD           N    Mean     SD      N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
 Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                          222 5.75 1.80         23     5.09 2.35       76      5.08   1.89   34      5.38    1.84
 Bank’s effectiveness in Cameroon.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between geographic locations


                                                              Yaoundé                 Douala                Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                        N      Mean SD           N     Mean    SD      N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank's
 staff is well prepared to help Cameroon solve its      205 6.11 2.00            23    5.57 2.37       61    5.56     1.73   30      5.10    1.86
 most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between geographic locations

When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Cameroon,
in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in
Cameroon? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé          Douala         Other cities        Rural areas
Social protection                                         9.1%            3.7%             3.8%                5.7%
Public sector governance/ reform                         41.3%           44.4%            40.0%               37.1%
Transport                                                25.2%           14.8%            21.3%               22.9%
Poverty reduction                                        19.4%           14.8%            15.0%               11.4%
Global/regional integration                               0.8%            0.0%             1.3%                0.0%
Gender equity                                             3.3%           11.1%             8.8%               11.4%
Domestic private sector development                       9.1%           14.8%            13.8%                5.7%
Rural development                                        11.2%            3.7%            17.5%               17.1%
Foreign direct investment                                 2.1%            3.7%             1.3%                0.0%
Water and sanitation                                      6.6%            0.0%             3.8%                0.0%
Energy                                                   14.5%           14.8%            13.8%                8.6%
Job creation/employment                                  13.6%            3.7%            10.0%                8.6%
Financial markets                                         0.0%            0.0%             0.0%                0.0%
Urban development                                         4.5%            7.4%             3.8%                0.0%
Environmental sustainability                              3.7%            0.0%             5.0%                8.6%
Equality of opportunity*                                  5.4%           25.9%             7.5%                8.6%
Health*                                                  23.6%           44.4%            30.0%               42.9%
Education                                                24.0%           33.3%            23.8%               42.9%
Food security                                             3.7%            0.0%             1.3%                0.0%
Climate change                                            2.9%            0.0%             3.8%                5.7%
Agricultural development                                 16.9%            7.4%            17.5%               25.7%
Trade and exports                                         0.8%            0.0%             2.5%                2.9%
Economic growth                                          10.3%            0.0%             3.8%                5.7%
Law and justice*                                          5.0%           22.2%            10.0%                8.6%
Regulatory framework                                      2.5%            0.0%             1.3%                0.0%
Basic infrastructure                                     12.4%           11.1%            10.0%                2.9%
Natural resource management                               9.1%            3.7%             7.5%                8.6%
Anti-corruption                                          16.5%           14.8%            20.0%                5.7%
Information and communications technology                 1.7%            0.0%             2.5%                2.9%
Disaster management                                       0.0%            0.0%             0.0%                0.0%
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                        87
The World Bank                                                     Cameroon                                  Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
 second greatest value in Cameroon?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                Yaoundé      Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Financial resources: investment lending                   40.8%       30.8%      34.6%          46.7%
Financial resources: policy based lending /
                                                          17.2%        38.5%     23.1%           6.7%
budget support to the Government
Mobilizing third party financial resources                4.4%         15.4%     9.6%           0.0%
Technical assistance                                      7.8%         7.7%      3.8%           6.7%
Policy advice                                             4.4%         7.7%      5.8%           0.0%
Donor coordination                                        1.1%         0.0%      0.0%           6.7%
Data and information                                      3.9%         0.0%      1.9%           0.0%
Training/capacity building                                12.2%        0.0%      15.4%          20.0%
Studies/analyses                                          2.2%         0.0%      3.8%           0.0%
Convening/facilitating                                    0.0%         0.0%      0.0%           0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                             4.4%         0.0%      1.9%           13.3%
Other                                                     1.7%         0.0%      0.0%           0.0%


2nd Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                Yaoundé      Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Financial resources: investment lending                   12.6%        7.7%       5.9%          14.3%
Financial resources: policy based lending /
                                                          10.4%        7.7%       7.8%          14.3%
budget support to the Government
Mobilizing third party financial resources                9.3%         0.0%      11.8%          7.1%
Technical assistance                                      17.6%        30.8%     7.8%           21.4%
Policy advice                                             6.6%         7.7%      9.8%           14.3%
Donor coordination                                        8.2%         7.7%      9.8%           0.0%
Data and information                                      2.2%         0.0%      2.0%           0.0%
Training/capacity building                                12.1%        15.4%     19.6%          28.6%
Studies/analyses                                          9.9%         0.0%      9.8%           0.0%
Convening/facilitating                                    0.5%         0.0%      3.9%           0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                             9.9%         23.1%     9.8%           0.0%
Other                                                     0.5%         0.0%      2.0%           0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Cameroon?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                     Yaoundé      Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Staff too inaccessible                                    14.7%       36.0%      20.8%          20.6%
Not exploring alternative policy options                   8.0%        8.0%       0.0%           2.9%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social
                                                          31.5%        24.0%     22.1%          38.2%
realities in Cameroon
Not enough public disclosure of its work                  18.1%        16.0%     18.2%           8.8%
Arrogant in its approach*                                 2.5%         24.0%     2.6%            0.0%
Not aligned with country priorities                       9.2%         0.0%      3.9%            2.9%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                     1.3%         0.0%      2.6%            2.9%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and
                                                          19.3%        20.0%     32.5%          26.5%
reform efforts in the country
Too influenced by developed countries                     19.3%        24.0%     27.3%          38.2%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard
                                                          16.0%        4.0%      11.7%          14.7%
to political realities
World Bank processes too slow and complex                 16.4%        12.0%     14.3%           5.9%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                          6.7%         4.0%       7.8%           8.8%
procedures
Not aligned with other donors’ work                       3.4%         0.0%      1.3%           2.9%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors            22.7%        28.0%     31.2%          23.5%
Not client focused                                        0.4%         0.0%      1.3%           0.0%
Other                                                     2.9%         0.0%      1.3%           0.0%
 *Significantly different between geographic locations


                                                                     88
The World Bank                                                        Cameroon                                                   Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                              Yaoundé                 Douala                Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                        N      Mean SD           N     Mean    SD      N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank
 SHOULD seek to influence the global
                                                        226    7.65    1.95      23    7.22    2.58    77      7.04   2.20   31      6.74    2.18
 development agenda as related to “global public
 goods”?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of
the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better
development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé          Douala         Other cities        Rural areas
NGOs*                                                    32.6%           40.7%            52.5%               42.9%
Local Government                                         45.5%           48.1%            37.5%               62.9%
Beneficiaries                                            21.1%           33.3%            17.5%               20.0%
Private Sector*                                          30.6%           25.9%             7.5%                2.9%
Community-Based Organizations*                           19.0%           11.1%            27.5%               40.0%
Donor Community                                          10.7%            3.7%             6.3%                5.7%
Foundations                                               0.8%            3.7%             2.5%                0.0%
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                 17.8%           22.2%            21.3%               20.0%
Parliament                                                5.4%            0.0%             6.3%                0.0%
Media                                                     7.4%            3.7%            11.3%                5.7%
Faith-Based Organizations                                 5.0%            3.7%             3.8%                0.0%
Other                                                     1.7%            0.0%             3.8%                0.0%
*Significantly different between geographic locations


To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Cameroon?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                              Yaoundé                 Douala                Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                        N      Mean SD           N    Mean     SD      N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
                                                        232    6.06    2.28      25    5.20    2.45    70      5.64   1.94   33      5.58    2.25
role in development in Cameroon*
The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
                                                      221      5.46    2.30      24    5.00    2.50    69      5.17   1.93   33      5.03    2.04
consider the development priorities for Cameroon
The World Bank supports programs and strategies
                                                      223      5.78    2.16      25    5.20    2.22    74      5.43   2.04   33      5.24    2.26
that are realistic for Cameroon
The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
                                                      198      5.99    2.35      24    4.67    2.01    58      5.33   1.91   32      5.41    1.60
Cameroon with respect*
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                        89
The World Bank                                                           Cameroon                                                      Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Cameroon, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                 Yaoundé                  Douala                  Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                           N      Mean SD           N      Mean    SD        N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
Responsiveness*                                            182    5.34    1.94      25     3.96    1.90      56      5.20   1.81   32      4.50    1.72
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products
                                                           187    5.06    1.85      24     3.71    1.71      57      4.68   1.90   32      4.47    1.57
and services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                           184    5.15    1.85      24     4.21    2.21      57      5.05   2.00   31      4.58    1.29
circumstances)
Being inclusive*                                           172    5.77    2.04      23     4.52    2.37      53      5.26   1.89   28      4.61    1.34
Openness (sharing data and other information)*             200    6.16    2.19      26     4.62    2.40      66      5.70   2.07   32      5.13    2.11
Staff accessibility*                                       208    5.09    2.41      24     3.50    1.87      61      4.02   2.19   32      3.56    2.38
Straightforwardness and honesty*                           183    5.89    2.41      22     5.09    2.71      58      5.28   2.55   33      4.36    2.63
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                           196    5.35    2.03      25     4.52    2.16      65      5.03   1.91   33      5.06    1.54
Government
Collaboration with the Government*                         209    7.53    1.79      25     6.44    2.60      69      6.83   2.07   32      6.16    2.10
Collaboration with other donors*                      189         6.96    1.96      22     5.45    2.70      58      6.53   2.12   28      5.75    1.99
The speed in which it gets things accomplished
                                                      184         5.17    1.93      24     3.42    1.91      60      4.85   1.84   30      4.70    1.78
on the ground*
Follow through over time*                             191         6.01    1.93      22     5.14    2.83      55      5.18   1.99   30      5.53    1.81
*Significantly different between geographic locations


When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                       Yaoundé               Douala       Other cities          Rural areas
The World Bank works too slowly                             13.1%                 7.7%           9.1%                  5.7%
The Government works inefficiently                          28.8%                38.5%          20.8%                 14.3%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil
                                                            39.4%                50.0%             49.4%               48.6%
society participation
Poor donor coordination                                        7.6%              3.8%              5.2%                2.9%
The World Bank does not do adequate follow
                                                            14.0%                11.5%             11.7%               8.6%
through/follow-up
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in
                                                            13.6%                11.5%             5.2%                14.3%
Government
Political pressures and obstacles                           22.9%                19.2%             16.9%               20.0%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of
                                                            21.2%                23.1%             37.7%               37.1%
country challenges*
The World Bank is not sensitive enough to
                                                            33.9%                34.6%             44.2%               45.7%
political/social realities on the ground
Other                                                          1.3%              0.0%              0.0%                0.0%
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                           90
The World Bank                                                           Cameroon                                                  Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Cameroon? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                 Yaoundé                 Douala               Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                           N      Mean SD           N     Mean    SD     N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                            205    5.03    2.21      25    4.96    2.76   68      5.03   2.05   32      4.69    2.02
Information and communications technology                  170    5.19    1.92      23    4.30    2.70   57      5.05   1.66   30      4.80    1.63
Transport                                                  200    5.84    2.06      26    5.35    2.67   67      5.55   1.97   31      5.71    1.53
Law and justice                                            160    4.52    2.08      24    4.42    2.26   56      4.79   1.62   31      5.06    1.21
Urban development                                          186    5.61    1.95      25    5.28    2.62   61      5.38   1.69   31      5.16    1.42
Environmental sustainability*                              187    6.02    1.94      23    4.96    2.72   66      5.38   1.67   33      5.88    1.52
Regulatory framework                                       165    5.44    1.95      21    4.67    2.39   51      5.47   1.38   31      5.39    1.48
Basic infrastructure                                       193    5.58    1.97      24    4.54    1.91   63      5.51   1.93   32      5.66    1.73
Poverty reduction                                          199    5.47    2.09      24    4.46    2.34   69      5.26   1.73   31      5.58    1.95
Gender equity*                                             160    5.56    2.02      20    4.20    3.19   58      4.40   2.03   33      4.03    2.31
Domestic private sector development                        164    4.68    1.77      22    3.77    2.25   55      4.31   1.64   28      4.21    1.64
Foreign direct investment*                                 149    5.40    1.95      17    4.18    2.48   50      4.76   1.48   29      5.03    1.96
Water and sanitation                                       181    5.35    2.01      23    4.30    2.16   62      5.32   1.75   29      5.45    1.72
Trade and exports*                                         150    4.91    1.88      21    3.67    1.98   51      5.10   1.55   27      5.07    1.62
Economic growth                                            186    5.44    2.04      23    4.26    2.47   62      5.27   1.56   30      5.60    1.87
Energy                                                     197    5.81    2.17      24    4.92    2.89   61      5.31   1.90   32      5.81    1.67
Disaster management*                                       156    4.85    2.15      19    3.37    1.95   53      4.92   1.76   29      5.17    1.95
Public sector governance/ reform                           204    5.36    2.29      25    5.04    2.85   64      5.47   1.63   30      5.37    1.33
Job creation/employment                                    184    4.45    1.99      23    3.48    2.06   63      4.25   1.68   29      4.38    1.45
Financial markets                                          141    4.59    1.98      17    4.47    2.40   49      4.39   1.61   26      4.54    1.14
Equality of opportunity*                                   159    4.84    2.22      19    3.26    1.94   55      3.89   2.07   30      3.53    1.68
Health*                                                    199    5.96    1.97      24    4.63    2.32   64      5.81   2.25   29      5.45    1.55
Rural development*                                         197    5.46    2.11      24    4.08    2.36   65      4.88   1.91   33      5.61    1.73
Global/regional integration                                169    5.34    2.22      20    4.60    2.52   56      5.50   2.21   30      5.47    1.74
Food security                                              182    5.25    2.08      22    4.23    2.45   63      5.21   1.72   31      5.39    1.89
Education*                                                 195    5.95    1.97      25    4.36    2.45   67      5.63   1.77   31      6.13    1.86
Social protection*                                         166    4.19    2.02      22    2.68    1.70   54      4.15   1.57   28      4.79    1.85
Climate change                                             172    5.43    2.17      22    4.45    2.58   59      5.17   1.73   30      5.97    2.11
Agricultural development                                   190    5.75    2.12      22    4.91    2.69   67      5.16   1.65   31      5.77    2.05
Natural resource management                           177         5.33    2.12      23    5.04    2.88   62      5.08   1.55   32      5.78    1.91
*Significantly different between geographic locations


                                                                 Yaoundé                 Douala               Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                           N      Mean SD           N     Mean    SD     N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
To what extent does the World Bank’s work help
                                                           224    5.85    1.72      25    5.16    2.17   69      5.67   1.67   31      5.42    1.69
to achieve development results in Cameroon?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Cameroon?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                 Yaoundé                 Douala               Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                           N      Mean SD           N    Mean     SD     N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
The World Bank's financial instruments meet the
                                                           219    5.56    2.11      25    4.84    2.43   66      4.86   1.77   31      4.84    1.61
needs of Cameroon*
The World Bank meets Cameroon’s needs for
                                                      215         5.53    2.01      23    4.83    2.42   66      5.32   1.96   31      4.94    1.32
knowledge services
*Significantly different between geographic locations



                                                                           91
The World Bank                                                        Cameroon                                                        Country Survey 2013




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*

Percentage of Respondents                               Yaoundé               Douala            Other cities        Rural areas
Weekly                                                   10.2%                14.8%                5.2%                5.7%
Monthly                                                  23.3%                22.2%               14.3%                5.7%
A few times a year                                       44.9%                29.6%               37.7%               25.7%
Rarely                                                   16.9%                22.2%               39.0%               34.3%
Never                                                     4.7%                11.1%                3.9%               28.6%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

When thinking about the development challenges in Cameroon, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the
 World Bank to focus its knowledge work and activities in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé               Douala            Other cities        Rural areas
Public sector governance/ reform                         46.7%                44.4%               41.6%               54.3%
Gender equity                                             4.2%                11.1%                9.1%                8.6%
Domestic private sector development                      13.3%                14.8%               23.4%                8.6%
Foreign direct investment                                 4.6%                 7.4%                2.6%                2.9%
Water and sanitation                                      6.3%                 3.7%                7.8%                0.0%
Trade and exports                                         1.7%                 7.4%                1.3%                2.9%
Energy                                                   12.9%                11.1%               15.6%               14.3%
Disaster management*                                      0.0%                 0.0%                2.6%                0.0%
Social protection                                        12.1%                11.1%                2.6%                8.6%
Climate change                                            4.2%                 3.7%                9.1%                0.0%
Poverty reduction                                        16.7%                 3.7%               14.3%                8.6%
Law and justice*                                          6.3%                18.5%               10.4%               20.0%
Anti-corruption                                          20.4%                22.2%               20.8%               22.9%
Financial markets                                         2.1%                 0.0%                1.3%                0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                   3.8%                 7.4%                1.3%                5.7%
Urban development                                         3.8%                11.1%                9.1%                8.6%
Education*                                               19.2%                40.7%               27.3%               31.4%
Global/regional integration                               1.7%                 0.0%                3.9%                0.0%
Information and communications technology                 5.0%                 7.4%                2.6%                2.9%
Transport                                                14.6%                11.1%               10.4%               20.0%
Agricultural development                                 15.0%                 3.7%               14.3%               17.1%
Natural resource management                              12.9%                 0.0%               10.4%                8.6%
Job creation/employment                                  15.4%                11.1%               14.3%                0.0%
Health*                                                  12.1%                29.6%               11.7%               22.9%
Economic growth                                          13.8%                 7.4%                6.5%                2.9%
Rural development*                                        8.8%                 0.0%               14.3%               22.9%
Food security                                             1.3%                 0.0%                2.6%                2.9%
Environmental sustainability                              5.4%                 0.0%                5.2%                2.9%
Regulatory framework                                      2.9%                 7.4%                0.0%                0.0%
Basic infrastructure*                                    10.4%                 3.7%                2.6%                0.0%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

In Cameroon, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities are at:
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

                                                              Yaoundé                  Douala                  Other Cities            Rural Areas
                                                        N      Mean SD           N      Mean      SD      N      Mean SD          N      Mean SD
Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills*                 218    5.61    2.04      25     4.24     2.60     67      4.88   2.13     30      5.13    1.85
Contributing to good policy making*                     204    5.81    2.01      24     4.87     2.44     67      5.54   1.74     30      5.00    1.46
Providing support for program implementation*         221      6.25    1.88      26     5.35     2.73     66      6.02   1.68     30      5.27    1.66
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                        92
The World Bank                                                           Cameroon                                                    Country Survey 2013




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Cameroon, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                 Yaoundé                 Douala                 Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                           N      Mean SD           N     Mean    SD      N       Mean SD        N      Mean SD
Are timely*                                                196    5.14    1.80      24    3.83    2.04    60       4.63   1.81   30      4.60    1.28
Include appropriate level of stakeholder
                                                           210    5.12    2.02      25    4.00    1.89    67       4.93   1.87   32      4.72    1.71
involvement during preparation*
Are relevant to Cameroon’s development
                                                           220    5.81    1.94      26    5.12    2.67    67       5.63   1.75   31      5.23    1.89
priorities
Provide feasible recommendations                           207    5.80    1.99      24    5.25    2.66    62       5.48   1.79   31      5.16    1.49
Are accessible (well written and easy to
                                                           214    5.94    1.96      24    4.17    1.99    68       5.24   1.86   31      4.87    1.54
understand)*
Are source of relevant information on global good
                                                           212    6.54    2.02      22    5.36    2.56    68       6.09   2.01   30      5.13    1.74
practices*
Are useful in terms of the work you do*                    218    6.43    2.17      26    4.54    2.58    66       5.68   2.14   31      5.23    1.84
Are adequately disseminated                                212    5.02    1.96      25    4.60    2.78    66       4.45   1.88   31      4.29    1.37
Are appropriately translated*                         194         4.78    2.72      22    4.23    3.05    66       3.85   2.46   30      3.80    1.45
Are adaptable to Cameroon’s specific
development challenges and country                    213         5.96    2.12      23    5.00    2.49    69       5.83   2.20   31      5.13    1.78
circumstances
*Significantly different between geographic locations


                                                                 Yaoundé                 Douala                 Other Cities          Rural Areas
                                                           N      Mean SD           N    Mean     SD      N       Mean SD        N      Mean SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the World Bank's knowledge work and
                                                           222    6.13    1.85      21    5.19    2.16    71       5.70   1.49   33      5.94    1.84
activities make to development results in your
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality
of the World Bank's knowledge work and                     219    6.68    1.75      24    6.13    2.05    68       5.96   1.74   33      5.82    1.78
activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                           93
The World Bank                                                        Cameroon                                                          Country Survey 2013




E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                              Yaoundé                   Douala                  Other Cities             Rural Areas
                                                        N      Mean SD            N      Mean    SD        N      Mean SD           N      Mean SD
The World Bank disburses funds promptly*                191    4.77    2.17      20      3.70    1.95      62      3.92    1.70     28      4.14    1.43
The World Bank effectively monitors and
                                                        224    6.41    2.09      25      5.92    2.61      68      5.68    2.02     32      5.19    1.82
evaluates the projects and programs it supports*
The World Bank's approvals and reviews are done
                                                        201    5.25    1.94      22      4.14    2.05      63      4.89    1.69     32      4.91    1.51
in a timely fashion*
The World Bank's “Safeguard Policy”
                                                        178    5.70    2.06      21      4.43    2.14      62      5.32    2.04     28      5.14    1.82
requirements are reasonable*
The World Bank's conditions on its lending are
                                                        181    5.47    2.16      24      4.38    2.83      58      4.40    1.81     27      4.63    1.90
reasonable*
Working with the World Bank increases
                                                        224    6.40    2.11      26      5.08    2.67      68      6.12    2.00     31      5.61    2.19
Cameroon's institutional capacity*
The World Bank ensures consistency and
                                                        149    5.58    2.06      19      5.42    2.65      54      5.11    2.10     28      5.07    1.65
continuity through staff changes
The World Bank's teams and visits are well
                                                        177    6.54    2.03      21      5.19    2.84      56      5.43    1.82     30      5.43    2.18
coordinated*
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                        181    6.52    1.97      22      6.14    2.32      59      6.00    1.89     27      5.07    1.96
Bank makes appropriate use of them*
The World Bank provides effective
                                                      207      6.51    2.05      22      6.18    2.91      64      5.95    1.91     31      5.39    2.11
implementation support*
*Significantly different between geographic locations


F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Cameroon

                                                              Yaoundé                   Douala                  Other Cities             Rural Areas
                                                        N      Mean SD            N      Mean    SD        N      Mean SD           N      Mean SD
 How significant a role do you believe the World
 Bank SHOULD play in Cameroon’s development in 237 7.76 1.91                       24    6.58 2.75      76     7.46        2.04     34      7.35    2.27
 the near future?*
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role) *Significantly different between geographic locations

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Cameroon?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé               Douala             Other cities             Rural areas
Improve the quality of its experts as related to
                                                          30.7%               55.6%                   34.7%                 51.4%
Cameroon’s specific challenges*
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank
                                                          41.6%               29.6%                   49.3%                 34.3%
financing
Focus primarily on advocacy issues                        12.2%                  7.4%                   8.0%                14.3%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing
                                                            9.7%              14.8%                   13.3%                 14.3%
compared to markets
Reach out more to groups outside of
                                                          52.1%               55.6%                   65.3%                 51.4%
government
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                      3.4%                 3.7%                   4.0%                 0.0%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                          11.8%               14.8%                     6.7%                14.3%
statistics/figures on Cameroon’s economy
Offer more innovative financial products                   9.2%               11.1%                     5.3%                 5.7%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                   8.0%                0.0%                     4.0%                 8.6%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services*               0.0%                0.0%                     2.7%                 0.0%
Work faster*                                              14.7%                3.7%                     2.7%                 5.7%
Other                                                      1.7%                0.0%                     2.7%                 0.0%
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                        94
The World Bank                                                    Cameroon                                     Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Cameroon?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé          Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Local newspapers                                         50.6%           42.3%      50.6%          57.1%
International newspapers                                 15.9%           30.8%      15.2%          17.1%
Local radio*                                             10.9%            3.8%      15.2%          28.6%
International radio                                      11.3%           19.2%      15.2%          11.4%
Local television                                         23.8%           15.4%      16.5%           8.6%
International television                                 17.6%           19.2%      20.3%          28.6%
Periodicals                                              12.1%           19.2%       5.1%           8.6%
Internet                                                 44.4%           46.2%      46.8%          22.9%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                 3.8%            0.0%       3.8%           5.7%
Blogs                                                     0.0%            0.0%       1.3%           0.0%
Mobile phones*                                            0.4%            0.0%       6.3%           2.9%
Instant messaging                                         0.4%            0.0%       0.0%           0.0%
Other                                                     5.9%            0.0%       2.5%           0.0%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé          Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
World Bank website                                       33.8%           48.1%      34.2%          15.6%
Direct contact with World Bank                           32.1%           25.9%      25.3%          31.3%
e-Newsletters*                                           35.8%           33.3%      35.4%           3.1%
Instant messaging                                         6.3%            0.0%       3.8%           3.1%
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                42.1%           29.6%      48.1%          62.5%
World Bank Public Information Center                      7.1%           14.8%       5.1%           6.3%
World Bank publications and other written
                                                         24.6%            18.5%     13.9%          21.9%
materials
Mobile phones*                                            4.6%            0.0%      17.7%          21.9%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                 9.6%            11.1%      6.3%          6.3%
Blogs                                                     0.8%            0.0%       0.0%          3.1%
Other                                                     0.0%            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?

Percentage of Respondents                               Yaoundé          Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Yes                                                      27.2%           26.9%      28.4%          17.9%
No                                                       72.8%           73.1%      71.6%          82.1%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?*

Percentage of Respondents                               Yaoundé          Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Yes                                                      17.8%              -        5.6%          14.3%
No                                                       82.2%           100.0%     94.4%          85.7%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

Were you able to obtain this information?*

Percentage of Respondents                               Yaoundé          Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Yes                                                      53.7%              -       37.5%           6.7%
No                                                       46.3%           100.0%     62.5%          93.3%
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                    95
The World Bank                                                        Cameroon                                                     Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                               Yaoundé               Douala           Other cities          Rural areas
Yes                                                      95.1%                100.0%             98.6%                 71.0%
No                                                        4.9%                   -                1.4%                 29.0%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*

Percentage of Respondents                               Yaoundé               Douala           Other cities          Rural areas
Yes                                                      68.0%                84.6%              59.5%                 48.4%
No                                                       32.0%                15.4%              40.5%                 51.6%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

Which do you primarily use?

Percentage of Respondents                               Yaoundé               Douala           Other cities          Rural areas
The World Bank’s country website                         40.8%                19.0%              46.7%                 47.4%
The World Bank’s main website                            59.2%                81.0%              53.3%                 52.6%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank website?*

Percentage of Respondents                               Yaoundé               Douala           Other cities          Rural areas
High speed                                               56.9%                54.2%              24.6%                 25.0%
Dial-up                                                  43.1%                45.8%              75.4%                 75.0%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                              Yaoundé                 Douala               Other Cities             Rural Areas
                                                        N      Mean SD           N     Mean    SD      N     Mean SD           N      Mean SD
I use/consult World Bank data more often than I
                                                        217    5.68    2.56      23    4.48    2.76   67      4.82    2.33     28      4.54    2.10
did a few years ago.*
I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate.*       179    6.35    2.00      23    5.39    2.95   54      5.69    2.35     24      4.79    2.27
I find the information on the World Bank’s
                                                        182    7.35    1.89      22    6.59    2.38   55      6.35    2.16     23      5.00    2.43
websites useful.*
When I need information from the World Bank I
                                                        197    5.50    2.61      24    5.29    3.30   62      4.71    2.69     25      4.44    2.00
know how to find it.
The World Bank is responsive to my information
                                                        162    5.93    2.45      17    3.76    2.44   53      4.83    2.40     25      4.28    2.35
requests and inquiries.*
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                        96
The World Bank                                                    Cameroon                                     Country Survey 2013




H. Background Information

Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?*

Percentage of Respondents                               Yaoundé          Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Yes                                                      44.0%           18.5%      17.7%          20.6%
No                                                       56.0%           81.5%      82.3%          79.4%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                    Yaoundé          Douala   Other cities   Rural areas
Observer*                                                27.6%           23.1%      43.4%          53.6%
Use World Bank reports/data                              32.6%           34.6%      26.3%          17.9%
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored
                                                         33.9%           19.2%      27.6%          39.3%
events/activities
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*           40.6%           30.8%      11.8%          14.3%
Use World Bank website for information, data,
                                                         28.5%           38.5%      43.4%          28.6%
research, etc.
*Significantly different between geographic locations




                                                                    97
The World Bank                                                        Cameroon                                               Country Survey 2013




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys 1

FY 2005 N=170             FY 2009 N=258             FY 2013 N=403
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank


                                                                        FY 2005                      FY 2009                FY 2013
                                                                  N      Mean SD              N       Mean SD         N      Mean SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World
                                                                155       6.32     2.12     250       5.97     2.43   396    5.65      2.05
Bank in Cameroon?^
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) ^Significantly different between FY13 and FY05 surveys


                                                                        FY 2005                      FY 2009                FY 2013
                                                                  N      Mean SD              N       Mean SD         N      Mean SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                                162       5.64     1.77     236       5.19     1.86   369    5.52      1.88
Bank’s effectiveness in Cameroon.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between FY13 and FY09 surveys

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Cameroon?

                                                                        FY 2005                      FY 2009                FY 2013
                                                                  N      Mean SD              N       Mean SD         N      Mean SD
Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
                                                                161       6.15     2.28     235       5.64     2.12   370    5.89      2.25
role in development in Cameroon
The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
consider the development priorities for                         158       5.39     2.05     223       4.75     2.09   357    5.37      2.21
Cameroon*
The World Bank supports programs and strategies
                                                                162       5.48     2.19     153       5.23     2.21   365    5.65      2.15
that are realistic for Cameroon*
The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
                                                                132       6.07     2.35     199       5.88     2.16   322    5.71      2.22
Cameroon with respect
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY13 and FY09 surveys



To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Cameroon, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                        FY 2005                      FY 2009                FY 2013
                                                                  N      Mean       SD        N      Mean      SD     N     Mean        SD
Staff accessibility^*                                           155       5.60     2.07     135       5.20     2.69   334    4.61      2.41
Straightforwardness and honesty^*                               149       6.38     2.56     139       6.62     2.70   305    5.55      2.52
^Significantly different between FY13 and FY05 surveys *Significantly different between FY13 and FY09 surveys




1
    Only those questions with similar response options/scales could be included in these comparisons.


                                                                        98
The World Bank                                                     Cameroon                                            Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Cameroon? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

                                                                     FY 2005                   FY 2009                 FY 2013
                                                               N      Mean SD             N     Mean SD          N      Mean SD
Anti-corruption^                                              158      4.46    2.44     197      4.68     2.60   343    4.98     2.24
Transport^                                                    152      5.01    2.33     186      5.74     2.42   334    5.72     2.05
Law and justice                                                                         183      4.81     2.48   280    4.67     1.95
Urban development^                                            146      4.64    2.10     191      5.39     2.60   315    5.47     1.92
Regulatory framework                                                                    177      5.60     2.40   279    5.36     1.85
Basic infrastructure^*                                        153      6.04    2.00     203      6.18     2.45   323    5.44     1.99
Poverty reduction                                             158      5.27    1.97     213      5.15     2.29   334    5.33     2.04
Gender equity^*                                               150      5.61    2.23     178      5.90     2.52   279    5.05     2.25
Domestic private sector development^*                         146      5.41    2.32     187      5.39     2.36   279    4.47     1.80
Economic growth                                               153      5.43    1.87     193      5.24     2.22   314    5.31     1.99
Energy^                                                       151      4.50    2.18     188      5.66     2.63   324    5.60     2.16
Health^*                                                      151      6.36    2.03     195      6.33     2.32   328    5.73     2.08
Global/regional integration                                                             182      5.31     2.56   286    5.31     2.19
Education                                                     152      5.87    2.41     190      5.87     2.41   329    5.71     2.05
Agricultural development^                                     145      6.04    2.13     190      5.78     2.58   319    5.52     2.09
Natural resource management^*                                 153      5.75    2.04     189      5.96     2.51   303    5.28     2.08
^Significantly different between FY13 and FY05 surveys *Significantly different between FY13 and FY09 surveys




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Cameroon, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                     FY 2005                   FY 2009                 FY 2013
                                                               N      Mean SD             N     Mean SD          N      Mean SD
Are source of relevant information on global good
                                                              146      7.13    1.86     216      6.53     2.42   345    6.21     2.08
practices^
Are useful in terms of the work you do*                                                 225      7.67     1.98   351    6.05     2.24
Are adequately disseminated*                                                            218      6.44     2.50   346    4.79     2.00
Are adaptable to Cameroon’s specific
development challenges and country                            152      5.31    1.97     219      4.99     2.25   349    5.77     2.16
circumstances^*
^Significantly different between FY13 and FY05 surveys *Significantly different between FY13 and FY09 surveys




                                                                     99
The World Bank                                                         Cameroon                                        Country Survey 2013




E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                         FY 2005                 FY 2009               FY 2013
                                                                   N      Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
The World Bank effectively monitors and
                                                  107                      6.83     2.12   137    6.58    2.27   364    6.08     2.14
evaluates the projects and programs it supports^*
The World Bank's conditions on its lending are
                                                                                           130    6.04    2.23   303    5.07     2.20
reasonable*
Working with the World Bank increases
                                                                   105     6.82     2.21   133    6.47    2.16   363    6.18     2.17
Cameroon's institutional capacity^
^Significantly different between FY13 and FY05 surveys *Significantly different between FY13 and FY09 surveys




G. Communication and Information Sharing

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                                FY 2005               FY 2009         FY 2013
Yes                                                          -                  96.3%           94.3%
No                                                           -                   3.7%            5.7%
*Significantly different between geographic locations

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?^*

Percentage of Respondents                             FY 2005              FY 2009            FY 2013
Yes                                                    43.7%                58.1%              66.2%
No                                                     56.3%                41.9%              33.8%
^Significantly different between FY13 and FY05 surveys *Significantly different between FY13 and FY09 surveys

Which do you primarily use?

Percentage of Respondents                                FY 2005               FY 2009         FY 2013
The World Bank’s country website                             -                  45.0%           41.3%
The World Bank’s main website                                -                  55.0%           58.7%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                         FY 2005                 FY 2009               FY 2013
                                                                   N      Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N      Mean SD
I find the information on the World Bank’s
                                                                                           153    7.78    2.02   289    6.91     2.12
websites useful.*
*Significantly different between FY13 and FY09 surveys




                                                                         100
The World Bank                                                                                                                       Cameroon                                                                                                             Country Survey 2013


Appendix E: Responses to Sector Effectiveness Questions by Specialization

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Cameroon? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Public sector
                                                                                                           Health /                                                   Natural                    governance /
                                        Agriculture/                                                    communicable                                    Law and      resource     Private sector     public
                                            rural                              Financial Gender equity      /non-      Information                      justice /  management / development /      financial
                                      development /                            markets /  / equality of communicable    and comm.     Job creation/   regulatory environmental foreign direct mgmt. / anti-        Social                   Urban     Water and
                                       food security   Education    Energy      banking   opportunity     diseases      technology    employment      framework    sustainability investment      corruption     protection   Transport development   sanitation        Other
                                         N     Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean     N     Mean     N    Mean      N     Mean     N      Mean   N     Mean     N     Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean   N     Mean    N      Mean
Anti-corruption                         36    5.17     38   4.92   13   5.31   3    5.00    14    4.64   20    5.05    14    4.93      9      4.78    27    4.85     22    5.09     5     4.80    42     5.26    11   3.91    8    6.63   13   6.08   8      5.13   38     4.39
Information and comm. technology        33    5.48     34   4.74   12   5.58   2    4.50    14    5.36   17    4.24    15    4.60      6      3.67    23    4.30     14    5.07     6     5.67    31     5.19    9    5.22    5    6.00   7    6.29   6      5.50   36     5.11
Transport                               34    6.12     34   5.00   12   5.67   3    6.67    17    5.59   21    5.24    15    5.67      6      4.00    29    5.66     20    5.45     6     5.50    39     6.05    10   5.90    8    5.63   12   6.50   8      6.00   41     6.44
Law and justice*                        27    5.11     34   4.21   8    3.88   2    6.00    14    5.14   17    3.41    16    4.19      6      3.33    27    4.04     15    5.27     5     5.00    34     5.12    9    5.33    6    5.17   7    5.14   6      5.67   30     4.63
Urban development                       30    5.60     36   5.00   10   5.40   3    5.33    17    5.65   18    5.11    15    5.20      5      4.20    26    5.12     18    5.78     6     5.33    37     5.65    10   5.60    7    5.71   12   6.17   7      6.86   37     5.81
Environmental sustainability            36    6.28     36   5.44   12   6.17   3    6.67    15    5.53   18    5.61    14    4.86      5      5.00    25    5.08     24    6.08     6     5.67    36     5.83    10   5.80    7    6.57   10   6.20   7      7.43   37     5.84
Regulatory framework                    29    6.31     30   5.00   11   5.64   1    7.00    12    5.33   17    4.47    12    5.17      5      5.40    21    4.71     17    5.65     6     5.50    35     5.60    9    4.89    7    5.29   11   5.45   6      6.17   31     5.42
Basic infrastructure                    29    6.03     36   5.36   12   5.92   3    7.00    15    5.00   20    4.50    14    4.57      6      4.83    26    5.38     19    5.42     6     5.50    40     5.83    11   5.27    8    5.25   12   6.25   8      5.13   38     5.76
Poverty reduction                       35    5.83     35   5.29   11   5.91   3    6.67    17    5.00   19    5.21    15    4.80      6      4.33    28    4.96     21    5.52     6     5.33    42     5.55    10   5.60    8    5.00   10   5.40   8      4.38   39     5.44
Gender equity                           31    5.58     31   4.45   10   6.00   3    5.67    14    3.86   18    5.11    14    5.21      5      4.20    25    5.36     15    4.27     6     4.17    33     4.91    9    4.78    7    6.71   7    5.29   5      6.00   30     5.37
Domestic private sector development     28    4.96     28   4.21   10   4.80   2    5.50    13    4.38   17    4.24    14    4.07      5      4.20    20    4.40     15    4.67     6     4.50    34     4.65    11   3.82    7    4.00   8    4.25   7      5.14   35     4.51
Foreign direct investment               25    5.44     30   5.03   13   4.92   2    6.00    13    4.92   15    4.87    10    4.80      6      4.00    19    5.05     14    5.71     4     4.00    31     5.26    8    5.00    5    4.60   7    4.29   6      6.67   28     5.50
Water and sanitation                    32    5.78     36   4.92   12   5.25   3    5.67    14    5.00   18    4.44    11    4.64      6      4.00    26    5.38     17    5.88     6     5.00    37     5.38    10   5.10    6    5.00   11   5.73   8      5.25   34     5.53
Trade and exports                       26    5.42     31   4.84   10   4.30   2    4.00    14    5.57   17    4.53    10    4.60      5      3.40    23    4.78     12    4.50     5     4.40    31     4.97    10   6.10    7    2.86   7    5.29   4      5.25   27     5.04
Economic growth                         34    5.94     35   5.09   12   5.67   3    5.33    14    5.50   18    5.39    13    4.46      6      4.33    28    5.07     17    5.88     6     4.83    36     5.50    11   4.82    8    4.75   11   4.73   6      7.17   36     5.31
Energy                                  35    6.23     34   4.88   15   6.20   3    6.67    15    5.27   19    5.47    15    5.47      6      4.33    27    5.22     22    6.23     6     5.33    38     6.03    10   5.00    6    5.00   10   6.10   8      6.00   36     5.69
Disaster management                     29    5.62     33   4.70   9    4.22   1    5.00    13    4.15   15    3.47    15    4.60      4      4.75    23    4.61     14    5.36     6     5.00    32     5.38    7    5.14    7    5.29   6    4.67   6      5.00   28     4.39
Public sector governance/reform*        35    6.23     36   4.25   12   5.83   3    5.33    14    5.43   18    5.11    16    4.56      9      5.00    27    5.07     19    5.89     6     5.50    43     6.05    11   4.73    8    4.63   11   4.73   6      6.50   40     5.65
Job creation/employment                 34    4.76     36   4.39   12   4.42   2    3.50    13    3.77   19    3.63    15    3.87      9      4.56    25    4.12     18    4.33     6     4.83    34     4.74    11   3.91    8    4.25   10   4.80   5      6.00   35     3.97
Financial markets                       24    5.00     28   4.11   9    3.44   1    4.00    13    4.69   13    4.46    12    5.00      7      4.29    20    4.25     11    4.45     5     4.60    32     5.06    8    5.25    5    4.40   8    5.00   3      4.00   25     4.20
Equality of opportunity                 29    4.66     32   4.41   9    5.11   2    5.00    14    3.79   13    3.38    12    4.50      9      4.33    23    4.39     15    4.20     6     4.33    32     4.66    8    4.00    6    4.83   8    5.00   6      4.33   30     4.53
Health                                  33    6.42     34   5.44   12   6.00   3    5.67    16    5.56   23    6.00    13    5.62      9      5.67    29    5.83     19    5.68     6     5.17    39     6.08    9    5.78    7    5.43   10   5.80   8      5.00   40     5.85
Rural development                       38    5.84     36   5.08   11   5.18   3    6.33    15    4.67   17    4.71    15    4.47      9      5.67    29    4.90     22    5.77     6     5.00    38     5.71    10   5.70    8    4.87   11   5.45   8      4.75   36     4.97
Global/regional integration             31    5.90     31   4.97   10   5.10   2    5.00    13    5.77   17    5.35    13    5.00      8      4.25    22    5.18     17    5.59     5     5.00    35     5.91    10   5.90    6    4.50   11   5.55   5      5.60   32     5.19
Food security                           33    5.73     34   5.29   10   5.00   3    5.67    13    5.38   16    4.63    14    4.14      9      5.44    28    5.14     20    5.05     6     5.33    38     5.47    10   5.50    7    4.14   10   5.90   7      5.00   32     4.75
Education                               33    6.00     40   5.83   11   5.91   3    6.67    14    5.79   18    4.61    14    5.21       9     5.44    29     5.66    20    6.05     6     5.33    39     6.21    10    5.80   7    5.86   11   5.91   7      5.57   38     5.95
Social protection                       25    3.76     34   4.24   11   3.45   1    5.00    13    4.46   17    3.76    14    3.79       9     4.33    23     4.30    15    3.93     6     5.00    31     5.00    11    4.64   8    3.88   8    3.75   6      3.00   30     3.50
Climate change                          33    6.03     32   4.81   10   5.10   2    6.00    15    5.60   17    5.00    13    5.08       7     6.86    22     4.64    21    6.19     6     5.00    34     5.74    10    5.00   6    6.00   10   5.60   7      5.71   30     4.53
Agricultural development                37    5.95     36   5.25   11   5.18   3    7.00    15    5.40   17    4.82    12    5.50       7     6.86    27     5.07    19    5.74     6     5.00    40     6.02    10    6.00   7    4.71   11   5.73   8      5.00   37     5.46
Natural resource management             31    5.97     33   4.67   12   4.92   3    4.33    15    5.73   16    5.44    14    4.86       8     4.63    26     5.38    21    5.95     5     4.40    37     5.54    11    4.45   7    3.29   7    5.71   8      6.75   33     5.06
*Significantly different between specializations




                                                                                                                                      101
The World Bank                                                                                              Cameroon                                                                     Country Survey 2013



Appendix F: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank
                                                       H3. Currently, do you
                                                    professionally collaborate/    H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                    work with the World Bank?             Observer              Use WB reports/data   Engage in WB activities       Collaborate         Use WB website

Indicator Question                                    No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean       Yes Mean        No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                        5.17          6.16         5.79              4.89           5.38      5.79      5.33          5.88       5.25         6.05     5.60        5.30
World Bank’s effectiveness in Cameroon.
To what extent do you believe the World Bank’s
staff is well prepared to help Cameroon solve its       5.49          6.54         6.15              5.34           5.83      6.04      5.71          6.31       5.55         6.59     6.01        5.64
most complicated development challenges?
The World Bank’s financial instruments meet the
                                                        5.00          5.90         5.57              4.87           5.24      5.58      5.19          5.70       5.08         5.93     5.38        5.30
needs of Cameroon
The World Bank meets Cameroon’s needs for
                                                        5.08          5.92         5.79              4.61           5.21      5.84      5.22          5.86       5.26         5.74     5.31        5.62
knowledge services
Overall the World Bank currently plays a
                                                        5.38          6.84         6.25              5.21           5.90      5.95      5.60          6.62       5.49         6.85     6.02        5.71
relevant role in development in Cameroon
The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
consider the development priorities for                 4.95          6.07         5.60              4.84           5.27      5.57      5.17          5.78       5.10         5.92     5.39        5.31
Cameroon

Responsiveness                                          4.75          5.66         5.39              4.53           4.99      5.44      4.95          5.54       4.90         5.63     5.14        5.13

Openness (sharing data and other information)           5.30          6.71         6.34              4.94           5.73      6.23      5.73          6.25       5.63         6.40     5.79        6.09
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                        4.79          5.84         5.36              4.80           5.11      5.32      5.06          5.47       4.96         5.67     5.22        5.10
Government
Collaboration with the Government                       6.79          7.96         7.57              6.62           7.21      7.40      7.05          7.75       7.07         7.72     7.24        7.33

Collaboration with other donors                         6.30          7.31         7.01              6.17           6.74      6.73      6.42          7.41       6.60         7.01     6.55        7.12
To what extent does the World Bank’s work help
                                                        5.44          6.19         5.98              5.18           5.66      5.88      5.47          6.30       5.53         6.17     5.83        5.51
to achieve development results in Cameroon?
Are adaptable to Cameroon’s specific
development challenges and country                      5.42          6.44         6.19              5.00           5.64      6.15      5.61          6.27       5.51         6.45     5.80        5.82
circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the World Bank’s knowledge work and
                                                        5.65          6.51         6.31              5.28           5.94      6.07      5.73          6.49       5.79         6.39     5.93        6.07
activities make to development results in your
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank's knowledge work and          6.10          6.98         6.87              5.52           6.30      6.75      6.18          7.01       6.17         7.05     6.48        6.38
activities?
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                        5.89          6.83         6.64              5.59           6.21      6.49      6.15          6.66       6.11         6.68     6.30        6.32
Bank makes appropriate use of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.




                                                                                                              102
The World Bank                                                                                                            Cameroon                                                                                            Country Survey 2013



Appendix G: Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Group
                                                                              Consultant                                          Private /
                                                    Office of the              on Bank-                            Bilateral or   Financial                                          Independent
                                                     President/ Employee of   supported                    Local   Multilateral    Sector/   NGO/Private                             Government                 Faith-Based
                                                    PM/Minister a Ministry      Project        PMU      Government   Agency     Private Bank Foundation         CBO       Media       Institution Trade Union      Group      Academia     Other
                                                     N    Mean    N   Mean     N   Mean    N    Mean     N    Mean    N    Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean   N      Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean    N    Mean     N    Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                     15   5.53   73    5.75   16    6.06   21    6.90    14   5.50   18     6.50   17   5.41   93   4.88   10     5.40   21   5.19     5    6.20   9     4.67    7     5.29   17   6.00   21   5.57
Bank’s effectiveness in Cameroon*
To what extent do you believe the World Bank’s
staff is well prepared to help Cameroon solve its    15   6.07   65    6.11   16    6.44   21    7.05    14   5.21   15     7.07   17   5.53   77   5.40   10     5.40   18   5.78     5    6.60   10    4.10    4     6.00   16   5.69   18   6.22
most complicated development challenges?*
The World Bank’s financial instruments meet the
                                                     15   5.80   73    5.64   16    5.81   21    6.81    15   4.53   17     6.29   16   4.13   91   5.04   8      4.50   19   4.95     4    5.25   9     4.78    5     5.40   18   4.83   18   5.50
needs of Cameroon*
The World Bank meets Cameroon’s needs for
                                                     14   5.86   72    5.28   15    5.67   21    6.24    15   4.47   15     6.47   16   4.62   85   5.60   8      5.13   19   5.21     5    5.00   8     4.00    5     4.40   19   4.63   22   5.55
knowledge services*
Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
                                                     14   6.93   77    5.64   16    7.06   23    7.48    13   5.08   19     7.11   17   5.06   93   5.60   9      5.67   20   5.20     5    6.80   9     5.22    6     5.33   18   5.44   22   6.09
role in development in Cameroon*
The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
consider the development priorities for              14   6.43   74    5.00   16    6.38   22    7.23    13   4.77   19     6.63   17   4.71   86   5.15   9      4.78   20   4.85     5    5.80   8     3.75    6     5.67   18   4.72   21   5.62
Cameroon*
Responsiveness*                                      10   5.20   62    5.24   14    5.43   21    6.10    15   4.33   15     5.87   17   4.47   73   4.70   8      4.38   19   4.89     3    4.33   4     3.00    4     5.00   13   6.08   19   5.63
Openness (sharing data and other information)*       12   5.50   72    5.72   14    7.29   19    7.26    12   3.92   19     6.26   17   5.18   83   6.07   9      4.78   19   5.63     3    7.33   7     3.86    7     6.00   16   5.56   17   6.00
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                     10   6.00   68    5.38   11    5.91   19    6.37    14   5.07   17     5.76   17   4.88   88   4.69   9      4.89   19   5.05     1    5.00   7     3.57    5     5.20   15   5.47   22   5.32
Government
Collaboration with the Government*                   14   7.21   71    6.94   15    7.80   22    8.36    14   5.36   18     7.67   16   5.75   85   7.86   9      7.22   18   5.89     4    7.50   7     5.86    6     7.17   17   7.29   22   6.64
Collaboration with other donors*                     13   7.23   66    6.65   13    7.31   20    7.30    12   4.92   18     6.94   16   5.69   67   6.94   8      7.13   18   5.11     2    6.50   6     6.17    6     7.00   13   6.77   18   7.22
To what extent does the World Bank’s work help
                                                     14   5.64   73    5.81   16    6.00   23    6.87    15   5.33   18     6.56   16   5.25   91   5.45   8      5.75   18   5.61     5    5.60   9     4.11    7     6.29   17   5.24   22   6.09
to achieve development results in Cameroon?*
Are adaptable to Cameroon’s specific
development challenges and country                   12   7.33   72    5.92   14    6.71   18    7.22    15   4.47   18     6.44   14   5.14   90   5.72   9      5.56   20   5.95     5    5.00   9     4.78    6     4.17   16   4.50   21   6.00
circumstances*
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the World Bank’s knowledge work and
                                                     13   6.62   75    5.88   16    7.13   22    7.09    15   5.33   17     6.35   14   5.00   87   5.95   9      5.22   20   5.75     5    6.00   9     5.56    7     5.43   19   5.16   21   6.19
activities make to development results in your
country?*
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality
of the World Bank's knowledge work and               14   7.07   75    6.40   14    7.21   21    7.29    14   5.29   18     7.33   15   5.67   88   6.56   9      6.11   20   6.00     5    6.00   9     6.00    6     5.50   17   5.76   21   6.33
activities?*
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                     10   5.70   67    6.48   14    6.79   23    7.57    15   4.67   10     6.70   14   5.86   65   6.38   8      5.87   17   5.53     3    6.67   8     5.63    5     5.80   14   5.29   16   6.50
Bank makes appropriate use of them*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                            103
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                                      Country Survey 2013



Appendix H: Cameroon FY 2013 Questionnaire




                             World Bank Country Survey FY13 – Cameroon


The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Cameroon or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey is meant to give the World Bank’s team that works in Cameroon, greater insight into how the Bank’s
work is perceived. This is one tool the World Bank uses to assess the views of its critical stakeholders. With this
understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies, outreach and programs that support
development in Cameroon. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm to oversee the logistics of this
effort in Cameroon. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the
survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion. If you prefer not to answer
a question, please leave it blank.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING CAMEROON

 A1. In general would you say that Cameroon is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                       104
The World Bank                                              Cameroon                                             Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Cameroon.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in
 Cameroon? (Choose no more than THREE)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  1                                                            16      Health
       assistance)
  2    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)        17      Education
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  3    effectiveness, public financial management, public      18      Poverty reduction
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  4    Global/regional integration                             19      Energy
  5    Gender equity                                           20      Food security
  6    Domestic private sector development                     21      Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
  7    Foreign direct investment                               22      Agricultural development
  8    Water and sanitation                                    23      Trade and exports
  9    Anti corruption                                         24      Economic growth
 10    Job creation/employment                                 25      Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 11    Rural development                                       26      Regulatory framework
 12    Financial markets                                       27      Basic infrastructure
 13    Urban development                                       28      Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 14    Environmental sustainability                            29      Disaster management
 15    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                  30      Information and communications technology




                                                              105
The World Bank                                            Cameroon                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Cameroon? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Water and sanitation                               16    Domestic private sector development
  2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)             17    Foreign direct investment
  3    Economic growth                                    18    Education
  4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)      19    Energy
                                                                Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  5    Global/regional integration                        20    effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                expenditure, fiscal system reform)

  6    Gender equity                                      21    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)

  7    Rural development                                  22    Environmental sustainability
  8    Urban development                                  23    Disaster management
  9    Regulatory framework                               24    Health
 10    Basic infrastructure                               25    Agricultural development
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 11                                                       26    Job creation/employment
       social assistance)
 12    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)            27    Financial markets
 13    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)   28    Trade and exports
 14    Information and communications technology
                                                          29    Food security
 15    Anti corruption



PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                               106
The World Bank                                             Cameroon                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
 Cameroon? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy                                             15   Regulatory framework
 2    Gender equity                                      16   Trade and exports
                                                              Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 3    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)             17   effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                              expenditure, fiscal system reform)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 4                                                       18   Domestic private sector development
      social assistance)
 5    Global/regional integration                        19   Job creation/employment
 6    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)      20   Agricultural development
 7    Anti corruption                                    21   Food security
 8    Disaster management                                22   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 9    Rural development                                  23   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 10   Foreign direct investment                          24   Environmental sustainability
 11   Urban development                                  25   Health
 12   Water and sanitation                               26   Basic infrastructure
 13   Education                                          27   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 14   Information and communications technology          28   Financial markets


 A5. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity” in your country, which of the following TWO
 best illustrate how this would be achieved in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Better employment opportunities for young people
  2    Better employment opportunities for women
  3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
  4    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
  5    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
  6    A growing middle class
  7    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
  8    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
  9    Consistent economic growth
 10    More effective risk management
 11    Greater equity of fiscal policy
 12    Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 13    Improved access to basic services
 14    Better quality public services
 15    Other (please specify):_____________________________________




                                                              107
The World Bank                                               Cameroon                                                     Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Cameroon, on a ten point
 scale?
         1              2        3       4       5       6          7            8           9               10

 Not familiar at all                                                                                 Extremely familiar


 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in Cameroon, on a
 ten point scale?
          1             2    3       4       5       6   7       8         9                  10                  

 Not effective at all                                                                      Very effective    Don't know


 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank's staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Cameroon solve its most complicated development challenges, on a ten
 point scale?
          1             2    3       4       5       6   7       8         9                  10                  
                                                                                     To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                         Don't know
                                                                                                  degree

 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in
 Cameroon, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention
 and resources in Cameroon? (Choose no more than THREE)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 1                                                             16       Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
      assistance)
      Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 2    effectiveness, public financial management, public       17       Health
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)         18       Education
 4    Poverty reduction                                        19       Food security
 5    Global/regional integration                              20       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Gender equity                                            21       Agricultural development
 7    Domestic private sector development                      22       Trade and exports
 8    Rural development                                        23       Economic growth
 9    Foreign direct investment                                24       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 10   Water and sanitation                                     25       Regulatory framework
 11   Energy                                                   26       Basic infrastructure
 12   Job creation/employment                                  27       Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 13   Financial markets                                        28       Anti corruption
 14   Urban development                                        29       Information and communications technology
 15   Environmental sustainability                             30       Disaster management




                                                               108
The World Bank                                              Cameroon                                  Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and
 which activity is of second greatest value in Cameroon?
                                                                       Greatest Value   Second Greatest Value
                                                              (Choose only ONE) (Choose only ONE)
 1    Financial resources: investment lending                                                  
      Financial resources: policy based lending / budget
 2                                                                                             
      support to the Government
 3    Mobilizing third party financial resources                                               
 4    Technical assistance                                                                     
 5    Policy advice                                                                            
 6    Donor coordination                                                                       
 7    Data and information                                                                     
 8    Training/capacity building                                                               
 9    Studies/analyses                                                                         
 10   Convening/facilitating                                                                   
      Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 11                                                                                            
      knowledge sharing)
 12   Other (please specify):_______________________                                           



 B6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in
 Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Staff too inaccessible
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Cameroon
 4    Not enough public disclosure of its work
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not aligned with country priorities
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12   Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 13   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 14   Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 15   Not client focused
 16   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________




                                                              109
The World Bank                                       Cameroon                                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK



 B7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the global
 development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate change, communicable
 diseases, international financial systems, trade, etc.), on a ten point scale?
        1              2   3      4      5       6   7         8   9           10                
 To no degree at                                                                 To a very
                                                                                             Don't know
 all                                                                    significant degree



 B8. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor,
 which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your
 country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    NGOs
 2    Local Government
 3    Beneficiaries
 4    Private sector
 5    Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 6    Donor community
 7    Foundations
 8    Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 9    Parliament
 10   Media
 11   Faith based organizations
 12   Other (please specify): __________________________




                                                         110
The World Bank                                               Cameroon                                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Cameroon,
 on a ten point scale?
                                                                  Strongly                                Strongly   Don't
                                                                  disagree                                   agree   know
        Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
  B9                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        role in development in Cameroon
        The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
 B10                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        consider the development priorities for Cameroon
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies
 B11                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        that are realistic for Cameroon
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
 B12                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Cameroon with respect


 To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Cameroon, in terms of each of
 the following?
                                                                  To no                                To a very
                                                                                                                     Don't
                                                                  degree at                           significant
                                                                                                                     know
                                                                  all                                    degree
 B13    Responsiveness                                               1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products
 B14                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        and services)
        Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B15                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        circumstances)
 B16    Being inclusive                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      

 B17    Openness (sharing data and other information)                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      

 B18    Staff accessibility                                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      

 B19    Straightforwardness and honesty                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B20                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B21    Collaboration with the Government                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      

 B22    Collaboration with other donors                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B23                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        the ground
 B24    Follow through over time                                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      




                                                               111
The World Bank                                              Cameroon                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B25. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    The World Bank works too slowly
 2    The Government works inefficiently
 3    There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4    Poor donor coordination
 5    The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 6    Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 7    Political pressures and obstacles
 8    Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 9    The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 10   Other (please specify): ________________________________________



PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                               112
The World Bank                                               Cameroon                                              Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
 development in Cameroon, on a ten point scale?
                                                                  Not effective                                   Very    Don't
                                                                  at all                                      effective   know
  C1    Anti corruption                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C2    Information and communications technology                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C4    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C5    Urban development                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C6    Environmental sustainability                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C7    Regulatory framework                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C8    Basic infrastructure                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C9    Poverty reduction                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C10    Gender equity                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C11    Domestic private sector development                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C12    Foreign direct investment                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C13    Water and sanitation                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C14    Trade and exports                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C15    Economic growth                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C16    Energy                                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C17    Disaster management                                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 C18    effectiveness, public financial management, public           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 C19    Job creation/employment                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C20    Financial markets                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C21    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C22    Health                                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C23    Rural development                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C24    Global/regional integration                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C25    Food security                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C26    Education                                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 C27                                                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        assistance)
 C28    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C29    Agricultural development                                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C30    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                               113
The World Bank                                               Cameroon                                                  Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C31. To what extent does the World Bank’s work help to achieve development results in Cameroon,
 on a ten point scale?
        1            2      3      4       5       6         7         8       9               10                   
 To no degree at                                                                                To a very
                                                                                                                Don't know
 all                                                                                   significant degree




 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Cameroon, on a
 ten point scale?
                                                        Strongly                                            Strongly      Don't
                                                        disagree                                               agree      know
        The World Bank’s financial instruments (i.e.,
        investment lending, Development Policy
 C32                                                     1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10       
        Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.)
        meet the needs of Cameroon
        The World Bank meets Cameroon’s needs
 C33    for knowledge services (e.g., research,          1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10       
        analysis, data, technical assistance)




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                 114
The World Bank                                             Cameroon                                           Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS, STUDIES,
RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)

 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge work and activities in the work you do?
 1    Weekly
 2    Monthly
 3    A few times a year
 4    Rarely
 5    Never


 D2. When thinking about the development challenges in Cameroon, where do you believe it would be
 most valuable for the World Bank to focus its knowledge work and activities in the next few years?
 (Choose no more than THREE)
      Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 1    effectiveness, public financial management, public     16    Urban development
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 2    Gender equity                                          17    Education
 3    Domestic private sector development                    18    Global/regional integration
 4    Foreign direct investment                              19    Information and communications technology
 5    Water and sanitation                                   20    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 6    Trade and exports                                      21    Agricultural development
 7    Energy                                                 22    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 8    Disaster management                                    23    Job creation/employment
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 9                                                           24    Health
      assistance)
 10   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)          25    Economic growth
 11   Poverty reduction                                      26    Rural development
 12   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                27    Food security
 13   Anti corruption                                        28    Environmental sustainability
 14   Financial markets                                      29    Regulatory framework
 15   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                 30    Basic infrastructure




                                                             115
The World Bank                                                    Cameroon                                                        Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS, STUDIES,
RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)

 In Cameroon, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities are at:
                                                             Not
                                                                                                                                Very    Don't
                                                             effective
                                                                                                                            effective   know
                                                             at all
 D3    Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                 1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
 D4    Contributing to good policy making                     1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
       Providing support for program
 D5                                                           1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
       implementation


 In Cameroon, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                             To no                                                       To a very
                                                                                                                                        Don't
                                                             degree at                                                  significant
                                                                                                                                        know
                                                             all                                                           degree
  D6     Are timely                                           1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D7                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Cameroon’s development
  D8                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
         priorities
  D9     Provide feasible recommendations                     1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D10                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
         understand)
         Are source of relevant information on global
 D11                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
         good practices.
 D12     Are useful in terms of the work you do               1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
 D13     Are adequately disseminated                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
 D14     Are translated enough into local language            1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
         Are adaptable to Cameroon’s specific
 D15     development challenges and country                   1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9        10      
         circumstances


 D16. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge work and
 activities make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?
           1                  2   3   4     5        6            7           8       9                  10                       

 Not significant at all                                                                              Very significant        Don't know



 D17. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's knowledge work and
 activities, on a ten point scale?
          1               2       3    4        5        6            7           8       9              10                       
 Very low                                                                                         Very high technical
                                                                                                                             Don't know
 technical quality                                                                                            quality




                                                                      116
The World Bank                                          Cameroon                                   Country Survey 2013



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale?
                                                       Strongly                                Strongly   Don't
                                                       disagree                                   agree   know
  E1    The World Bank disburses funds promptly         1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        The World Bank effectively monitors and
  E2    evaluates the projects and programs it          1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        supports
        The World Bank's approvals and reviews are
  E3                                                    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        done in a timely fashion
        The World Bank's “Safeguard Policy”
  E4                                                    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        requirements are reasonable
        The World Bank’s conditions on its lending
  E5                                                    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        are reasonable
        Working with the World Bank increases
  E6                                                    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Cameroon's institutional capacity
        The World Bank ensures consistency and
  E7                                                    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        continuity through staff changes
        The World Bank's teams and visits are well
  E8                                                    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        coordinated
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
        financial management, etc.) are adequate,
  E9                                                    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        the World Bank makes appropriate use of
        them
        The World Bank provides effective
 E10    implementation support (i.e., supervision of    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        projects)




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                            117
The World Bank                                             Cameroon                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN CAMEROON

 F1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play in Cameroon’s
 development in the near future, on a ten point scale?
        1             2       3      4          5    6    7         8     9              10             
 Not a significant                                                               Very significant
                                                                                                    Don't know
 role at all                                                                                 role



 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in
 Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Cameroon’s specific challenges
  2    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
  3    Focus primarily on advocacy issues
       Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, and other
  4
       terms)
  5    Reach out more to groups outside of government
  6    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
  7    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Cameroon’s economy
  8    Offer more innovative financial products
  9    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 10    Increase availability of Fee-Based services
 11    Work faster
 12    Other (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                              118
The World Bank                                            Cameroon                                      Country Survey 2013



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues
 in Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?             (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2    Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Public Information Center
 7    World Bank publications and other written materials
 8    Mobile phones
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



       Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will
 G3                                                                                               Yes        No
       now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 G4                                                                                               Yes        No
       (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                  Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                        Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?                                           Yes        No




                                                            119
The World Bank                                             Cameroon                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use? (Please mark only ONE response)
 1     The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/en/country/cameroon)
 2     The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 G9. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank website?
 1     High speed
 2     Dial-up



 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                                      Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                      disagree                              agree   know
         I use/consult World Bank data more often than I did a
 G10                                                                   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         few years ago
         I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only
 G11                                                                   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used a World Bank website)
         I find the information on the World Bank’s websites
 G12     useful. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank            1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         website)
         When I need information from the World Bank I know
 G13     how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them,      1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         etc.)
         The World Bank is responsive to my information
 G14                                                                   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries



PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                              120
The World Bank                                           Cameroon                                        Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?         (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   Other (please specify): ________________________


 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Agriculture/ rural development / food security    10    Law and justice / regulatory framework
                                                              Natural resource management / environmental
 2    Climate change / disaster management              11
                                                              sustainability
                                                              Private sector development / foreign direct
 3    Education                                         12
                                                              investment
                                                              Public sector governance / public financial
 4    Energy                                            13
                                                              management / anti corruption
 5    Financial markets / banking                       14    Social protection
 6    Gender equity / equality of opportunity           15    Transport
      Health / communicable/non-communicable
 7                                                      16    Urban development
      diseases
 8    Information and communications technology         17    Water and sanitation
 9    Job creation/employment                           18    Other (please specify): _______________________




                                                             121
The World Bank                                              Cameroon                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No



 H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in
 Cameroon? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.



 H5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Yaoundé
 2    Douala
 3    Other cities
 4    Rural areas




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               122
