                           88141




Benin Country Opinion
    Survey Report

 (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                         Benin                                      Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. General Issues facing Benin .......................................................10
          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank .................................14
         VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................20
        VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments ..................................24
       VIII. How the World Bank Operates ..................................................34
         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Benin..............................38
          X. Communication and Openness..................................................42
         XI. Appendices ................................................................................51




                                                          2
The World Bank                                Benin                              Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in Benin
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Benin regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Benin;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in Benin;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank ’s effectiveness and results, knowledge
               and research, and communication and information sharing in Benin; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in Benin.

       Use data to help inform the Benin country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In April and May 2012, 687 stakeholders of the World Bank in Benin were invited to provide
their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country survey.
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime Minister;
the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial
department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World Bank
supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a
project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral agencies; private
sector organizations; private foundations; financial sector/private banks; NGOs; community-
based organizations; the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-based
groups; academia, research institutes or think tanks; and the judiciary branch. A total of 600
stakeholders participated in the country survey (87%).

Respondents completed the questionnaire with a representative from the local fielding agency.
Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Benin, their overall attitudes toward the
Bank; the World Bank’s effectiveness and results; the Bank’s knowledge; working with the
World Bank; the Bank’s future role in Benin, and the Bank’s communication and information
sharing in Benin:

A. General Issues facing Benin: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Benin is headed in
   the right direction, what they thought were the top three most important development
   priorities, and which areas would contribute most to poverty reduction and economic growth.




                                                3
The World Bank                                 Benin                              Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their familiarity
   with the World Bank, the Bank’s effectiveness in Benin, the extent to which the Bank meets
   Benin’s need for knowledge services and financial instruments, the extent to which the Bank
   should and does seek to influence the global development agenda, their agreement with
   various statements regarding the Bank’s work in Benin, and the extent to which the Bank is
   an effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the sectoral areas
   on which it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its resources, the Bank’s greatest
   values and greatest weaknesses in its work, the Bank instruments that are most and least
   effective in reducing poverty, with which groups the Bank should work more, and to what
   reasons respondents attributed failed or slow reform efforts.
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
   the Bank’s work helps achieve sustainable development results in Benin and the Bank’s level
   of effectiveness across thirty-four development areas, such as poverty reduction, anti-
   corruption, and economic growth.
D. The World Bank’s Knowledge: Respondents were asked to indicate the areas on which the
   Bank should focus its research efforts and to rate the effectiveness and quality of the Bank’s
   knowledge/research, including how significant of a contribution the Bank’s knowledge and
   research make to development results, the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge and
   research, and the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement with
   a series of statements regarding working with the Bank, such as the World Bank safeguard
   policies requirements being reasonable, working with the World Bank increasing Benin’s
   institutional capacity, and the Bank disburses funds promptly.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Benin: Respondents were asked to rate how
   significant a role the Bank should play in Benin’s development over the medium term and to
   indicate what the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Benin.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate where they
   get information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their access to the Internet, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s website and PICs. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s
   Access to Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of
   agreement that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data
   policy. Respondents were also asked their level of agreement that they know how to find
   information from the Bank and that the Bank is responsive to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank, their exposure
   to the Bank in Benin, and their geographic location.

In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 389 respondents (67% response rate) who completed the
country survey in FY 2007. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were
possible.


                                                4
The World Bank                              Benin                             Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
    For further analyses: the small number of consultants/contractors working on World
       Bank supported projects/programs and Project Management Units (PMUs) were
       combined into one group; the small number of respondents from community-based
       organizations were combined with those from local NGOs; respondents from bilateral
       agencies were combined with those from multilateral agencies; and the few respondents
       from private foundations, independent government institutions, trade unions, and the
       judiciary branch were included in the “Other” category.




                                              5
The World Bank                   Benin        Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                  6
The World Bank                                Benin                             Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The majority of respondents indicated that they were located in Cotonou. Because of the
        small number of respondents from Porto Novo, Parakou, and rural areas, respondents
        from these locations were combined into one category, “Other Areas”, for all further
        analyses.




                                               7
The World Bank                             Benin   Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Professional Collaboration with the World Bank




Exposure to the World Bank




                                            8
The World Bank                                 Benin                               Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank
   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 5.9 on a
    10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar. This was
    significantly lower than the FY ’07 survey, in which familiarity with the Bank received a
    mean rating of 6.2 across all respondents.
         Consultants on Bank projects/respondents from PMUs indicated the highest levels of
            familiarity whereas respondents from private sector, local government, other
            organizations, academia, and faith-based groups indicated significantly lower levels.
         Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings of
            familiarity with the World Bank.
         It should be noted that respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the Bank were
            significantly, strongly correlated with their impressions of the Bank’s overall
            effectiveness in Benin as well as significantly, moderately correlated with their
            perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable deve lopment results and
            the Bank’s relevance to Benin’s development.




                                                 9
The World Bank                                 Benin                              Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Benin

Headed in the Right Direction

       When asked whether Benin was headed in the right or wrong direction, 42% of
        respondents indicated that Benin was headed in the right direction.
             Pluralities of employees of a ministry, consultants on Bank Projects/PMUs, and
              respondents from the office of a Minister, local government, bilateral or
              multilateral agencies, the private sector, NGOs/CBOs, faith-based groups,
              academia, and other organizations indicated that Benin was headed in the right
              direction. In contrast, respondents from the financial sector/private banks and the
              media were more likely to say that Benin was headed in the wrong direction.
              Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister and the office of a
              Parliamentarian were more likely to say that they were not sure if Benin was
              headed in the right or wrong direction.
             A plurality of respondents from all geographic locations indicated that Benin was
              headed in the right direction.




                                                10
The World Bank                              Benin                            Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Benin (continued)
Development Priority
    Respondents indicated that education was the most important development priority in
      Benin. Health, rural development, poverty reduction, and agricultural development were
      also considered top priorities.
           In the FY ’07 country survey, government effectiveness (30%), economic growth
             (25%), reducing poverty (24%), and reducing corruption (24%) were considered
             the most important development priorities for Benin.
           Respondents across most stakeholder groups and all geographic locations
             indicated these as development priorities except respondents from the financial
             sector/private banks who indicated public sector governance.




                                             11
The World Bank                               Benin                            Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Benin (continued)

Poverty Reduction

       Respondents indicated that education would contribute most to poverty reduction in
        Benin. Health, agricultural development, rural development, and economic growth were
        also considered key contributors to poverty reduction.
             Respondents from the FY ’07 country survey indicated agricultural development
              (41%), employment (36%), and governance (31%) would contribute most to
              reducing poverty in Benin.




                                              12
The World Bank                                Benin                              Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Benin (continued)

Economic Growth

       Respondents indicated that agricultural development, anti-corruption, and energy would
        contribute most to generating economic growth in Benin. Domestic private sector
        development, rural development, transport, and trade and exports were also identified as
        key to economic growth.




                                                13
The World Bank                                Benin                             Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Focusing World Bank Resources

       Respondents indicated that the Bank would have the most impact on development results
        in Benin by focusing most of its attention and resources on education. Rural
        development, agricultural development, and health were also seen as key.
             In the FY ’07 country survey, respondents indicated that it would be most
              productive for the Bank to focus its resources on agricultural development (23%),
              reducing poverty (21%), education (20%), employment (19%), and private sector
              development (19%).




                                               14
The World Bank                                  Benin                               Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Overall Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, ratings of the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Benin
        received a mean rating of 6.9 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10
        being very effective. This was significantly higher than the FY ’07 survey, in which the
        Bank’s overall effectiveness received a mean rating of 6.2 across all respondents.
             Respondents from the financial sector/private banks and faith-based groups gave
              the highest ratings for the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Benin whereas
              respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies, private sector, and other
              organizations gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Other Cities and Other Areas gave significantly higher ratings
              for the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Benin compared to respondents
              from Cotonou and Abomey-Calavi.




                                                 15
The World Bank                                 Benin                              Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Achieving Sustainable Development Results

       Across all respondents, the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results
        in Benin received a mean rating of 7.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at
        all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from Other Cities and Other Areas gave the highest ratings for the
              World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results in Benin whereas
              respondents from Abomey-Calavi gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar ratings for the
              World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results in Benin.




                                                16
The World Bank                                 Benin                               Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest value to Benin was its
        financial resources. The Bank’s technical assistance, policy advice, training/capacity
        building, and mobilization of third party financial resources were also considered of great
        value to Benin.
             Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey also indicated that the Bank’s greatest
              value to Benin was its financial resources, specifically providing loans to finance
              development projects (67%) and providing loans to promote policy reforms
              (37%).
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups and all geographic locations
              indicated that the Bank’s financial resources was its greatest value to Benin,
              except respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister who indicated
              that the Bank’s greatest value was its donor coordination.




                                                17
The World Bank                                  Benin                               Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Benin were
        imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities, being too influenced
        by developed countries, and not enough public disclosure of its work.
             Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey indicated that the Bank’s greatest
              weaknesses were working too much with the government (28%) and imposing
              technocratic solutions without regard to political realities (21%).
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups, as well as all geographic locations,
              indicated that these were the Bank’s greatest weaknesses, except respondents
              from the office of the President/Prime Minister who indicated that Bank processes
              are too slow and complex.




                                                 18
The World Bank                                  Benin                                Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, respondents
        indicated that they most often attribute this to an inadequate level of citizen/ civil society
        participation, political pressures and obstacles, reforms not being well thought out in light
        of country challenges, or the government working inefficiently/slowly.




                                                  19
The World Bank                                  Benin                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Specific Areas of Effectiveness
       Respondents saw the Bank as most effective at health, receiving a mean rating of 7.4,
        across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not effective at all and 10 being
        very effective.




                                                 20
The World Bank                                  Benin                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder differences in their ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness
        across several of these thirty-four areas. For the most part, respondents from the office of
        a Minister and consultants on Bank projects/PMUs had the highest ratings across these
        areas whereas respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, faith-based groups, and
        academia had significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness across these areas.
        Those areas with significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Anti-corruption”;
             “Law and justice”;
             “Environmental sustainability”;
             “Regulatory framework”;
             “Poverty reduction”;
             “Domestic private sector development”;
             “Energy”;
             “Rural development ”;
             “Climate change”;
             “Agricultural development”; and
             “Natural resource management.

       There were also significant differences between geographic locations in their ratings of
        the Bank’s effectiveness across several of these thirty-four areas. For the most part,
        respondents from Abomey-Calavi had significantly lower ratings across these areas
        compared to respondents from Cotonou, Other Cities, and Other Areas. Those areas with
        significant differences between geographic locations were:
             “Anti-corruption”;
             “Global information and communications technology”;
             “Communicable/non-communicable disease”;
             “Poverty reduction”;
             “Domestic private sector development”;
             “Foreign investment”;
             “Monitoring and evaluation”;
             “Health”;
             “Food security”;
             “Social protection”; a nd
             “Regional integration”.

       Responses across all stakeholder groups, geographic locations, and both country surveys
        can be found in the Appendix.


                                                 21
The World Bank                                 Benin                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
        effectiveness at all areas that could be compared, except for “Anti-corruption” and
        “Domestic private sector development” which were statistically similar, and “Natural
        resource management” which was significantly lower compared to respondents in the
        FY ’07 country survey.




                                                22
The World Bank                                  Benin                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness and
ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable development results in Benin, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-four specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as r atings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of
effectiveness in one specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness or perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Benin. The areas determined
        to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at health;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at energy;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at education; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at poverty reduction.

       Achieving Sustainable Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest
        Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainab le development results in
        Benin, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results. The
        areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at poverty reduction;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at social protection; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at health.




                                                 23
The World Bank                                  Benin                               Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments

Knowledge: Meeting Benin’s Knowledge Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank meets Benin’s needs for knowledge
        services received a mean rating of 6.5 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at all
        and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from all geographic
              locations, gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank meeting Benin’s needs for
              knowledge services.




                                                 24
The World Bank                              Benin                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Knowledge: Focusing Bank Research
    Respondents indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
      and knowledge efforts on education, agricultural development, domestic private sector
      development, and energy.
          Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey indicated that it would be most
             valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on enhanced business
             environment for private sector development (31%) and education (29%).
          Respondents across most stakeholder groups and all geographic locations
             indicated that these would be the most valuable areas for the Bank’s research,
             except respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian who were more likely to
             indicate that the Bank should focus its research on economic growth.




                                              25
The World Bank                                 Benin                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, the effectiveness of the World Bank’s knowledge and research to
        provide support for program implementation received the highest mean rating, 7.4, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents from Abomey-Calavi had significantly lower ratings for the
              effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research to contribute to good policy
              making compared to respondents from Cotonou, Other Cities, and Other Areas.
              Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for
              the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research in all other areas.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for the
              effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research in these areas.




                                                26
The World Bank                                 Benin                               Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Qualities

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s knowledge and research being a source of
        relevant information on global good practices received the highest mean rating, 7.6, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from Abomey-Calavi had significantly lower ratings for the extent to
              which the Bank’s knowledge and research “Include appropriate level of
              stakeholder involvement during preparation”, “Provide feasible
              recommendations”, and “Are adequately disseminated” compared to respondents
              from Cotonou, Other Cities, and Other Areas. Respondents across all geographic
              locations had statistically similar ratings for the other qualities of the World
              Bank’s knowledge and research.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for
              these qualities of the World Bank’s knowledge and research.




                                                27
The World Bank                                  Benin                               Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Contribution

       Across all respondents, the significance of the contribution that the World Bank’s
        knowledge and research make to development results in Benin received a mean rating of
        7.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not significant at all and 10 being very significant.
             Respondents from Abomey-Calavi gave significantly lower ratings for the
              contribution that the Bank’s knowledge and research make to development results
              in Benin compared to respondents from Other Cities, Other Areas, and Cotonou.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar significance
              ratings for the contribution that the World Bank’s knowledge and research make
              to development results in Benin.




                                                 28
The World Bank                                  Benin                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Technical Quality

       Across all respondents, the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge and
        research received a mean rating of 7.6 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being very low
        technical quality and 10 being very high technical quality.
                  Respondents from Abomey-Calavi gave significantly lower ratings for the
                   technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge and research compared to
                   respondents from Other Cities, Other Areas, and Cotonou.
                  Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar ratings for
                   the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge and research.




                                                 29
The World Bank                                  Benin                               Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Linkage to Non-Bank Expertise

       Across all respondents, the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank
        expertise received a mean rating of 7.7 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at
        all and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as all geographic locations,
              gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage
              to non-Bank expertise.




                                                 30
The World Bank                                Benin                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Most Effective

       Over two-thirds of all respondents indicated that the World Bank’s investment lending
        was its most effective instrument in reducing poverty in Benin.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations indicated
              that the World Bank’s investment lending was its most effective instrument in
              reducing poverty in Benin.




                                               31
The World Bank                                 Benin                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Least Effective

       Nearly a third of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s policy based lending/budget
        support to the government was least effective in reducing poverty in Benin, but nearly the
        same number indicated that they didn’t know which of the World Bank’s instruments was
        least effective in reducing poverty.
             A plurality of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated the Bank’s
              policy based lending or that they didn’t know which Bank instruments were least
              effective, except respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian who indicated
              that the World Bank’s capacity development was least effective in reducing
              poverty in Benin and respondents from the financial sector/private banks who
              indicated that the Bank’s Trust Fund management was least effective.
             Respondents across all geographic locations indicated that the Bank’s policy
              based lending/budget support to the government was least effective in reducing
              poverty in Benin.




                                                32
The World Bank                                 Benin                               Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Meeting Benin’s Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank’s financial instruments meet Benin’s
        needs received a mean rating of 6.5 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at all
        and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister, NGOs/CBOs, and
              consultants on Bank projects/PMUs gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s
              financial instruments meeting Benin’s needs whereas respondents from the media,
              private sector, and the office of a Parliamentarian gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for
              the Bank’s financial instruments meeting Benin’s needs.




                                                33
The World Bank                                 Benin                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates

The World Bank’s Work in Benin

       In terms of the Bank’s work, the World Bank currently playing a relevant role in Benin’s
        development received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.3, across all respondents,
        on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of
              agreement that the Bank plays a relevant role in Benin’s development, that the
              programs and strategies the Bank supports are realistic for Benin, and that the
              Bank’s work is alig ned with their development priorities compared to respondents
              from the FY ’07 country survey.
             Respondents from Abomey-Calavi had significantly lower levels of agreement
              that the Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Benin
              compared to respondents from Cotonou, Other Cities, and Other Areas.
              Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar levels of
              agreement for the other three statements.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement across these statements.




                                                34
The World Bank                                  Benin                               Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions
 Across all respondents, “Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank makes
   appropriate use them” received the highest mean rating, 7.9, on a 10-point scale with 1 being
   to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
        Ratings for “The World Bank disburses funds promptly” in this year’s country survey
           were significantly higher compared to the FY ’07 country survey. Ratings for the
           other three statements that could be compared were statistically similar in the FY ’12
           and FY ’07 country surveys.
        Respondents from the financial sector/private banks and consultants on Bank
           projects/PMUs had the highest ratings for “The World Bank disburses funds
           promptly” whereas respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, the media, and
           academia had significantly lower ratings. Respondents from faith-based groups had
           the highest ratings for “The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the
           projects and programs it supports” whereas respondents from academia had
           significantly lower ratings. Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically
           similar ratings for the other aspects of working with the World Bank.
        Respondents from Abomey-Calavi had significantly lower ratings for “The World
           Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it supports”
           compared to respondents from Cotonou, Other Cities, and Other Areas. Respondents
           across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for the other aspects of
           working with the World Bank in Benin.




                                                 35
The World Bank                                 Benin                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development
        partner in terms of its collaboration with the Government in Benin received the highest
        mean rating, 8.2, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a
        very significant degree.




                                                36
The World Bank                                 Benin                               Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower ratings regarding the
        Bank’s staff accessibility compared to respondents from the FY ’07 country survey. In
        contrast, respondents from the FY ’07 country survey had significantly lower ratings
        regarding the Bank’s straightforwardness and honesty compared to respondents in this
        year’s country survey. Ratings for the extent to which the Bank displayed flexibility in
        terms of the country’s changing circumstances received statistically similar ratings across
        both country surveys.

       There were some interesting stakeholder group significant differences in their perceptions
        of the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development partner in Benin.
             Respondents from NGOs/CBOs and the media had the highest ratings regarding
                the Bank being inclusive whereas respondents from the office of a
                Parliamentarian, the office of a Minister, academia, and other organizations had
                significantly lower ratings.
             Consultants on Bank projects/PMUs had the highest ratings regarding the Bank’s
                openness whereas respondents from the private sector had significantly lower
                ratings.
             Consultants on Bank projects/PMUs had the highest ratings regarding the Bank’s
                staff accessibility whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies had
                significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings across
                the other areas.

       There were some interesting significant differences between geographic locations in their
        perceptions of the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development partner.
             Respondents from Abomey-Calavi had significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s
               follow up and follow through compared to respondents from Cotonou, Other
               Cities, and Other Areas.
             Respondents from Other Cities had significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
               flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances) compared to respondents
               from Cotonou, Abomey-Calavi, and Other Areas.
             Respondents from Cotonou and Other Areas had the highest ratings for the
               Bank’s staff accessibility whereas respondents from Other Cities had significantly
               lower ratings.
             Respondents from Other Cities and Other Areas had significantly higher ratings
               for the Bank’s straightforwardness and honesty compared to respondents from
               Cotonou and Abomey-Calavi.
             Respondents from Other Areas had significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
               collaboration with groups outside of the Government compared to respondents
               from Cotonou, Abomey-Calavi, and Other Cities.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for
               the other aspects of working with the World Bank in Benin.


                                                37
The World Bank                                  Benin                               Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Benin

Role Significance

       Respondents believe that the Bank should play a fairly significant role in Benin’s
        development over the medium term, receiving a mean rating of 8.5 across all respondents
        on a 10-point scale with 1 being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as across all geographic
              locations, gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s role significance.




                                                 38
The World Bank                                Benin                              Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Benin (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should reduce the complexity of obtaining
        Bank financing to make itself of greater value in Benin. Respondents also indicated that
        the Bank should improve the quality of its experts as related to Benin’s specific
        challenges, improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets, and offer
        more innovative financial products.




                                                39
The World Bank                                Benin                             Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Benin (continued)

Collaborating in Benin

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely with NGOs, local
        government, and the private sector to ensure better development results in Benin.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups and all geographic locations indicated
              that the Bank should work more closely with NGOs, local government, and the
              private sector except respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian who were
              more likely to indicate that the Bank should work more closely with Parliament,
              respondents from academia who were more likely to indicate that the Bank should
              work with academia/think tanks/research institutes, and respondents from bilateral
              or multilateral agencies who indicated that the Bank should also work with CBOs
              and the donor community.




                                               40
The World Bank                                 Benin                               Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Benin (continued)

Influencing the Global Development Agenda

       Across all respondents, the extent to which respondents believed the World Bank should
        influence the global development agenda received a mean rating of 7.1 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree. The
        extent to which respondents believed the World Bank does influence the global
        development agenda received a mean rating of 6.6 across all respondents.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups as well as those from all geographic
              locations gave statistically similar ratings for the extent to which the Bank should
              and does influence the global development agenda.




                                                41
The World Bank                                Benin                              Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Respondents indicated that they got most of their information about economic and social
        development issues in Benin from local television, local newspapers, and the Internet.
             Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey indicated that the y too got most of their
              information about economic and social development issues in Benin from local
              television (47%), local newspapers (42%), and the Internet (33%).
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups and all geographic locations
              indicated that they get information from local television, local newspapers, and
              the Internet, except respondents from the financial sector/private banks who were
              more likely to utilize international television.




                                                42
The World Bank                                Benin                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank, over
        half of all respondents indicated the World Bank website. Other popular choices were
        World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences, World Bank publications and other
        written materials, and direct contact with World Bank staff.




                                               43
The World Bank                                 Benin                              Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       The vast majority of respondents indicated that they were unaware of the Bank’s new
        Access to Information policy.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and all geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of awareness for the Bank’s new Access to Information
              policy.




       Nearly a third of all respondents indicated that they had requested information from the
        World Bank in the past year.
             Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies and the media were
              significantly more likely to have requested information from the World Bank
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar rates of
              requesting information from the World Bank.




                                                44
The World Bank                                 Benin                               Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Nearly all respondents who indicated that they had requested information from the World
        Bank indicated that they were able to obtain this information.
             Respondents from NGOs/CBOs, the media, and academia had significantly lower
              rates of obtaining their requested information compared to respondents from other
              stakeholder groups.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar rates of
              obtaining their requested information.




       Agreement that respondents use more data from the World Bank as a result of its Open
        Data policy received a mean rating of 5.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and all geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement that they use more data from the World
              Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data policy.




                                                45
The World Bank                                  Benin                                Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet.
             Respondents from faith-based groups had significantly lower rates of Internet
              access compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar rates of
              Internet access.




Website Usage

       Just over half of all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website ,
        statistically similar to the rates of website usage found in the FY ’0 7 country survey.
             Employees of ministries, consultants on Bank projects/PMUs, and respondents
              from the office of a Minister, private sector, and the media had significantly
              higher rates of Bank website usage compared to respondents from other
              stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from Cotonou and Abomey-Calavi had significantly higher rates of
              Bank website usage compared to respondents from Other Cities and Other Areas.




                                                  46
The World Bank                                Benin                             Country Survey 2012




X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage (continued)

       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, nearly two-thirds indicated that they
        used the World Bank’s country website, significantly more than in the FY ’07 country
        survey.
             Consultants on Bank projects/PMUs and respondents from bilateral or multilateral
              agencies had significantly higher rates of usage for the World Bank’s main
              website compared to those from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from Cotonou had significantly higher rates of usage for the World
              Bank’s main website compared to respondents from other locations.




                                               47
The World Bank                                 Benin                               Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Evaluation

       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, agreement that
        respondents find the information on the Bank’s websites useful received the highest mean
        rating, 7.7, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and
        10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents from the office of a Minister, the office of a Parliamentarian, and
              academia had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank websites are easy to
              navigate whereas respondents from the private sector had significantly lower
              levels of agreement. Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and
              academia had the highest levels of agreement that they find the information on the
              Bank’s websites useful whereas respondents from the financial sector/private
              banks and the private sector had significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar levels of
              agreement that they find the information on the Bank’s websites useful and that
              the Bank websites are easy to navigate.




                                                48
The World Bank                                 Benin                               Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
PIC Usage
       Just 10% of all respondents in this year’s country survey indicated that they had used the
        Bank’s PICs in Benin; more than a third of all respondents indicated that they were
        unaware of the World Bank’s PICs.
             Respondents in this year’s country survey were significantly less likely to have
              used the Bank’s PICS in Benin compared to the FY ’07 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of usage for the World Bank’s PICs.




PIC Evaluation
       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s PICs, agreement that
        respondents find them to be a valuable source of information related to development in
        Benin received a mean rating of 6.5, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1
        being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement regarding the value of the Bank’s PICs.




                                                49
The World Bank                                 Benin                              Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       In terms of the Bank’s information sharing in Benin, respondents had the highest level of
        agreement that “When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it ”,
        receiving a mean rating of 6.9, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being
        strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Consultants on Bank projects/PMUs and respondents from the office of a
              Parliamentarian and bilateral or multilateral agencies had the highest levels of
              agreement that “When I need information from the World Bank I know how to
              find it” whereas respondents from the financial sector/private banks, faith-based
              groups, private sector, and other organizations had significantly lower levels of
              agreement. Consultants on Bank projects/PMUs and respondents from the office
              of a Parliamentarian had the highest levels of agreement that “The Bank is
              appropriately responsive to my information requests and inquiries” whereas
              respondents from the financial sector/private banks and other organizations had
              significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Respondents from Other Cities and Other Areas had significantly lower levels of
              agreement that “The Bank is appropriately responsive to my information requests
              and inquiries” and that “When I need information from the World Bank I know
              how to find it” compared to respondents from Cotonou and Abomey-Calavi.




                                                50
The World Bank                                   Benin                                Country Survey 2012



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 52


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 67


          C. Responses to All Questions by Geographic Locations ................... 84


          D. Responses to All Questions by Year .............................................. 97


          E. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank ........ 100


          F. World Bank Client Survey 2012 – Benin Questionnaire ............. 101




                                                BENIN




                                                  51
The World Bank                                        Benin                                 Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=600)
A. General Issues facing Benin
1. In general, would you say that Benin is headed in...?                   Percentage of Respondents (N=561)
The right direction                                                                      42.2%
The wrong direction                                                                      26.6%
Not sure                                                                                 31.2%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in             Percentage of Respondents (N=513)
                                                                              nd          rd
   Benin. Please identify which of these you consider the         Most      2 Most       3 Most
   1st, 2nd, and 3rd most important development priority.       Important Important Important Combined
Education                                                         33.3%       20.7%        7.3%      61.3%
Health                                                            6.6%        13.5%       11.7%      31.9%
Rural development                                                 15.0%        9.1%        5.0%      29.1%
Poverty reduction                                                 10.7%        5.2%        6.9%      22.8%
Agricultural development                                          9.6%         6.2%        6.9%      22.6%
Anti-corruption                                                   3.1%         5.6%        8.6%      17.3%
Public sector governance                                          4.9%         4.4%        4.2%      13.5%
Transport                                                         3.1%         5.0%        4.8%      12.9%
Economic growth                                                   2.7%         3.5%        4.0%      10.2%
Energy                                                            1.9%         3.5%        4.2%       9.6%
Public financial management                                       1.2%         3.3%        4.8%       9.2%
Domestic private sector development                               0.8%         2.1%        4.6%       7.5%
Social protection                                                 1.2%         3.1%        3.1%       7.3%
Water and sanitation                                              0.6%         2.7%        3.1%       6.4%
Basic infrastructure                                              1.0%         1.4%        3.1%       5.4%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                             0.6%         1.4%        1.9%       3.9%
Food security                                                     0.8%         1.2%        1.1%       3.1%
Natural resource management                                       0.2%         1.4%        1.1%       2.7%
Law and justice                                                   0.4%         1.0%        1.3%       2.7%
Regional integration                                              0.4%         0.6%        1.7%       2.7%
Gender                                                            0.0%         1.2%        1.5%       2.7%
Global information and communications technology                  0.8%         0.4%        1.0%       2.1%
Trade and exports                                                 0.2%         0.8%        0.8%       1.7%
Equality of opportunity                                           0.2%         0.6%        1.0%       1.7%
Urban development                                                 0.0%         0.6%        1.0%       1.5%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                             0.2%         0.4%        0.8%       1.3%
Regulatory framework                                              0.2%         0.2%        0.8%       1.2%
Monitoring and evaluation                                         0.0%         0.2%        1.0%       1.2%
Foreign investment                                                0.2%         0.0%        0.8%       1.0%
Environmental sustainability                                      0.2%         0.2%        0.4%       0.8%
Global integration                                                0.0%         0.2%        0.6%       0.8%
Climate change                                                    0.0%         0.6%        0.0%       0.6%
Financial markets                                                 0.0%         0.0%        0.6%       0.6%
Disaster management                                               0.0%         0.0%        0.6%       0.6%




                                                           52
The World Bank                                     Benin                            Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
   different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do
   you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Benin?       Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                         (Responses Combined; N=597)
Education                                                                          39.5%
Health                                                                             28.0%
Agricultural development                                                           27.1%
Rural development                                                                  26.0%
Economic growth                                                                    21.8%
Energy                                                                             19.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                    17.3%
Water and sanitation                                                               15.6%
Domestic private sector development                                                14.4%
Food security                                                                      13.4%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                              12.6%
Transport                                                                          11.9%
Basic infrastructure                                                               10.9%
Public financial management                                                        7.2%
Public sector governance                                                           5.9%
Equality of opportunity                                                            5.5%
Social protection                                                                  4.5%
Law and justice                                                                    3.5%
Gender                                                                             2.3%
Natural resource management                                                        2.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                       1.7%
Trade and exports                                                                  1.7%
Regional integration                                                               1.5%
Foreign investment                                                                 1.0%
Urban development                                                                  0.8%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                          0.8%
Climate change                                                                     0.7%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.7%
Regulatory framework                                                               0.5%
Financial markets                                                                  0.5%
Global information and communications technology                                   0.3%
Disaster management                                                                0.2%
Global integration                                                                 0.2%




                                                     53
The World Bank                                        Benin                                    Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE
   areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating                Percentage of Respondents
   economic growth in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)                       (Responses Combined; N=593)
Agricultural development                                                                   31.9%
Anti-corruption                                                                            29.7%
Energy                                                                                     28.7%
Domestic private sector development                                                        24.1%
Rural development                                                                          20.7%
Transport                                                                                  20.1%
Trade and exports                                                                          19.2%
Education                                                                                  16.7%
Public financial management                                                                16.2%
Poverty reduction                                                                          15.0%
Foreign investment                                                                         12.8%
Public sector governance                                                                   9.3%
Health                                                                                     7.8%
Basic infrastructure                                                                       6.6%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                      5.6%
Natural resource management                                                                4.0%
Global information and communications technology                                           3.7%
Law and justice                                                                            3.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                       3.4%
Financial markets                                                                          3.4%
Water and sanitation                                                                       2.4%
Regional integration                                                                       2.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                                    2.2%
Food security                                                                              2.2%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                  2.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                               1.7%
Global integration                                                                         1.5%
Social protection                                                                          1.2%
Urban development                                                                          0.7%
Climate change                                                                             0.5%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                      0.3%
Disaster management                                                                        0.0%
Gender                                                                                     0.0%


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Familiarity and Overall Effectiveness                                                    N       Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Benin, on a ten-point
                                                                                         588      5.94     2.40
   scale? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank's effectiveness in Benin, on
                                                                                         520      6.91     2.02
   a ten-point scale. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                       54
The World Bank                                        Benin                                     Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)   N       Mean       SD
3. The World Bank's financial instruments meet the needs of Benin, on a ten-point
                                                                                          482      6.51     2.20
    scale?
4. The World Bank meets Benin's needs for knowledge services, on a ten-point scale?       477      6.46     2.23
5. The World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the global development agenda, on a
                                                                                          474      7.09     2.77
    ten point scale?
6. The World Bank DOES seek to influence the global development agenda, on a ten
                                                                                          422      6.57     2.44
    point scale?

7. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact
   on development results in Benin, in which sectoral areas do you
   believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and                  Percentage of Respondents
   resources in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)                              (Responses Combined; N=592)
Education                                                                                   54.6%
Rural development                                                                           31.6%
Agricultural development                                                                    27.5%
Health                                                                                      27.2%
Transport                                                                                   19.9%
Energy                                                                                      19.3%
Domestic private sector development                                                         15.4%
Poverty reduction                                                                           12.3%
Economic growth                                                                             10.6%
Basic infrastructure                                                                        9.8%
Public sector governance                                                                    9.5%
Water and sanitation                                                                        9.1%
Anti-corruption                                                                             9.1%
Public financial management                                                                 7.4%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                       6.4%
Food security                                                                               3.7%
Law and justice                                                                             3.2%
Trade and exports                                                                           3.0%
Social protection                                                                           2.9%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                   2.5%
Global information and communications technology                                            2.5%
Foreign investment                                                                          1.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                                1.5%
Natural resource management                                                                 1.5%
Gender                                                                                      1.2%
Urban development                                                                           1.2%
Regulatory framework                                                                        1.2%
Financial markets                                                                           0.8%
Equality of opportunity                                                                     0.7%
Climate change                                                                              0.7%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                       0.7%
Regional integration                                                                        0.3%
Global integration                                                                          0.2%
Disaster management                                                                         0.2%




                                                        55
The World Bank                                            Benin                                    Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                               Percentage of Respondents (N=546)
8. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do
                                                                                           nd
   you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second        Greatest      2 Greatest
   greatest value in Benin?                                                 Value          Value        Combined
Financial resources                                                         46.7%          10.2%          56.9%
Technical assistance                                                         9.0%          20.2%          29.2%
Policy advice                                                               10.8%          16.7%          27.5%
Training/capacity building                                                   8.8%          16.7%          25.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                  13.0%          10.9%          23.9%
Donor coordination                                                           6.4%           6.1%          12.5%
Convening/facilitating                                                       2.4%           7.1%           9.4%
Studies/analyses                                                             1.8%           5.6%           7.4%
Data                                                                         0.9%           3.3%           4.3%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                0.4%           2.2%           2.6%
Other                                                                        0.0%           0.9%           0.9%

9. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest                 Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                        (Responses Combined; N=547)
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                            35.1%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                            30.9%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                         26.5%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                        19.2%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                      17.6%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                         14.3%
Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country                     13.2%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                              12.1%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                           6.6%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                              4.0%
Not client focused                                                                               2.9%
Other                                                                                            2.7%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                            1.3%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                         0.7%

10. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective                 Percentage of Respondents
   in reducing poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                           (Responses Combined; N=594)
Investment lending                                                                               66.7%
Capacity development                                                                             31.1%
Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                                           30.1%
Credits to finance the sector wide approaches (SWAP)                                             22.2%
Technical assistance                                                                             19.0%
Loan/grant for rehabilitation and reconstruction in emergency                                    11.3%
Analytical work                                                                                  4.9%
Trust Fund management                                                                            4.0%
Don’t know                                                                                       3.2%
Other                                                                                            1.3%




                                                           56
The World Bank                                         Benin                                 Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

11. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in           Percentage of Respondents
   helping to reduce poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)               (Responses Combined; N=561)
Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                                     28.5%
Don’t know                                                                                 28.0%
Trust Fund management                                                                      20.0%
Technical assistance                                                                       18.5%
Analytical work                                                                            18.4%
Loan/grant for rehabilitation and reconstruction in emergency                              16.2%
Capacity development                                                                       11.8%
Credits to finance the sector wide approaches (SWAP)                                       6.8%
Investment lending                                                                         6.1%
Other                                                                                      1.4%

12. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
   main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
   Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better                   Percentage of Respondents
   development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                        (Responses Combined; N=592)
NGOs                                                                                       40.9%
Local Government                                                                           39.5%
Private sector                                                                             32.8%
Beneficiaries                                                                              25.5%
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                       24.8%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                   10.1%
Donor community                                                                            8.1%
Media                                                                                      5.7%
Parliament                                                                                 3.5%
Faith based organizations                                                                  3.5%
Other                                                                                      1.2%
Foundations                                                                                1.0%

                                                                                        Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s
work in Benin, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)           N     Mean        SD
13. Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Benin     560     7.28      2.07
14. The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                       530     6.50      2.26
    for this country
15. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Benin       530     6.89      2.16
16. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Benin with respect               484     7.07      2.19




                                                        57
The World Bank                                                 Benin                        Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                                              Degree
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Benin in terms
of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)    N      Mean       SD
17. Follow up and follow through                                                      514     7.34      1.90
18. Responsiveness                                                                    409      6.38     2.09
19. Flexibility (in terms of the institution's products and services)                 419      5.72     2.17
20. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                          424      5.83     2.12
21. Being inclusive                                                                   374      6.30     1.98
22. Openness (sharing data and other information)                                     490      6.90     2.22
23. Staff accessibility                                                               467      6.18     2.43
24. Straightforwardness and honesty                                                   406      7.47     2.07
25. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                               437      6.58     2.29
26. Collaboration with the Government                                                 503      8.23     1.73
27. Collaboration with other donors                                                   401      7.63     2.01

28. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
   place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to?             Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than TWO)                                                (Responses Combined; N=570)
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                   39.8%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                       38.6%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                         37.7%
The Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                           36.1%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                     22.5%
The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                            6.7%
The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                                           4.9%
Poor donor coordination                                                                 4.2%
Other                                                                                   1.4%




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

                                                                                              Degree
Achieving Sustainable Results                                                         N       Mean       SD
1. To what degree does the World Bank's work help achieve sustainable development
    results in Benin, on a ten point scale?                                           538      7.06     2.02
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                58
The World Bank                                       Benin                                 Country Survey 2012


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the         Effectiveness
following areas of development in Benin, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                           N       Mean      SD
2.    Anti-corruption                                                                421      5.10     2.57
3.    Global information and communications technology                               354      5.82     2.19
4.    Transport                                                                      447      6.74     2.04
5.    Law and justice                                                                325      5.73     2.19
6.    Urban development                                                              402      6.36     2.00
7.    Environmental sustainability                                                   352      6.18     2.11
8.    Regulatory framework                                                           365      6.24     2.05
9.    Basic infrastructure                                                           470      6.79     1.96
10.   Communicable/non-communicable disease                                          431      7.04     2.13
11.   Poverty reduction                                                              509      6.65     2.22
12.   Gender                                                                         364      5.90     2.16
13.   Domestic private sector development                                            376      5.59     2.14
14.   Foreign investment                                                             303      5.77     1.99
15.   Water and sanitation                                                           439      6.78     1.83
16.   Trade and exports                                                              288      5.36     1.97
17.   Economic growth                                                                426      6.22     2.13
18.   Energy                                                                         401      5.86     2.21
19.   Disaster management                                                            281      5.19     2.19
20.   Monitoring and evaluation                                                      430      6.90     2.11
21.   Public financial management                                                    396      6.52     2.27
22.   Labor markets/job creation/employment                                          355      4.83     2.25
23.   Financial markets                                                              298      5.60     2.15
24.   Equality of opportunity                                                        315      5.32     2.37
25.   Health                                                                         485      7.36     1.95
26.   Rural development                                                              446      6.49     2.04
27.   Global integration                                                             299      5.98     2.22
28.   Food security                                                                  422      6.25     2.12
29.   Education                                                                      492      6.95     1.98
30.   Social protection                                                              347      5.72     2.05
31.   Climate change                                                                 291      5.29     2.20
32.   Public sector governance                                                       384      6.08     2.21
33.   Regional integration                                                           291      5.50     2.19
34.   Agricultural development                                                       436      6.38     2.20
35.   Natural resource management                                                    278      5.03     2.44




                                                         59
The World Bank                                       Benin                              Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

1. When thinking about the development challenges in Benin, where do
   you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its
   research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?                     Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                             (Responses Combined; N=592)
Education                                                                              30.1%
Agricultural development                                                               27.5%
Domestic private sector development                                                    26.4%
Energy                                                                                 23.3%
Health                                                                                 20.1%
Public sector governance                                                               18.4%
Poverty reduction                                                                      15.4%
Transport                                                                              14.4%
Economic growth                                                                        14.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                        12.7%
Rural development                                                                      12.5%
Water and sanitation                                                                   10.5%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                  8.1%
Public financial management                                                            6.3%
Basic infrastructure                                                                   6.3%
Climate change                                                                         5.9%
Trade and exports                                                                      4.4%
Global information and communications technology                                       4.4%
Food security                                                                          4.4%
Natural resource management                                                            4.2%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                              4.1%
Law and justice                                                                        3.7%
Gender                                                                                 3.4%
Social protection                                                                      3.2%
Environmental sustainability                                                           3.2%
Foreign investment                                                                     2.5%
Equality of opportunity                                                                1.9%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                  1.7%
Disaster management                                                                    1.2%
Urban development                                                                      1.2%
Regulatory framework                                                                   1.0%
Financial markets                                                                      0.7%
Regional integration                                                                   0.7%
Global integration                                                                     0.2%




                                                      60
The World Bank                                                 Benin                                Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at … ?            Level of Effectiveness
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                                 N      Mean        SD
2.   Raising your awareness of the particular topic                                        395      6.40      2.16
3.   Stimulating public debate/dialogue                                                    399       6.33      2.22
4.   Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                                                464       6.92      2.15
5.   Contributing to good policy making                                                    454       6.93      2.13
6.   Providing support for program implementation                                          465       7.43      1.86


To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research … ?                      Degree
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                    N       Mean       SD
7.   Are timely                                                                            352       6.72     1.98
8.   Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation               420       6.59     2.19
9.   Are relevant to Benin’s development priorities                                        476       6.73     2.04
10. Provide feasible recommendations                                                       447       6.87     2.01
11. Are accessible                                                                         465       6.89     2.08
12. A source of relevant information on global good practices                              447       7.58     1.70
13. Are adequately disseminated                                                            417       6.26     2.16
14. Are appropriately translated                                                           416       6.69     2.08
15. Are adaptable to Benin’s development challenges                                        456       6.57     2.05


Overall Evaluations                                                                             N     Mean       SD
16. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge
    and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?          500       7.07     2.03
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
17. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's knowledge/
    research, on a ten point scale?                                                          481       7.60     1.81
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
18. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise,
                                                                                             426       7.65     1.79
    on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                61
The World Bank                                                Benin                            Country Survey 2012


E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten            Level of Agreement
point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                   N      Mean     SD
1. The World Bank disburses funds promptly                                             460      5.84   2.57
2. The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                       535      7.70        1.96
    supports
3. The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                 486      6.85        2.12
4.   The World Bank’s safeguard policy requirements are reasonable                     462      6.95        2.03
5.   The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                       427      6.36        2.33
6.   Working with the World Bank increases Benin’s institutional capacity              521      7.50        1.87
7.   The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes           414      7.68        1.81
8.   The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated                            459      7.82        1.75
9.   Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank makes appropriate use of
                                                                                       480      7.95        1.93
     them


F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Benin

The Bank’s Role                                                                          N          Mean     SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank SHOULD play in Benin’s development
over the medium term in the near future, on a ten point scale?                          549          8.49   1.67
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of             Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=578)
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                    46.0%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Benin's specific challenges               34.6%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                           27.5%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                   27.2%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                     16.1%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                   14.2%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Benin's
                                                                                             12.6%
economy
Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                           7.4%
Other                                                                                        5.9%




                                                               62
The World Bank                                      Benin                              Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social      Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                  (Responses Combined; N=582)
Local television                                                                      47.4%
Local newspapers                                                                      45.5%
Internet                                                                              39.0%
International television                                                              18.0%
Local radio                                                                           16.0%
International radio                                                                   10.0%
International newspapers                                                              8.8%
Periodicals                                                                           5.3%
Other                                                                                 4.8%
Mobile phones                                                                         1.0%
Blogs                                                                                 0.3%
Instant messaging                                                                     0.3%

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?         Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                               (Responses Combined; N=587)
World Bank website                                                                    54.7%
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                             39.2%
World Bank publications and other written materials                                   35.9%
Direct contact with World Bank                                                        28.4%
e-Newsletters                                                                         10.1%
World Bank Public Information Center                                                  9.2%
Instant messaging                                                                     7.8%
Mobile phones                                                                         4.9%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                             4.3%
Other                                                                                 1.2%
Blogs                                                                                 0.3%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under
    which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession     Percentage of Respondents
    that is not a list of exceptions?                                               (N=572)
Yes                                                                                  9.6%
No                                                                                   90.4%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities    Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                               (N=539)
Yes                                                                                  32.1%
No                                                                                   67.9%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                        (N=178)
Yes                                                                                  87.6%
No                                                                                   12.4%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                              (N=563)
Yes                                                                                  93.1%
No                                                                                   6.9%




                                                      63
The World Bank                                        Benin                                   Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank website?                                            (N=567)
Yes                                                                                         51.3%
No                                                                                          48.7%

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                             (N=540)
The World Bank’s country website (www.banquemondiale.org/benin)                             62.6%
The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                           37.4%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point            Level of Agreement
scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N       Mean      SD
10. I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the organization’s Open
                                                                                      352      5.15      2.95
    Data policy
11. The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of information related to
                                                                                      110      6.54      2.96
    development in Benin
12. I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate                                   266      7.47      2.01
13. I find the information on the World Bank’s websites useful                        256      7.68      1.84
14. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it                 377      6.89      2.60
15. The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries             356      6.75      2.58



H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                      (N=589)
Employee of Ministry                                                                       18.5%
NGO                                                                                        11.5%
Other                                                                                      11.2%
PMU                                                                                        10.2%
Local Government office or staff                                                           9.5%
Media                                                                                      8.0%
Academia/Research institute/Think tank                                                     7.3%
Office of Minister                                                                         5.4%
Private sector organization                                                                3.6%
Faith-based group                                                                          2.5%
Consultant/Contractor on Bank Project                                                      2.4%
Bilateral agency                                                                           1.5%
Financial sector/Private bank                                                              1.5%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                  1.4%
Community Based Organization                                                               1.2%
Independent Government Institution                                                         1.2%
Multilateral agency                                                                        1.0%
Office of the President, Prime Minister                                                    0.8%
Private foundation                                                                         0.5%
Trade Union                                                                                0.5%
Judiciary branch                                                                           0.2%




                                                       64
The World Bank                                         Benin                          Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.              Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                              (N=586)
Other                                                                              17.4%
Health                                                                             9.7%
Education                                                                          8.2%
Public financial management                                                        8.2%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                          5.5%
Agricultural development                                                           5.1%
Rural development                                                                  4.1%
Global information & comm. technology                                              3.6%
Poverty reduction                                                                  3.6%
Public sector governance                                                           3.6%
Transport                                                                          3.4%
Economic growth                                                                    3.1%
Law and justice                                                                    3.1%
Domestic private sector development                                                2.7%
Water and sanitation                                                               2.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                       2.6%
Energy                                                                             2.2%
Basic infrastructure                                                               1.7%
Social protection                                                                  1.5%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                              1.4%
Financial markets                                                                  1.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                    0.9%
Regulatory framework                                                               0.9%
Trade and exports                                                                  0.9%
Climate change                                                                     0.5%
Gender                                                                             0.5%
Natural resource management                                                        0.5%
Urban development                                                                  0.5%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.3%
Disaster management                                                                0.2%
Food security                                                                      0.2%
Global integration                                                                 0.2%
Regional integration                                                               0.2%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World      Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in your country?                                                           (N=273)
Yes                                                                                38.5%
No                                                                                 61.5%

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World   Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)                                        (N=565)
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                      44.8%
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                           42.8%
Observer                                                                           28.0%
Use World Bank reports/data                                                        25.1%
Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                       20.7%




                                                        65
The World Bank                                       Benin                Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

                                                             Percentage of Respondents
5. Which best represents your geographic location?                    (N=585)
Cotonou                                                                58.6%
Abomey-Calavi                                                          12.5%
Other Cities                                                           10.1%
Rural Areas                                                            7.2%
Parakou                                                                6.0%
Porto Novo                                                             5.6%




                                                      66
The World Bank                                                                                                         Benin                                                                                       Country Survey 2012


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

A. General Issues facing Benin
In general, would you say that Benin is headed in...?
                                                                       Office of                                                                         Bi- or              Financial
                                                                      President/                Office of    Employee Consultant                        Multi-                Sector/                    Faith-
                                                                        Prime      Office of   Parliamen-       of a     on Bank           Local        lateral    Private    Private    NGO/            Based
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister    Minister      tarian       Ministry project/PMU      Government      Agency     Sector      Bank       CBO    Media   Group    Academia    Other
 The right direction                                                    60.0%       60.0%        71.4%         57.1%      50.0%           66.7%         53.8%      23.1%       25.0%     35.3%   22.7%   30.8%     26.3%       33.3%
 The wrong direction                                                    20.0%       20.0%        14.3%         17.9%      33.3%            0.0%         23.1%      30.8%       45.0%     26.5%   36.4%   23.1%     42.1%       44.4%
 Not sure                                                               20.0%       20.0%        14.3%         25.0%      16.7%           33.3%         23.1%      46.2%       30.0%     38.2%   40.9%   46.2%     31.6%       22.2%

                                                                                                             st   nd     rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Benin. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
                                                                        Office of                                                                        Bi- or              Financial
  1st Most Important                                                   President/                 Office of    Employee Consultant                      Multi-                Sector/                    Faith-
                                                                          Prime      Office of Parliamen-          of a      on Bank        Local       lateral    Private    Private    NGO/            Based
  Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister     Minister      tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government         Agency     Sector      Bank       CBO    Media   Group    Academia    Other
  Rural development                                                       0.0%         8.0%        14.3%          21.0%       18.3%         20.4%        0.0%       5.3%       20.0%     18.0%   16.3%   18.2%      2.6%      11.8%
  Education                                                               0.0%         32.0%       28.6%          28.0%       25.0%         32.7%       16.7%      36.8%        0.0%     32.8%   48.8%   54.5%     36.8%      39.7%
  Social protection                                                       0.0%         4.0%         0.0%           2.0%        0.0%          2.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       0.0%
  Transport                                                               0.0%         0.0%        14.3%           4.0%        8.3%          4.1%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    2.3%    0.0%      2.6%       2.9%
  Poverty reduction                                                       0.0%         4.0%        14.3%          13.0%       15.0%         12.2%       16.7%      10.5%       20.0%      8.2%    4.7%    0.0%     10.5%      11.8%
  Public sector governance                                               40.0%         16.0%        0.0%           2.0%        5.0%          4.1%       16.7%       5.3%       20.0%      1.6%    7.0%    0.0%      5.3%       2.9%
  Regional integration                                                    0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      5.3%       0.0%
  Gender                                                                  0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Domestic private sector development                                     0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       2.9%
  Foreign investment                                                      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                                   20.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    2.3%    0.0%      0.0%       1.5%
  Energy                                                                  0.0%         4.0%         0.0%           2.0%        5.0%          0.0%        0.0%      10.5%        0.0%      3.3%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                               0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Public financial management                                             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      10.5%        0.0%      0.0%    2.3%    0.0%      5.3%       0.0%
  Labor markets/job creation/employment                                   0.0%         4.0%        14.3%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       0.0%
  Financial markets                                                       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Urban development                                                       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          2.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Equality of opportunity                                                 0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        1.7%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Health                                                                  0.0%         8.0%         0.0%           8.0%        5.0%         10.2%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      6.6%    2.3%   18.2%      5.3%       8.8%
  Global integration                                                      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Food security                                                           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%       16.7%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    2.3%    0.0%      2.6%       0.0%
  Climate change                                                          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Agricultural development                                               20.0%         8.0%        14.3%           8.0%       11.7%          8.2%        0.0%       5.3%       40.0%     13.1%    7.0%    9.1%     13.2%       7.4%
  Trade and exports                                                       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Economic growth                                                         0.0%         4.0%         0.0%           4.0%        3.3%          2.0%       16.7%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       4.4%
  Law and justice                                                         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        8.3%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Regulatory framework                                                    0.0%         4.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable disease                                   0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Basic infrastructure                                                    0.0%         4.0%         0.0%           2.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       1.5%
  Natural resource management                                             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Anti-corruption                                                        20.0%         0.0%         0.0%           2.0%        0.0%          0.0%        8.3%       5.3%        0.0%      6.6%    4.7%    0.0%      2.6%       4.4%
  Disaster management                                                     0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Global information and communications technology                        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        1.7%          2.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                       67
The World Bank                                                                                                         Benin                                                                                       Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)
                                                                                                             st   nd     rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Benin. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
    nd
                                                                        Office of                                                                        Bi- or              Financial
  2 Most Important                                                     President/                 Office of    Employee Consultant                      Multi-                Sector/                    Faith-
                                                                          Prime      Office of Parliamen-          of a      on Bank        Local       lateral    Private    Private    NGO/            Based
  Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister     Minister      tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government         Agency     Sector      Bank       CBO    Media   Group    Academia    Other
  Rural development                                                       0.0%         3.8%        28.6%          10.0%        4.9%         12.2%        0.0%      15.8%       16.7%      6.6%    9.3%    9.1%     13.2%      10.1%
  Education                                                               0.0%         26.9%       14.3%          25.0%       32.8%         16.3%       16.7%      10.5%       16.7%     13.1%   16.3%   18.2%     15.8%      23.2%
  Social protection                                                       0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           4.0%        0.0%          4.1%        0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      3.3%    2.3%   27.3%      2.6%       0.0%
  Transport                                                               0.0%         0.0%        14.3%           3.0%        4.9%         16.3%        8.3%       0.0%        0.0%      4.9%    4.7%    0.0%      2.6%       5.8%
  Poverty reduction                                                       0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           3.0%        3.3%          6.1%       16.7%       5.3%        0.0%      6.6%    9.3%    0.0%      2.6%       7.2%
  Public sector governance                                                0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           5.0%        3.3%          2.0%       25.0%       0.0%       16.7%      8.2%    4.7%    0.0%      0.0%       4.3%
  Regional integration                                                    0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    4.7%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Gender                                                                  0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      6.6%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       0.0%
  Domestic private sector development                                     0.0%         3.8%        14.3%           1.0%        1.6%          0.0%        0.0%      10.5%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       4.3%
  Foreign investment                                                      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                                    0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           2.0%        1.6%          8.2%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      3.3%    2.3%    0.0%      0.0%       2.9%
  Energy                                                                 20.0%         3.8%         0.0%           3.0%        8.2%          2.0%        0.0%       0.0%       16.7%      3.3%    2.3%    0.0%      2.6%       2.9%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                               0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          2.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Public financial management                                             0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           5.0%        6.6%          0.0%        0.0%      10.5%        0.0%      0.0%    7.0%    0.0%      5.3%       0.0%
  Labor markets/job creation/employment                                   0.0%         7.7%        14.3%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    2.3%    0.0%      2.6%       2.9%
  Financial markets                                                       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Urban development                                                       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       0.0%
  Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Equality of opportunity                                                 0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    2.3%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Health                                                                 20.0%         19.2%        0.0%          18.0%       14.8%         14.3%       16.7%       0.0%       16.7%      9.8%   11.6%   18.2%     18.4%       8.7%
  Global integration                                                      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        1.6%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Food security                                                           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        1.6%          0.0%        0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      3.3%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       1.4%
  Climate change                                                          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    4.7%    0.0%      0.0%       1.4%
  Agricultural development                                               20.0%         3.8%         0.0%           6.0%        1.6%          4.1%        8.3%      10.5%        0.0%      9.8%    2.3%    9.1%     10.5%       7.2%
  Trade and exports                                                      20.0%         3.8%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       1.4%
  Economic growth                                                         0.0%         7.7%        14.3%           2.0%        3.3%          4.1%        8.3%       5.3%       16.7%      4.9%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       4.3%
  Law and justice                                                         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        1.6%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    9.1%      2.6%       0.0%
  Regulatory framework                                                    0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable disease                                   0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Basic infrastructure                                                    0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        0.0%          4.1%        0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      0.0%    4.7%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Natural resource management                                             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           4.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    2.3%    0.0%      0.0%       2.9%
  Anti-corruption                                                        20.0%         3.8%         0.0%           3.0%        8.2%          4.1%        0.0%      10.5%        0.0%      4.9%    4.7%    9.1%      7.9%       8.7%
  Disaster management                                                     0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Global information and communications technology                        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    2.3%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                       68
The World Bank                                                                                                         Benin                                                                                       Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)
                                                                                                             st   nd     rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Benin. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
    rd
                                                                        Office of                                                                        Bi- or              Financial
  3 Most Important                                                     President/                 Office of    Employee Consultant                      Multi-                Sector/                    Faith-
                                                                          Prime      Office of Parliamen-          of a      on Bank        Local       lateral    Private    Private    NGO/            Based
  Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister     Minister      tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government         Agency     Sector      Bank       CBO    Media   Group    Academia    Other
  Rural development                                                       0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           3.0%        4.8%          3.9%       16.7%       5.3%        0.0%      1.6%    4.5%    0.0%     10.5%       8.7%
  Education                                                               0.0%         3.8%        25.0%           8.9%        4.8%          9.8%       16.7%       0.0%       20.0%      8.2%    2.3%    0.0%      5.3%      10.1%
  Social protection                                                       0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           3.0%        0.0%          2.0%        8.3%       5.3%        0.0%      1.6%    9.1%    0.0%      2.6%       4.3%
  Transport                                                               0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           4.0%        6.5%          5.9%        8.3%      10.5%        0.0%      3.3%    0.0%    9.1%      5.3%       7.2%
  Poverty reduction                                                       0.0%         11.5%        0.0%           7.9%       12.9%          9.8%        0.0%      10.5%        0.0%      1.6%    4.5%   18.2%      7.9%       1.4%
  Public sector governance                                                0.0%         7.7%        12.5%           4.0%        0.0%          2.0%        8.3%       0.0%       20.0%      6.6%    6.8%    0.0%      5.3%       2.9%
  Regional integration                                                    0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           2.0%        0.0%          9.8%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    2.3%    0.0%      0.0%       1.4%
  Gender                                                                  0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      6.6%    2.3%    9.1%      2.6%       1.4%
  Domestic private sector development                                     0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           4.0%        6.5%          9.8%        8.3%       5.3%        0.0%      4.9%    6.8%    0.0%      0.0%       4.3%
  Foreign investment                                                      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        1.6%          2.0%        0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                                    0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           3.0%        3.2%          7.8%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    4.5%    9.1%      0.0%       4.3%
  Energy                                                                 20.0%         0.0%        12.5%           7.9%        0.0%          2.0%        0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      6.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       7.2%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                               0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        1.6%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       2.9%
  Public financial management                                            20.0%         15.4%        0.0%           5.0%        3.2%          5.9%       16.7%       0.0%       20.0%      3.3%    4.5%    0.0%      2.6%       2.9%
  Labor markets/job creation/employment                                   0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           2.0%        1.6%          2.0%        0.0%       0.0%       20.0%      1.6%    2.3%    0.0%      5.3%       0.0%
  Financial markets                                                       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      0.0%    2.3%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Urban development                                                       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           2.0%        0.0%          2.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    4.5%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        1.6%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Equality of opportunity                                                 0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           1.0%        1.6%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       0.0%
  Health                                                                  0.0%         7.7%        12.5%          10.9%       12.9%          2.0%        8.3%      15.8%       20.0%     14.8%    9.1%   18.2%     18.4%      14.5%
  Global integration                                                      0.0%         0.0%        12.5%           1.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       0.0%
  Food security                                                           0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           2.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      3.3%    2.3%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Climate change                                                          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Agricultural development                                               20.0%         11.5%        0.0%           5.9%        4.8%          5.9%        0.0%      10.5%        0.0%      6.6%   11.4%   18.2%     13.2%       2.9%
  Trade and exports                                                       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        3.2%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    2.3%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Economic growth                                                         0.0%         7.7%        12.5%           5.9%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      3.3%    6.8%    9.1%      2.6%       5.8%
  Law and justice                                                         0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           2.0%        3.2%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Regulatory framework                                                    0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.0%        0.0%          2.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    2.3%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable disease                                   0.0%         3.8%         0.0%           0.0%        1.6%          2.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Basic infrastructure                                                   40.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        4.8%          5.9%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    4.5%    0.0%      0.0%       7.2%
  Natural resource management                                             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           2.0%        4.8%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       0.0%
  Anti-corruption                                                         0.0%         7.7%        12.5%           5.9%        9.7%          7.8%        8.3%      21.1%        0.0%     11.5%    4.5%    9.1%      7.9%       8.7%
  Disaster management                                                     0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        1.6%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       1.4%
  Global information and communications technology                        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           2.0%        3.2%          0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                       69
The World Bank                                                                                                     Benin                                                                                             Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                       Office of                                                                       Bi- or              Financial
                                                                      President/               Office of    Employee Consultant                       Multi-                Sector/                          Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Prime     Office of Parliamen-         of a       on Bank         Local       lateral    Private    Private     NGO/                 Based
 (Responses Combined)                                                  Minister   Minister      tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government          Agency     Sector      Bank        CBO       Media     Group    Academia   Other
 Energy                                                                 20.0%       28.1%       37.5%         23.1%        18.9%          10.7%        6.7%      33.3%       11.1%      18.7%      21.3%     13.3%      11.6%    19.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                   40.0%       15.6%       12.5%         18.5%        12.2%          19.6%       13.3%      14.3%       11.1%      17.3%      17.0%     13.3%      9.3%     12.7%
 Equality of opportunity                                                 0.0%       3.1%         0.0%          3.7%         4.1%          3.6%        13.3%       4.8%       22.2%       9.3%      10.6%      0.0%      4.7%      5.1%
 Economic growth                                                         0.0%       18.8%       62.5%         28.7%        25.7%          17.9%       40.0%      23.8%        0.0%      13.3%      19.1%      6.7%      23.3%    17.7%
 Climate change                                                          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       1.3%       2.1%      0.0%      0.0%      2.5%
 Disaster management                                                     0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      1.3%
 Regional integration                                                    0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          1.8%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       4.0%       0.0%      0.0%      4.7%      2.5%
 Gender                                                                  0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          1.9%         0.0%          1.8%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       4.0%       6.4%      6.7%      2.3%      3.8%
 Rural development                                                       0.0%       15.6%       25.0%         29.6%        24.3%          28.6%       26.7%      33.3%       11.1%      14.7%      17.0%     33.3%      44.2%    32.9%
 Urban development                                                       0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         2.7%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       4.3%      6.7%      0.0%      0.0%
 Education                                                              40.0%       37.5%       37.5%         41.7%        39.2%          48.2%       26.7%      47.6%       22.2%      40.0%      36.2%     60.0%      27.9%    39.2%
 Regulatory framework                                                    0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       6.4%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                   20.0%       21.9%        0.0%         13.9%        13.5%          8.9%         0.0%       4.8%        0.0%       2.7%      10.6%      0.0%      14.0%    15.2%
 Social protection                                                       0.0%       12.5%        0.0%          3.7%         2.7%          0.0%         6.7%       4.8%        0.0%       6.7%       8.5%      6.7%      4.7%      3.8%
 Law and justice                                                         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         5.4%          1.8%        20.0%       0.0%       11.1%       5.3%       6.4%      6.7%      4.7%      2.5%
 Transport                                                               0.0%       3.1%        25.0%         11.1%        28.4%          10.7%        0.0%       4.8%        0.0%       9.3%      12.8%     20.0%      4.7%     12.7%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                   0.0%       3.1%         0.0%          0.9%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      1.3%
 Global information and communications technology                        0.0%       3.1%         0.0%          0.0%         1.4%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
 Public sector governance                                                0.0%       18.8%       12.5%          5.6%         4.1%          7.1%         6.7%       0.0%        0.0%       6.7%       4.3%      0.0%      9.3%      2.5%
 Domestic private sector development                                    20.0%       12.5%        0.0%         13.9%        13.5%          12.5%       20.0%      33.3%       22.2%      14.7%      14.9%     26.7%      16.3%     8.9%
 Foreign investment                                                      0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.9%         0.0%          3.6%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       2.7%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      1.3%
 Global integration                                                      0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         1.4%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
 Food security                                                          20.0%       0.0%        12.5%         12.0%         8.1%          21.4%        6.7%       9.5%       44.4%      14.7%      17.0%     26.7%      18.6%     8.9%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                               0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          1.9%         1.4%          1.8%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      2.3%      0.0%
 Natural resource management                                             0.0%       3.1%         0.0%          0.9%         1.4%          1.8%        13.3%       4.8%        0.0%       1.3%       2.1%      0.0%      2.3%      1.3%
 Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%       3.1%         0.0%          3.7%         1.4%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       2.7%       0.0%      6.7%      0.0%      1.3%
 Health                                                                 20.0%       15.6%       25.0%         28.7%        28.4%          35.7%       33.3%      14.3%       44.4%      32.0%      25.5%     26.7%      23.3%    27.8%
 Public financial management                                            20.0%       9.4%        12.5%          3.7%         9.5%          3.6%        33.3%       9.5%       11.1%       5.3%      12.8%      6.7%      9.3%      2.5%
 Agricultural development                                               40.0%       40.6%       12.5%         27.8%        28.4%          26.8%       13.3%      19.0%       11.1%      33.3%      14.9%     13.3%      27.9%    30.4%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                   0.0%       12.5%       12.5%         12.0%         4.1%          14.3%       13.3%       9.5%       22.2%      14.7%       8.5%      6.7%      16.3%    20.3%
 Financial markets                                                       0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       4.8%       11.1%       1.3%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                       0.0%       3.1%         0.0%          0.9%         1.4%          1.8%         0.0%       0.0%       22.2%       5.3%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                        40.0%       12.5%       12.5%         11.1%        18.9%          14.3%        6.7%      23.8%       22.2%      18.7%      21.3%     13.3%      18.6%    21.5%




                                                                                                                   70
The World Bank                                                                                                   Benin                                                                                        Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                     Office of                                                                        Bi- or            Financial
                                                                    President/                Office of   Employee Consultant                        Multi-              Sector/                    Faith-
  Percentage of Respondents                                            Prime     Office of Parliamen-         of a       on Bank        Local        lateral    Private  Private    NGO/            Based
  (Responses Combined)                                               Minister    Minister      tarian      Ministry project/PMU Government           Agency     Sector    Bank       CBO    Media   Group    Academia    Other
  Poverty reduction                                                    0.0%        0.0%        12.5%        15.6%         18.9%        14.3%         21.4%      14.3%     11.1%     14.9%   13.0%   33.3%      9.3%      19.2%
  Energy                                                               40.0%      35.5%        25.0%        34.9%         27.0%        23.2%         21.4%      23.8%     11.1%     25.7%   28.3%   33.3%     25.6%      28.2%
  Equality of opportunity                                              0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.9%          1.4%         3.6%          7.1%       0.0%      0.0%      2.7%    0.0%    0.0%      2.3%       6.4%
  Social protection                                                    20.0%       3.2%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%       9.5%     11.1%      2.7%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Global integration                                                   0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         1.8%          2.7%         0.0%          0.0%       0.0%     11.1%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      2.3%       3.8%
  Climate change                                                       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.9%          0.0%         1.8%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       1.3%
  Anti-corruption                                                      20.0%      22.6%        37.5%        22.0%         28.4%        26.8%         21.4%      38.1%     11.1%     43.2%   34.8%   33.3%     30.2%      28.2%
  Disaster management                                                  0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Rural development                                                    0.0%       16.1%        37.5%        21.1%         24.3%        12.5%         35.7%      19.0%     11.1%     12.2%   17.4%   40.0%     23.3%      28.2%
  Foreign investment                                                   40.0%       0.0%        25.0%         8.3%         13.5%        19.6%         14.3%      19.0%     44.4%      8.1%    8.7%    0.0%     18.6%      16.7%
  Urban development                                                    0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          1.4%         0.0%          7.1%       0.0%      0.0%      1.4%    2.2%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                                 0.0%        3.2%        12.5%         0.9%          1.4%         5.4%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      1.4%    0.0%   20.0%      0.0%       2.6%
  Education                                                            0.0%       22.6%        12.5%        15.6%         21.6%        19.6%         28.6%      23.8%      0.0%     13.5%   17.4%   13.3%     14.0%      14.1%
  Global information and communications technology                     0.0%        0.0%        12.5%         2.8%          1.4%         5.4%          0.0%       9.5%      0.0%      4.1%    6.5%    0.0%      4.7%       5.1%
  Regulatory framework                                                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         5.5%          1.4%         5.4%          7.1%       0.0%      0.0%      2.7%    8.7%    0.0%      0.0%       2.6%
  Communicable/non-communicable disease                                0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.9%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       1.3%
  Trade and exports                                                    20.0%      19.4%        25.0%        20.2%         21.6%        17.9%          7.1%       4.8%     22.2%     20.3%   17.4%   13.3%     32.6%      17.9%
  Public sector governance                                             20.0%      25.8%         0.0%         8.3%          8.1%         8.9%         21.4%       9.5%      0.0%     10.8%    8.7%    0.0%      9.3%       5.1%
  Regional integration                                                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         1.8%          0.0%         3.6%          7.1%       0.0%      0.0%      1.4%    4.3%    0.0%      7.0%       3.8%
  Domestic private sector development                                  60.0%      29.0%         0.0%        19.3%         27.0%        32.1%         21.4%      33.3%     44.4%     21.6%   32.6%   20.0%     18.6%      15.4%
  Labor markets/job creation/employment                                0.0%        9.7%         0.0%         3.7%          5.4%         5.4%          7.1%       4.8%     11.1%      6.8%    8.7%    0.0%      4.7%       5.1%
  Agricultural development                                             40.0%      35.5%        25.0%        34.9%         32.4%        30.4%         14.3%      19.0%     33.3%     35.1%   30.4%   13.3%     37.2%      32.1%
  Food security                                                        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         4.6%          1.4%         0.0%          7.1%       9.5%      0.0%      1.4%    4.3%    0.0%      2.3%       0.0%
  Transport                                                            40.0%      25.8%        25.0%        25.7%         21.6%        21.4%         14.3%      23.8%     33.3%     17.6%   10.9%   26.7%     16.3%      12.8%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                            0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         4.6%          1.4%         3.6%          7.1%       4.8%      0.0%      0.0%    2.2%    0.0%      2.3%       0.0%
  Gender                                                               0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
  Natural resource management                                          0.0%        6.5%         0.0%         1.8%          4.1%         3.6%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      6.8%    2.2%    6.7%      7.0%       6.4%
  Environmental sustainability                                         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         2.8%          2.7%         0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      2.7%    2.2%    6.7%      0.0%       1.3%
  Health                                                               0.0%        6.5%        12.5%         9.2%          9.5%        10.7%          0.0%       4.8%     11.1%     12.2%    2.2%    6.7%      2.3%       6.4%
  Basic infrastructure                                                 0.0%       16.1%        12.5%         9.2%          2.7%         3.6%          0.0%       4.8%     11.1%      6.8%    2.2%    0.0%      4.7%      11.5%
  Law and justice                                                      0.0%        3.2%         0.0%         2.8%          2.7%         1.8%          7.1%       9.5%      0.0%      2.7%    2.2%   13.3%      2.3%       5.1%
  Public financial management                                          0.0%       12.9%        12.5%        17.4%         16.2%        12.5%         21.4%      14.3%      0.0%     20.3%   28.3%   20.0%     11.6%      14.1%
  Financial markets                                                    0.0%        0.0%        12.5%         1.8%          0.0%         3.6%          0.0%       0.0%     22.2%      2.7%    4.3%    0.0%     11.6%       5.1%




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                 71
The World Bank                                                                            Benin   Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                          72
The World Bank                                                                                                       Benin                                                                                               Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Benin, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in Benin?
  (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                    Office of                                                                          Bi- or              Financial
                                                                   President/               Office of     Employee Consultant                         Multi-                Sector/                            Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Prime    Office of Parliamen-           of a        on Bank          Local       lateral    Private    Private      NGO/                 Based
 (Responses Combined)                                               Minister  Minister       tarian        Ministry project/PMU Government            Agency      Sector      Bank        CBO      Media      Group     Academia    Other
 Rural development                                                   20.0%      19.4%        50.0%          32.7%         35.1%           32.1%       26.7%       40.0%       44.4%      18.9%     36.2%      33.3%      31.7%      36.7%
 Education                                                           40.0%      51.6%        62.5%          54.2%         47.3%           48.2%       20.0%       50.0%       66.7%      58.1%     57.4%      86.7%      56.1%      62.0%
 Social protection                                                    0.0%      3.2%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%           1.8%         6.7%        5.0%        0.0%       5.4%      6.4%       6.7%       2.4%       3.8%
 Transport                                                           40.0%      12.9%        12.5%          20.6%         37.8%           25.0%       20.0%        5.0%       11.1%      16.2%     10.6%      20.0%       9.8%      20.3%
 Poverty reduction                                                    0.0%      6.5%         12.5%          11.2%         18.9%           17.9%       13.3%       15.0%       22.2%      12.2%      8.5%       6.7%       7.3%      10.1%
 Public sector governance                                            20.0%      25.8%         0.0%          13.1%          9.5%           5.4%        26.7%        5.0%        0.0%       6.8%     10.6%       0.0%       9.8%       2.5%
 Regional integration                                                 0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       2.7%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Gender                                                               0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           0.9%          0.0%           1.8%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       4.1%      2.1%       0.0%       0.0%       1.3%
 Domestic private sector development                                 20.0%      25.8%        12.5%          10.3%         13.5%           12.5%        6.7%       40.0%       11.1%      13.5%     23.4%      26.7%       9.8%      15.2%
 Foreign investment                                                   0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           3.7%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       22.2%       0.0%      2.1%       0.0%       7.3%       0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                20.0%      6.5%         12.5%           7.5%          8.1%           14.3%        0.0%        5.0%       22.2%       9.5%     17.0%       6.7%       4.9%       7.6%
 Energy                                                              20.0%      25.8%        25.0%          23.4%         24.3%           12.5%       20.0%       10.0%        0.0%      16.2%     17.0%      20.0%      29.3%      13.9%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                            0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           3.7%          2.7%           7.1%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       1.4%      0.0%       6.7%       0.0%       3.8%
 Public financial management                                          0.0%      9.7%         12.5%           5.6%          4.1%           3.6%        26.7%       20.0%       11.1%       4.1%     14.9%       0.0%       7.3%       7.6%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                0.0%      19.4%        25.0%           5.6%          4.1%           5.4%         6.7%        5.0%        0.0%       6.8%      2.1%       0.0%      12.2%       6.3%
 Financial markets                                                    0.0%      0.0%         12.5%           0.0%          2.7%           0.0%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       2.7%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Urban development                                                    0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         6.7%       10.0%        0.0%       2.7%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       2.5%
 Environmental sustainability                                         0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           1.9%          1.4%           1.8%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       2.7%      2.1%       6.7%       0.0%       1.3%
 Equality of opportunity                                              0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%           1.8%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       1.4%      2.1%       0.0%       0.0%       1.3%
 Health                                                              20.0%      22.6%        12.5%          33.6%         23.0%           33.9%       13.3%       20.0%       44.4%      37.8%     14.9%      33.3%      26.8%      20.3%
 Global integration                                                   0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         6.7%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Food security                                                        0.0%      0.0%         12.5%           3.7%          2.7%           1.8%         6.7%       10.0%        0.0%       2.7%     10.6%       6.7%       4.9%       1.3%
 Climate change                                                       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           0.9%          0.0%           0.0%         6.7%        0.0%        0.0%       1.4%      2.1%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Agricultural development                                            40.0%      25.8%        12.5%          25.2%         24.3%           33.9%       13.3%       20.0%       22.2%      32.4%     23.4%      26.7%      36.6%      29.1%
 Trade and exports                                                    0.0%      3.2%          0.0%           1.9%          4.1%           5.4%        13.3%        5.0%        0.0%       4.1%      2.1%       0.0%       2.4%       1.3%
 Economic growth                                                     20.0%      9.7%         12.5%          15.0%          9.5%           5.4%        26.7%        5.0%       22.2%       5.4%      4.3%       6.7%      12.2%      15.2%
 Law and justice                                                      0.0%      3.2%          0.0%           1.9%          2.7%           1.8%         0.0%        5.0%        0.0%       6.8%      4.3%       0.0%       2.4%       3.8%
 Regulatory framework                                                 0.0%      3.2%          0.0%           1.9%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       1.4%      4.3%       0.0%       0.0%       1.3%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           1.9%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       2.7%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                 0.0%      22.6%         0.0%           9.3%         10.8%           10.7%        6.7%       10.0%        0.0%       5.4%      8.5%       0.0%      17.1%      11.4%
 Natural resource management                                          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           1.9%          4.1%           1.8%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       1.4%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       2.5%
 Anti-corruption                                                     20.0%      3.2%          0.0%           4.7%          6.8%           10.7%       20.0%       10.0%        0.0%      10.8%      8.5%       6.7%       9.8%      15.2%
 Disaster management                                                  0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%           1.8%         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                    20.0%      0.0%         12.5%           3.7%          2.7%           1.8%         6.7%        5.0%        0.0%       0.0%      4.3%       0.0%       0.0%       2.5%




                                                                                                                     73
The World Bank                                                                                                          Benin                                                                                        Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Benin?
                                                                        Office of                                                                           Bi- or             Financial
 Greatest Value                                                        President/                Office of     Employee Consultant                         Multi-               Sector/                    Faith-
                                                                          Prime      Office of Parliamen-          of a        on Bank          Local      lateral   Private    Private    NGO/            Based
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Minister     Minister     tarian        Ministry project/PMU Government            Agency    Sector      Bank      CBO     Media   Group    Academia    Other
 Financial resources                                                       20.0%        26.7%       42.9%           39.8%         63.2%            54.9%    42.9%      55.0%      37.5%    48.4%   31.8%    54.5%      53.8%    50.7%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                  0.0%       13.3%       14.3%           17.5%          7.4%            13.7%    14.3%      10.0%      25.0%    14.1%    9.1%    18.2%       7.7%    16.9%
 Technical assistance                                                        0.0%        6.7%       28.6%           12.6%          5.9%             5.9%      0.0%      5.0%      12.5%     6.3%   15.9%     9.1%      15.4%     4.2%
 Policy advice                                                             20.0%        16.7%         0.0%           9.7%          7.4%            11.8%    21.4%       5.0%       0.0%    10.9%   25.0%    18.2%       5.1%     5.6%
 Donor coordination                                                        60.0%        13.3%       14.3%            5.8%          5.9%             2.0%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     6.3%    4.5%     0.0%      10.3%     5.6%
 Data                                                                        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%           1.9%          1.5%             2.0%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     0.0%    2.3%     0.0%       0.0%     0.0%
 Training/capacity building                                                  0.0%       10.0%         0.0%           8.7%          4.4%             9.8%      0.0%     20.0%      25.0%    12.5%    4.5%     0.0%       5.1%    11.3%
 Studies/analyses                                                            0.0%        3.3%         0.0%           1.9%          1.5%             0.0%      7.1%      0.0%       0.0%     1.6%    4.5%     0.0%       0.0%     2.8%
 Convening/facilitating                                                      0.0%       10.0%         0.0%           1.9%          2.9%             0.0%    14.3%       5.0%       0.0%     0.0%    2.3%     0.0%       2.6%     1.4%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing)         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%     2.8%
 Other                                                                       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%     0.0%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Benin?
                                                                        Office of                                                                           Bi- or             Financial
 2nd Greatest Value                                                    President/                Office of     Employee Consultant                         Multi-               Sector/                    Faith-
                                                                          Prime      Office of Parliamen-          of a        on Bank          Local      lateral   Private    Private    NGO/            Based
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Minister     Minister     tarian        Ministry project/PMU Government            Agency    Sector      Bank       CBO    Media   Group    Academia    Other
 Financial resources                                                      0.0%         20.0%      16.7%           12.6%          4.4%           7.8%       21.4%      0.0%       12.5%      6.8%   11.6%    9.1%     10.3%      12.7%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                               0.0%         10.0%      16.7%            9.7%         16.2%           3.9%        7.1%     10.0%        0.0%      8.5%   11.6%    9.1%     17.9%      15.5%
 Technical assistance                                                    40.0%         10.0%      16.7%           21.4%         25.0%           25.5%      21.4%     40.0%       37.5%     22.0%   20.9%   18.2%     12.8%       9.9%
 Policy advice                                                           20.0%         13.3%      16.7%           21.4%         10.3%           17.6%       0.0%     10.0%       37.5%     16.9%   11.6%    9.1%     17.9%      21.1%
 Donor coordination                                                       0.0%          6.7%       0.0%            7.8%          8.8%           3.9%        7.1%     10.0%        0.0%      5.1%    2.3%   18.2%      0.0%       5.6%
 Data                                                                     0.0%          0.0%       0.0%            0.0%          2.9%           3.9%        7.1%      5.0%        0.0%      3.4%    7.0%    0.0%     10.3%       2.8%
 Training/capacity building                                               0.0%          6.7%      16.7%           13.6%         14.7%           23.5%       7.1%      0.0%        0.0%     18.6%   25.6%   27.3%     23.1%      21.1%
 Studies/analyses                                                        20.0%         10.0%      16.7%            2.9%          5.9%           5.9%       14.3%     15.0%        0.0%      3.4%    7.0%    0.0%      2.6%       4.2%
 Convening/facilitating                                                  20.0%         20.0%       0.0%            8.7%          7.4%           7.8%        7.1%      0.0%       12.5%     10.2%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       4.2%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing)      0.0%          3.3%       0.0%            1.0%          4.4%           0.0%        7.1%      5.0%        0.0%      1.7%    2.3%    9.1%      0.0%       2.8%
 Other                                                                    0.0%          0.0%       0.0%            1.0%          0.0%           0.0%        0.0%      5.0%        0.0%      3.4%    0.0%    0.0%      2.6%       0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                        Office of                                                                           Bi- or             Financial
                                                                       President/               Office of    Employee Consultant                           Multi-               Sector/                    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Prime     Office of Parliamen-         of a       on Bank            Local        lateral   Private    Private    NGO/            Based
 (Responses Combined)                                                   Minister   Minister       tarian      Ministry project/PMU         Government      Agency    Sector      Bank       CBO    Media   Group    Academia    Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities   50.0%       36.7%        62.5%        39.2%        30.0%            34.0%         40.0%     21.1%       37.5%     25.4%   43.2%   42.9%     38.2%      35.7%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                 0.0%       16.7%        25.0%        12.4%        20.0%             7.5%         26.7%     15.8%        0.0%     15.5%    9.1%    7.1%      2.9%      21.4%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures             25.0%       26.7%        25.0%        22.7%        21.4%             9.4%          6.7%     15.8%       12.5%     15.5%   25.0%    7.1%     11.8%      12.9%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                   0.0%        0.0%        12.5%         9.3%         4.3%             5.7%         20.0%      5.3%       12.5%      4.2%    6.8%   14.3%      8.8%       5.7%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         1.0%         1.4%             0.0%          0.0%      5.3%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%       1.4%
 Not client focused                                                       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         1.4%             1.9%          0.0%     10.5%       12.5%      7.0%    0.0%   14.3%      8.8%       1.4%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                    0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         1.0%         4.3%             0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      1.4%    0.0%    0.0%      5.9%       0.0%
 Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the
                                                                          0.0%       16.7%        12.5%         6.2%        11.4%             13.2%        20.0%     21.1%       0.0%      15.5%   31.8%   14.3%     14.7%      8.6%
 country
 Too influenced by developed countries                                    0.0%       26.7%        12.5%        19.6%        21.4%             45.3%        13.3%     36.8%      87.5%      42.3%   20.5%   28.6%     44.1%      32.9%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                50.0%       16.7%        25.0%        25.8%        15.7%             30.2%        26.7%     15.8%      12.5%      36.6%   27.3%   50.0%     23.5%      30.0%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                               75.0%       30.0%         0.0%        30.9%        24.3%             20.8%        20.0%     5.3%        0.0%      11.3%    9.1%   14.3%     0.0%       20.0%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                      0.0%       10.0%        25.0%         9.3%        12.9%             11.3%         0.0%     21.1%      12.5%       4.2%   18.2%    7.1%     17.6%      18.6%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                                      0.0%       10.0%         0.0%         5.2%         8.6%             5.7%         13.3%     0.0%        0.0%       0.0%    0.0%    0.0%     0.0%        4.3%
 Other                                                                    0.0%        3.3%         0.0%         4.1%         4.3%             1.9%          6.7%     5.3%        0.0%       2.8%    2.3%    0.0%     0.0%        1.4%

                                                                                                                        74
The World Bank                                                                                                         Benin                                                                                                Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                      Office of                                                                           Bi- or               Financial
                                                                     President/                Office of    Employee Consultant                          Multi-                 Sector/                          Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Prime     Office of Parliamen-         of a     on Bank             Local        lateral     Private    Private    NGO/                  Based
 (Responses Combined)                                                 Minister    Minister      tarian       Ministry project/PMU        Government      Agency      Sector      Bank       CBO       Media      Group     Academia     Other
 Investment lending                                                    40.0%       53.1%        62.5%         66.1%      68.5%             62.5%         73.3%       57.1%       66.7%     65.8%      58.7%      64.3%      81.4%       75.9%
 Capacity development                                                  40.0%       34.4%        12.5%         25.7%      23.3%             41.1%         20.0%       33.3%       22.2%     41.1%      32.6%      28.6%      32.6%       29.1%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                40.0%       50.0%        50.0%         33.0%      28.8%             25.0%         20.0%       33.3%       44.4%     24.7%      19.6%      42.9%      23.3%       31.6%
 Analytical work                                                        0.0%       6.3%          0.0%          5.5%       1.4%              7.1%          6.7%        9.5%        0.0%      0.0%       2.2%       0.0%      18.6%        3.8%
 Technical assistance                                                  20.0%       9.4%         25.0%         20.2%      16.4%             26.8%         26.7%       23.8%       22.2%     15.1%      26.1%      28.6%      16.3%       12.7%
 Trust Fund management                                                  0.0%       3.1%          0.0%          2.8%      12.3%              1.8%          6.7%        0.0%       11.1%      2.7%       0.0%       0.0%       4.7%        5.1%
 Credits to finance the sector wide approaches (SWAP)                  40.0%       25.0%        25.0%         22.9%      24.7%             21.4%         46.7%       23.8%       11.1%     24.7%      32.6%       0.0%      11.6%       16.5%
 Loan/grant for rehabilitation and reconstruction in emergency         20.0%       9.4%          0.0%         10.1%      17.8%              3.6%          0.0%       14.3%       22.2%     13.7%      17.4%      14.3%       4.7%       12.7%
 Other                                                                  0.0%       0.0%         12.5%          0.9%       0.0%              0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%      2.7%       2.2%       7.1%       0.0%        2.5%
 Don’t know                                                             0.0%       3.1%          0.0%          4.6%       1.4%              3.6%          0.0%        4.8%        0.0%      2.7%       2.2%      14.3%       2.3%        3.8%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                       Office of                                                                          Bi- or               Financial
                                                                      President/                 Office of   Employee Consultant                         Multi-                 Sector/                          Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Prime      Office of Parliamen-         of a      on Bank           Local        lateral     Private    Private    NGO/                  Based
 (Responses Combined)                                                  Minister    Minister       tarian      Ministry project/PMU       Government      Agency      Sector      Bank       CBO       Media      Group     Academia     Other
 Investment lending                                                     50.0%        6.3%         12.5%         6.9%         6.8%           3.8%          0.0%        4.8%        0.0%     10.1%       4.3%       0.0%       2.9%        4.2%
 Capacity development                                                    0.0%        15.6%        50.0%        13.9%        13.5%           9.4%         13.3%       14.3%        0.0%     14.5%      10.9%      13.3%       8.6%        4.2%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                 50.0%        9.4%          0.0%        25.7%        29.7%          28.3%         46.7%       28.6%       33.3%     27.5%      52.2%      13.3%      34.3%       26.4%
 Analytical work                                                        25.0%        21.9%        37.5%        11.9%        27.0%          18.9%         13.3%       23.8%       33.3%     17.4%      15.2%      20.0%      17.1%       13.9%
 Technical assistance                                                   25.0%        31.3%        37.5%        21.8%        23.0%          18.9%          6.7%        9.5%       33.3%     14.5%      13.0%      13.3%       8.6%       15.3%
 Trust Fund management                                                  25.0%        21.9%        12.5%        17.8%        13.5%          18.9%         13.3%       14.3%       50.0%     21.7%      23.9%      20.0%      34.3%       20.8%
 Credits to finance the sector wide approaches (SWAP)                    0.0%        6.3%          0.0%         6.9%         5.4%           5.7%          0.0%        0.0%       16.7%     10.1%       6.5%      13.3%      11.4%        6.9%
 Loan/grant for rehabilitation and reconstruction in emergency           0.0%        15.6%        12.5%        17.8%        17.6%           9.4%         20.0%       19.0%       33.3%     17.4%      15.2%       6.7%      22.9%       16.7%
 Other                                                                   0.0%        0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         1.4%           1.9%          0.0%        4.8%        0.0%      1.4%       4.3%       0.0%       2.9%        1.4%
 Don’t know                                                              0.0%        31.3%        12.5%        31.7%        24.3%          37.7%         33.3%       23.8%        0.0%     24.6%      21.7%      46.7%       8.6%       34.7%

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)?
                                                                          Office of                                                                         Bi- or              Financial
                                                                         President/                 Office of    Employee Consultant                       Multi-                Sector/                          Faith-
  Percentage of Respondents                                                Prime       Office of Parliamen-         of a       on Bank         Local       lateral    Private    Private     NGO/                 Based
  (Responses Combined)                                                    Minister     Minister      tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government          Agency     Sector       Bank       CBO      Media      Group    Academia     Other
  NGOs                                                                     75.0%        28.1%        12.5%         34.3%        32.4%         35.7%         14.3%      38.1%       66.7%     82.4%      45.7%     46.7%      32.6%      32.5%
  Local Government                                                         50.0%        43.8%        25.0%         46.3%        39.2%         42.9%         42.9%      42.9%       22.2%     21.6%      23.9%      6.7%      30.2%      63.6%
  Beneficiaries                                                             0.0%        25.0%        25.0%         30.6%        33.8%         33.9%         21.4%      19.0%       22.2%     24.3%      15.2%      6.7%      25.6%      19.5%
  Private sector                                                           50.0%        53.1%        37.5%         38.9%        41.9%         23.2%         21.4%      61.9%       11.1%     27.0%      32.6%     13.3%      32.6%      19.5%
  Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                      0.0%        25.0%        25.0%         20.4%        28.4%         35.7%         42.9%      19.0%       33.3%     21.6%      21.7%     20.0%      16.3%      29.9%
  Donor community                                                          25.0%         0.0%         0.0%          8.3%         8.1%         10.7%         42.9%      4.8%        11.1%      5.4%       4.3%      6.7%       4.7%      11.7%
  Foundations                                                               0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          7.1%      0.0%        11.1%      2.7%       0.0%      0.0%       2.3%       1.3%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                  0.0%         9.4%        25.0%          6.5%         6.8%          8.9%          0.0%      14.3%       22.2%      8.1%       6.5%      6.7%      39.5%       6.5%
  Parliament                                                                0.0%         3.1%        50.0%          4.6%         4.1%          1.8%          7.1%      0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       4.3%      0.0%       4.7%       2.6%
  Media                                                                     0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          3.7%         1.4%          0.0%          0.0%      0.0%         0.0%      4.1%      45.7%      0.0%       7.0%       1.3%
  Faith based organizations                                                 0.0%         3.1%         0.0%          1.9%         1.4%          0.0%          0.0%      0.0%         0.0%      1.4%       0.0%     73.3%       2.3%       3.9%
  Other                                                                     0.0%         3.1%         0.0%          1.9%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%      0.0%         0.0%      1.4%       0.0%      6.7%       2.3%       1.3%




                                                                                                                       75
The World Bank                                                                                                            Benin                                                                                           Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Benin, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Benin in terms of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                         Office of                                                                        Bi- or                    Financial
                                                                        President/               Office of    Employee Consultant                        Multi-                      Sector/                    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                                Prime     Office of Parliamen-         of a         on Bank        Local       lateral          Private    Private    NGO/            Based
 (Responses Combined)                                                    Minister   Minister       tarian      Ministry project/PMU Government          Agency            Sector      Bank       CBO    Media   Group    Academia    Other
 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                            20.0%       9.7%         25.0%         4.8%           4.2%         3.8%         0.0%            14.3%       11.1%      4.3%    2.1%    6.7%      2.7%       2.7%
 The Government works inefficiently/too slowly                            40.0%       12.9%        50.0%        32.4%          51.4%         28.3%       13.3%            33.3%        0.0%     38.6%   48.9%   40.0%     51.4%      34.2%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation    60.0%       45.2%        37.5%        29.5%          31.9%         43.4%       40.0%            33.3%       44.4%     55.7%   40.4%   60.0%     32.4%      41.1%
 Poor donor coordination                                                   0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         2.9%           6.9%         3.8%        20.0%             9.5%       11.1%      2.9%    2.1%    0.0%     10.8%       1.4%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up              0.0%       3.2%          0.0%         1.9%           1.4%         11.3%        0.0%             4.8%       11.1%      5.7%   17.0%    6.7%     16.2%       9.6%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                      20.0%       35.5%        12.5%        29.5%          23.6%         17.0%       20.0%            33.3%       22.2%     17.1%   23.4%   13.3%     10.8%      17.8%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                        20.0%       38.7%        12.5%        42.9%          41.7%         41.5%       33.3%            38.1%       44.4%     34.3%   34.0%   33.3%     35.1%      42.5%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges          20.0%       41.9%        62.5%        46.7%          30.6%         35.8%       66.7%            19.0%       55.6%     34.3%   27.7%   33.3%     24.3%      42.5%
 Other                                                                    20.0%       3.2%          0.0%         1.0%           0.0%         3.8%         6.7%             0.0%        0.0%      1.4%    0.0%    6.7%      0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                          76
The World Bank                                                                                                             Benin                                                                Country Survey 2012

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Benin, on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                           77
The World Bank                                                                                                      Benin                                                                                             Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

When thinking about the development challenges in Benin, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                     Office of                                                                           Bi- or               Financial
                                                                    President/                Office of     Employee Consultant                         Multi-                 Sector/                        Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Prime       Office of Parliamen-         of a      on Bank            Local       lateral    Private     Private    NGO/                Based
 (Responses Combined)                                                Minister     Minister      tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government            Agency     Sector       Bank       CBO      Media     Group    Academia   Other
 Public sector governance                                             20.0%        18.8%       25.0%          21.3%        16.2%           18.2%        20.0%       9.5%        22.2%     16.4%     26.1%     20.0%      18.6%    12.8%
 Gender                                                                0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          3.7%         5.4%            1.8%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      5.5%      6.5%      6.7%       2.3%     2.6%
 Domestic private sector development                                  40.0%        31.3%       12.5%          26.9%        18.9%           20.0%        33.3%      28.6%        33.3%     26.0%     34.8%     33.3%      30.2%    25.6%
 Foreign investment                                                    0.0%        6.3%          0.0%          0.0%         1.4%            3.6%        13.3%       4.8%        11.1%      5.5%      0.0%      0.0%       2.3%     1.3%
 Water and sanitation                                                 40.0%        3.1%        25.0%          12.0%         6.8%           16.4%         6.7%       0.0%        11.1%      8.2%     10.9%     13.3%       7.0%    12.8%
 Trade and exports                                                    20.0%        3.1%          0.0%          4.6%         4.1%            5.5%         6.7%       4.8%         0.0%      2.7%      2.2%      0.0%       9.3%     5.1%
 Economic growth                                                       0.0%        15.6%       50.0%          16.7%        13.5%           16.4%        13.3%       4.8%        22.2%      8.2%      4.3%     13.3%      14.0%    17.9%
 Energy                                                               40.0%        18.8%       37.5%          29.6%        29.7%           20.0%         6.7%      14.3%        33.3%     17.8%     26.1%     20.0%      23.3%    16.7%
 Disaster management                                                   0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%            3.6%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      4.1%      0.0%      0.0%       2.3%     1.3%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                             0.0%        3.1%          0.0%          4.6%         2.7%           12.7%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      2.7%      2.2%      0.0%       4.7%     3.8%
 Education                                                            20.0%        40.6%       12.5%          25.9%        24.3%           25.5%         6.7%      42.9%        11.1%     32.9%     30.4%     40.0%      37.2%    35.9%
 Social protection                                                     0.0%        6.3%          0.0%          1.9%         0.0%            5.5%         6.7%       0.0%         0.0%      5.5%      4.3%      6.7%       2.3%     2.6%
 Climate change                                                        0.0%        6.3%        12.5%           8.3%         0.0%            1.8%         6.7%       4.8%        11.1%      6.8%     10.9%      0.0%       4.7%     7.7%
 Poverty reduction                                                     0.0%        9.4%          0.0%         13.9%        20.3%           21.8%        13.3%      14.3%        33.3%     16.4%      6.5%     33.3%      11.6%    15.4%
 Law and justice                                                       0.0%        3.1%          0.0%          1.9%         2.7%            1.8%         6.7%       9.5%         0.0%      4.1%     10.9%      0.0%       4.7%     2.6%
 Anti-corruption                                                       0.0%        6.3%        12.5%           6.5%        10.8%           10.9%        20.0%      14.3%        22.2%     15.1%     23.9%     20.0%       7.0%    17.9%
 Financial markets                                                     0.0%        0.0%        12.5%           0.0%         1.4%            1.8%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     1.3%
 Equality of opportunity                                               0.0%        3.1%          0.0%          1.9%         2.7%            0.0%         6.7%       0.0%         0.0%      2.7%      4.3%      0.0%       0.0%     1.3%
 Urban development                                                     0.0%        6.3%          0.0%          0.9%         0.0%            1.8%         6.7%       4.8%         0.0%      1.4%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     0.0%
 Regional integration                                                  0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.9%         1.4%            1.8%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     1.3%
 Global information and communications technology                     20.0%        0.0%        12.5%           4.6%         5.4%            5.5%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      2.7%      6.5%      0.0%       7.0%     5.1%
 Transport                                                            20.0%        12.5%         0.0%         18.5%        29.7%           14.5%        20.0%       9.5%        22.2%      5.5%      6.5%     13.3%      11.6%    10.3%
 Agricultural development                                             20.0%        28.1%       37.5%          21.3%        31.1%           29.1%        20.0%      38.1%        11.1%     32.9%     30.4%     26.7%      27.9%    26.9%
 Natural resource management                                           0.0%        3.1%          0.0%          6.5%         2.7%            0.0%         6.7%      19.0%        11.1%      6.8%      2.2%      6.7%       0.0%     2.6%
 Public financial management                                           0.0%        15.6%       12.5%           1.9%         5.4%            3.6%        26.7%      23.8%         0.0%      4.1%      4.3%      6.7%      11.6%     3.8%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                 0.0%        18.8%         0.0%          5.6%         6.8%            1.8%        13.3%       4.8%        11.1%      9.6%      8.7%      6.7%      14.0%     9.0%
 Health                                                               20.0%        21.9%       12.5%          22.2%        21.6%           16.4%         6.7%      19.0%        33.3%     19.2%     21.7%     13.3%      23.3%    17.9%
 Rural development                                                    20.0%        0.0%          0.0%         17.6%         9.5%           14.5%         6.7%      14.3%         0.0%      8.2%      8.7%     13.3%      16.3%    19.2%
 Global integration                                                    0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      2.2%      0.0%       0.0%     0.0%
 Food security                                                         0.0%        3.1%          0.0%          4.6%         5.4%            3.6%        13.3%       0.0%         0.0%      6.8%      2.2%      6.7%       4.7%     3.8%
 Environmental sustainability                                          0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          4.6%         4.1%            5.5%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      6.8%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     3.8%
 Regulatory framework                                                  0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          1.9%         0.0%            1.8%         6.7%       4.8%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     1.3%
 Basic infrastructure                                                 20.0%        9.4%        12.5%           5.6%        10.8%            7.3%         6.7%       0.0%         0.0%      6.8%      2.2%      0.0%       2.3%     7.7%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                 0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.9%         1.4%            1.8%         0.0%       4.8%         0.0%      5.5%      0.0%      0.0%       0.0%     2.6%




                                                                                                                    78
The World Bank                                                                                                                     Benin                   Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at …? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research …? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                                                                                   79
The World Bank                                                                                                          Benin                                                                               Country Survey 2012

E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Benin




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                      Office of                                                                    Bi- or             Financial
                                                                     President/                 Office of   Employee Consultant                   Multi-               Sector/                    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Prime       Office of Parliamen-       of a     on Bank         Local     lateral   Private    Private    NGO/            Based
 (Responses Combined)                                                  Minister     Minister     tarian      Ministry project/PMU    Government   Agency    Sector      Bank      CBO     Media   Group    Academia    Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Benin's specific
                                                                        60.0%        29.0%       28.6%        35.5%      38.0%         35.8%      26.7%     38.1%      44.4%      23.6%   37.0%   26.7%     36.6%      38.2%
 challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                40.0%        48.4%       28.6%        46.7%      50.7%         45.3%      26.7%     47.6%      55.6%      45.8%   43.5%   46.7%     41.5%      48.7%
 Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                     0.0%         6.5%         0.0%        11.2%       2.8%         3.8%        0.0%     0.0%       11.1%       9.7%    2.2%   13.3%     12.2%      10.5%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets       0.0%         35.5%       28.6%        29.9%      26.8%         39.6%       0.0%     19.0%      22.2%      18.1%   28.3%   40.0%     29.3%      26.3%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                 0.0%         19.4%       14.3%        13.1%      22.5%         11.3%      33.3%     23.8%      11.1%      23.6%   10.9%    6.7%     22.0%       7.9%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Benin's
                                                                        40.0%        6.5%        14.3%        10.3%       9.9%         18.9%      20.0%      9.5%      11.1%      9.7%    26.1%   20.0%     7.3%       10.5%
 economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                               40.0%        19.4%       42.9%        26.2%      25.4%         26.4%      46.7%     28.6%      33.3%      36.1%   30.4%    6.7%     29.3%      22.4%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                               20.0%        9.7%        28.6%        15.0%      15.5%         7.5%       26.7%     23.8%       0.0%      19.4%    6.5%   13.3%     9.8%       14.5%
 Other                                                                  0.0%         12.9%       14.3%         2.8%       4.2%         5.7%        6.7%     4.8%        0.0%       9.7%    4.3%   13.3%     0.0%        9.2%
                                                                                                                        80
The World Bank                                                                                                            Benin                                                                                           Country Survey 2012



G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                      Office of                                                                               Bi- or               Financial
                                                                     President/               Office of   Employee Consultant                                Multi-                 Sector/                    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Prime     Office of Parliamen-        of a       on Bank                Local         lateral    Private     Private    NGO/            Based
 (Responses Combined)                                                 Minister   Minister      tarian      Ministry project/PMU             Government       Agency     Sector       Bank       CBO    Media   Group     Academia    Other
 Local newspapers                                                      40.0%      25.0%        62.5%        45.4%        53.5%                43.6%          80.0%      52.6%        22.2%     51.5%   55.3%   64.3%      19.0%      41.8%
 International newspapers                                               0.0%      21.9%        12.5%         6.5%        12.7%                 9.1%           0.0%      21.1%        22.2%      2.9%    8.5%   14.3%       9.5%       5.1%
 Local radio                                                           20.0%       0.0%        12.5%        10.2%         7.0%                10.9%           0.0%      15.8%        33.3%     13.2%   19.1%   21.4%      23.8%      35.4%
 International radio                                                    0.0%       9.4%        25.0%        13.0%        11.3%                10.9%           6.7%       5.3%        22.2%      7.4%    2.1%   14.3%      19.0%       5.1%
 Local television                                                      20.0%      37.5%        50.0%        41.7%        39.4%                65.5%          26.7%      31.6%        33.3%     52.9%   27.7%   50.0%      57.1%      65.8%
 International television                                              20.0%       9.4%        12.5%        24.1%        18.3%                23.6%           6.7%      21.1%        44.4%     19.1%   12.8%    7.1%      11.9%      12.7%
 Periodicals                                                           40.0%      25.0%         0.0%         4.6%         7.0%                 7.3%           6.7%       5.3%         0.0%      0.0%    4.3%    0.0%       2.4%       2.5%
 Internet                                                              40.0%      43.8%        25.0%        41.7%        45.1%                20.0%          53.3%      47.4%        22.2%     39.7%   66.0%   14.3%      42.9%      27.8%
 Blogs                                                                  0.0%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%                 1.8%           0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       2.4%       0.0%
 Mobile phones                                                          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         1.4%                 1.8%           0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      2.9%    0.0%    7.1%       2.4%       0.0%
 Instant messaging                                                      0.0%       0.0%         0.0%         0.9%         0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       2.4%       0.0%
 Other                                                                 20.0%      21.9%         0.0%         4.6%         2.8%                 1.8%          13.3%       0.0%         0.0%      4.4%    4.3%    7.1%       2.4%       3.8%


How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                     Office of                                                                                Bi- or               Financial
                                                                    President/             Office of            Employee Consultant                          Multi-                 Sector/                    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Prime     Office of Parliamen-               of a     on Bank            Local         lateral    Private     Private    NGO/            Based
 (Responses Combined)                                                Minister   Minister    tarian               Ministry project/PMU       Government       Agency     Sector       Bank       CBO    Media   Group     Academia    Other
 World Bank website                                                   40.0%       53.1%     37.5%                 65.7%      65.8%            61.8%          71.4%      57.1%        44.4%     50.0%   36.2%   21.4%      48.8%      49.4%
 Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face
                                                                      40.0%       21.9%     25.0%                 22.2%           19.2%        10.9%         42.9%       28.6%      44.4%      36.1%   46.8%   35.7%      23.3%      41.6%
 meetings/discussions)
 e-Newsletters                                                        20.0%       9.4%      12.5%                  6.5%           11.0%        5.5%           7.1%       28.6%       0.0%      13.9%   14.9%    7.1%      9.3%        7.8%
 Instant messaging                                                     0.0%       12.5%     12.5%                  3.7%            6.8%        14.5%          7.1%       9.5%        0.0%       6.9%    8.5%    7.1%      14.0%       6.5%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                            20.0%       31.3%     50.0%                 38.9%           41.1%        36.4%          7.1%       33.3%      66.7%      40.3%   42.6%   57.1%      41.9%      40.3%
 World Bank Public Information Center                                 20.0%       18.8%      0.0%                 10.2%            9.6%        9.1%           7.1%       9.5%        0.0%      11.1%    6.4%    7.1%      4.7%        7.8%
 World Bank publications and other written materials                  60.0%       43.8%     62.5%                 41.7%           37.0%        41.8%         57.1%       19.0%      33.3%      29.2%   23.4%   35.7%      30.2%      31.2%
 Mobile phones                                                         0.0%       6.3%       0.0%                  2.8%            6.8%        0.0%           0.0%       4.8%        0.0%       5.6%    2.1%   14.3%      7.0%        9.1%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)                             0.0%       0.0%       0.0%                  0.9%            1.4%        5.5%           0.0%       9.5%       11.1%       1.4%   12.8%    0.0%      16.3%       2.6%
 Blogs                                                                 0.0%       0.0%       0.0%                  0.0%            0.0%        0.0%           0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       1.4%    0.0%    0.0%      2.3%        0.0%
 Other                                                                 0.0%       0.0%       0.0%                  1.9%            0.0%        1.8%           0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       2.8%    2.1%    0.0%      2.3%        0.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                                       Office of                                                                               Bi- or              Financial
                                                                      President/                Office of     Employee Consultant                             Multi-                Sector/                    Faith-
                                                                        Prime     Office of Parliamen-           of a        on Bank           Local          lateral    Private    Private    NGO/            Based
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister    Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government                Agency      Sector     Bank       CBO    Media   Group     Academia    Other
 Yes                                                                    25.0%       6.5%          12.5%         10.5%         19.7%            3.8%            6.7%       10.0%      22.2%     10.1%   13.3%   13.3%       4.9%       2.6%
 No                                                                     75.0%       93.5%         87.5%         89.5%         80.3%           96.2%           93.3%       90.0%      77.8%     89.9%   86.7%   86.7%      95.1%      97.4%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?*
                                                                         Office of                                                                            Bi- or               Financial
                                                                       President/                 Office of     Employee Consultant                          Multi-                 Sector/                     Faith-
                                                                          Prime      Office of   Parliamen-        of a     on Bank            Local         lateral    Private     Private    NGO/            Based
  Percentage of Respondents                                              Minister    Minister      tarian        Ministry project/PMU       Government       Agency     Sector       Bank       CBO    Media   Group     Academia    Other
  Yes                                                                     20.0%       37.9%        37.5%          33.0%      28.4%            22.6%          50.0%      42.9%        11.1%     36.9%   53.7%    0.0%      41.5%      18.3%
  No                                                                      80.0%       62.1%        62.5%          67.0%      71.6%            77.4%          50.0%      57.1%        88.9%     63.1%   46.3%   100.0%     58.5%      81.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



                                                                                                                          81
The World Bank                                                                                                        Benin                                                                                            Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Were you able to obtain this information?*
                                                                     Office of                                                                        Bi- or               Financial
                                                                    President/                   Office of    Employee Consultant                    Multi-                 Sector/                        Faith-
                                                                       Prime       Office of    Parliamen-       of a     on Bank         Local      lateral    Private     Private     NGO/              Based
  Percentage of Respondents                                          Minister      Minister        tarian      Ministry project/PMU    Government    Agency     Sector       Bank        CBO     Media    Group      Academia     Other
  Yes                                                                 100.0%       100.0%         100.0%        91.4%      95.2%          91.7%      100.0%     100.0%       100.0%     77.3%    83.3%     0.0%       64.7%      100.0%
  No                                                                   0.0%         0.0%            0.0%         8.6%       4.8%          8.3%        0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      22.7%    16.7%    100.0%      35.3%       0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you have access to the Internet?*
                                                                       Office of                                                                       Bi- or               Financial
                                                                      President/                  Office of    Employee Consultant                    Multi-                 Sector/                       Faith-
                                                                        Prime       Office of    Parliamen-       of a     on Bank         Local      lateral    Private     Private     NGO/              Based
  Percentage of Respondents                                            Minister     Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU    Government    Agency     Sector       Bank        CBO    Media     Group     Academia     Other
  Yes                                                                   80.0%        96.6%         87.5%         96.1%      98.6%         96.2%       93.3%      100.0%       88.9%      92.4%   100.0%    57.1%      100.0%      80.3%
  No                                                                    20.0%        3.4%          12.5%          3.9%       1.4%          3.8%        6.7%       0.0%        11.1%       7.6%    0.0%     42.9%       0.0%       19.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*
                                                                       Office of                                                                       Bi- or               Financial
                                                                      President/                  Office of    Employee Consultant                    Multi-                 Sector/                        Faith-
                                                                        Prime       Office of    Parliamen-       of a     on Bank         Local      lateral    Private     Private     NGO/              Based
  Percentage of Respondents                                            Minister     Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU    Government    Agency     Sector       Bank        CBO    Media     Group     Academia     Other
  Yes                                                                   40.0%        61.3%         50.0%         60.2%      77.5%         47.2%       53.3%      85.0%        33.3%      50.0%   54.5%      0.0%      37.2%       27.6%
  No                                                                    60.0%        38.7%         50.0%         39.8%      22.5%         52.8%       46.7%      15.0%        66.7%      50.0%   45.5%     100.0%     62.8%       72.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which do you primarily use?*
                                                                       Office of                                                                       Bi- or               Financial
                                                                      President/                  Office of    Employee Consultant                    Multi-                 Sector/                       Faith-
                                                                        Prime       Office of    Parliamen-       of a     on Bank         Local      lateral    Private     Private     NGO/              Based
  Percentage of Respondents                                            Minister     Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU    Government    Agency     Sector       Bank        CBO    Media     Group     Academia     Other
  The World Bank's country website (www.banquemondial.org/benin)        80.0%        57.1%         66.7%         56.9%      41.4%         62.7%       38.5%      80.0%        85.7%      79.1%   70.5%     77.8%      51.2%       70.8%
  The World Bank's main website (www.worldbank.org)                     20.0%        42.9%         33.3%         43.1%      58.6%         37.3%       61.5%      20.0%        14.3%      20.9%   29.5%     22.2%      48.8%       29.2%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Benin?
                                                                      Office of                                                                        Bi- or               Financial
                                                                     President/                   Office of    Employee Consultant                    Multi-                 Sector/                       Faith-
                                                                        Prime      Office of     Parliamen-       of a     on Bank         Local      lateral    Private     Private     NGO/              Based
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Minister     Minister        tarian       Ministry project/PMU    Government    Agency     Sector       Bank        CBO    Media     Group     Academia     Other
 Yes                                                                    0.0%        10.3%           0.0%          8.7%      12.9%          7.5%        6.7%       5.6%        22.2%      14.3%   15.6%      0.0%      19.5%        6.6%
 No                                                                    50.0%        62.1%          57.1%         53.8%      57.1%         62.3%       60.0%      38.9%        33.3%      45.7%   48.9%     42.9%      48.8%       46.1%
 I don’t know what a PIC is                                            50.0%        27.6%          42.9%         37.5%      30.0%         30.2%       33.3%      55.6%        44.4%      40.0%   35.6%     57.1%      31.7%       47.4%




                                                                                                                      82
The World Bank                                                                                                           Benin                                                                                Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
                                                                        Office of                                                                    Bi- or             Financial
                                                                      President/                  Office of    Employee Consultant                  Multi-               Sector/                    Faith-
                                                                         Prime      Office of    Parliamen-       of a     on Bank        Local     lateral   Private    Private    NGO/            Based
 Percentage of Respondents                                              Minister    Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU   Government   Agency    Sector      Bank       CBO    Media   Group    Academia    Other
 Yes                                                                     20.0%       83.9%         37.5%         61.1%      90.4%        43.6%      71.4%     42.9%       71.4%     68.5%   43.5%   13.3%      9.3%      40.3%
 No                                                                      80.0%       16.1%         62.5%         38.9%       9.6%        56.4%      28.6%     57.1%       28.6%     31.5%   56.5%   86.7%     90.7%      59.7%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Benin?   (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                       Office of                                                                     Bi- or             Financial
                                                                      President/                  Office of    Employee Consultant                  Multi-               Sector/                    Faith-
                                                                        Prime        Office of   Parliamen-       of a     on Bank        Local     lateral   Private    Private    NGO/            Based
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister      Minister      tarian       Ministry project/PMU   Government   Agency    Sector      Bank       CBO    Media   Group    Academia    Other
 Observer                                                               20.0%         9.4%         37.5%         20.4%       1.4%        33.3%      14.3%     38.1%       12.5%     13.4%   42.2%   83.3%     60.0%      47.3%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                            80.0%         31.3%        25.0%         25.9%      15.3%        25.9%      42.9%     23.8%       37.5%     13.4%   42.2%    8.3%     25.0%      24.3%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities               60.0%         43.8%        25.0%         45.4%      73.6%        42.6%       7.1%     33.3%       50.0%     64.2%   11.1%   25.0%     15.0%      35.1%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                          20.0%         78.1%        37.5%         50.9%      62.5%        40.7%      78.6%     19.0%       62.5%     53.7%   44.4%    8.3%     10.0%      28.4%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.           20.0%         6.3%         37.5%         25.9%      12.5%        14.8%      28.6%     47.6%       25.0%     17.9%   28.9%    8.3%     32.5%      13.5%




                                                                                                                         83
The World Bank                                                             Benin                                                        Country Survey 2012




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location

A. General Issues facing Benin
In general, would you say that Benin is headed in...?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                 Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi          Other Cities          Other Areas
 The right direction                                                        37.0%                38.8%                 49.1%                 57.4%
 The wrong direction                                                        28.4%                25.4%                 22.8%                 23.8%
 Not sure                                                                   34.6%                35.8%                 28.1%                 18.8%

                                                                                                           st   nd     rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Benin. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development
    priority.
 1st Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                 Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi          Other Cities          Other Areas
 Rural development                                                          13.9%                15.0%                 17.0%                 16.3%
 Education                                                                  28.7%                40.0%                 34.0%                 43.9%
 Social protection                                                           1.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  3.1%
 Transport                                                                   4.4%                 3.3%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Poverty reduction                                                          11.8%                11.7%                 10.6%                  7.1%
 Public sector governance                                                    6.8%                 1.7%                  0.0%                  3.1%
 Regional integration                                                        0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  2.0%
 Gender                                                                      0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                         0.7%                 0.0%                  2.1%                  1.0%
 Foreign investment                                                          0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                        0.7%                 0.0%                  2.1%                  0.0%
 Energy                                                                      2.0%                 3.3%                  2.1%                  1.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                   0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Public financial management                                                 1.4%                 1.7%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                       0.7%                 1.7%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Financial markets                                                           0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Urban development                                                           0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                     0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Health                                                                      5.7%                 0.0%                 14.9%                  9.2%
 Global integration                                                          0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Food security                                                               1.0%                 1.7%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Climate change                                                              0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                   11.8%                 6.7%                  8.5%                  5.1%
 Trade and exports                                                           0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Economic growth                                                             2.4%                 5.0%                  6.4%                  0.0%
 Law and justice                                                             0.7%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                        0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                       0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                        0.3%                 3.3%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Natural resource management                                                 0.0%                 1.7%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                             4.1%                 3.3%                  2.1%                  1.0%
 Disaster management                                                         0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                            0.7%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  2.0%




                                                                            84
The World Bank                                                             Benin                                                        Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)
                                                                                                           st   nd     rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Benin. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development
    priority.
   nd
 2 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                 Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi          Other Cities          Other Areas
 Rural development                                                           8.0%                 3.3%                 12.2%                 15.6%
 Education                                                                  22.1%                20.0%                 22.4%                 15.6%
 Social protection                                                           3.7%                 3.3%                  0.0%                  3.1%
 Transport                                                                   4.0%                 6.7%                  6.1%                  7.3%
 Poverty reduction                                                           4.7%                 0.0%                 10.2%                  8.3%
 Public sector governance                                                    5.4%                 5.0%                  2.0%                  3.1%
 Regional integration                                                        0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  2.1%
 Gender                                                                      0.7%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  4.2%
 Domestic private sector development                                         2.0%                 3.3%                  2.0%                  2.1%
 Foreign investment                                                          0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                        1.7%                 3.3%                  8.2%                  2.1%
 Energy                                                                      5.0%                 0.0%                  2.0%                  1.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                   0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Public financial management                                                 5.0%                 3.3%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                       1.0%                 1.7%                  0.0%                  2.1%
 Financial markets                                                           0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Urban development                                                           0.3%                 3.3%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                     0.0%                 1.7%                  2.0%                  1.0%
 Health                                                                     12.4%                20.0%                  8.2%                 14.6%
 Global integration                                                          0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Food security                                                               0.7%                 1.7%                  2.0%                  2.1%
 Climate change                                                              0.3%                 0.0%                  2.0%                  1.0%
 Agricultural development                                                    5.7%                 6.7%                  6.1%                  6.3%
 Trade and exports                                                           0.3%                 3.3%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Economic growth                                                             4.7%                 1.7%                  2.0%                  2.1%
 Law and justice                                                             1.0%                 3.3%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                        0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                       0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                        1.3%                 1.7%                  2.0%                  0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                 1.7%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  2.1%
 Anti-corruption                                                             6.7%                 5.0%                 10.2%                  1.0%
 Disaster management                                                         0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                            0.3%                 1.7%                  0.0%                  0.0%




                                                                            85
The World Bank                                                             Benin                                                        Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)
                                                                                                           st   nd     rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Benin. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development
    priority.
   rd
 3 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                 Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi          Other Cities          Other Areas
 Rural development                                                           3.6%                 9.8%                  8.2%                  4.1%
 Education                                                                   7.3%                 3.3%                 10.2%                  9.2%
 Social protection                                                           4.0%                 1.6%                  2.0%                  2.0%
 Transport                                                                   4.3%                 1.6%                  4.1%                  8.2%
 Poverty reduction                                                           7.0%                 8.2%                  4.1%                  7.1%
 Public sector governance                                                    5.3%                 6.6%                  2.0%                  0.0%
 Regional integration                                                        1.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  5.1%
 Gender                                                                      1.0%                 3.3%                  2.0%                  2.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                         5.3%                 1.6%                 10.2%                  2.0%
 Foreign investment                                                          1.0%                 0.0%                  2.0%                  0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                        3.6%                 0.0%                  2.0%                  4.1%
 Energy                                                                      3.6%                 6.6%                  2.0%                  5.1%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                   0.0%                 1.6%                  2.0%                  3.1%
 Public financial management                                                 6.6%                 0.0%                  2.0%                  4.1%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                       1.3%                 4.9%                  2.0%                  1.0%
 Financial markets                                                           0.7%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Urban development                                                           1.3%                 0.0%                  2.0%                  0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                0.7%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                     0.7%                 3.3%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Health                                                                     10.6%                 8.2%                 18.4%                 13.3%
 Global integration                                                          0.3%                 3.3%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Food security                                                               1.7%                 0.0%                  2.0%                  0.0%
 Climate change                                                              0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                    6.0%                14.8%                  6.1%                  6.1%
 Trade and exports                                                           0.3%                 1.6%                  0.0%                  2.0%
 Economic growth                                                             4.0%                 3.3%                  4.1%                  5.1%
 Law and justice                                                             2.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                        0.7%                 0.0%                  2.0%                  0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                       1.0%                 0.0%                  2.0%                  0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                        3.3%                 4.9%                  0.0%                  3.1%
 Natural resource management                                                 1.0%                 1.6%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                             8.9%                 8.2%                  8.2%                  7.1%
 Disaster management                                                         0.3%                 1.6%                  0.0%                  1.0%
 Global information and communications technology                            1.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                  1.0%




                                                                            86
The World Bank                                                            Benin                                                       Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would
   contribute most to reducing poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                       Cotonou           Abomey-Calavi          Other Cities         Other Areas
 Energy                                                                      20.6%                21.9%                 16.9%                12.7%
 Water and sanitation                                                        15.0%                16.4%                 15.3%                16.4%
 Equality of opportunity                                                      4.7%                 4.1%                  5.1%                 9.1%
 Economic growth                                                             24.1%                24.7%                 16.9%                16.4%
 Climate change                                                               0.6%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 1.8%
 Disaster management                                                          0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.9%
 Regional integration                                                         0.3%                 1.4%                  0.0%                 6.4%
 Gender                                                                       1.5%                 5.5%                  1.7%                 3.6%
 Rural development                                                           22.1%                31.5%                 33.9%                30.9%
 Urban development                                                            1.5%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
 Education                                                                   40.3%                39.7%                 35.6%                42.7%
 Regulatory framework                                                         0.6%                 0.0%                  1.7%                 0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                         9.7%                 8.2%                 15.3%                13.6%
 Social protection                                                            5.0%                 2.7%                  0.0%                 5.5%
 Law and justice                                                              4.1%                 4.1%                  5.1%                 0.9%
 Transport                                                                   12.6%                13.7%                  8.5%                10.9%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                        0.9%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                             0.6%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
 Public sector governance                                                     6.2%                 9.6%                  0.0%                 5.5%
 Domestic private sector development                                         15.0%                 6.8%                 16.9%                14.5%
 Foreign investment                                                           1.2%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 1.8%
 Global integration                                                           0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
 Food security                                                               12.4%                13.7%                 13.6%                15.5%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                    0.9%                 0.0%                  3.4%                 0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                  2.4%                 0.0%                  1.7%                 1.8%
 Environmental sustainability                                                 1.5%                 1.4%                  1.7%                 1.8%
 Health                                                                      25.3%                24.7%                 44.1%                29.1%
 Public financial management                                                  9.1%                 5.5%                  1.7%                 6.4%
 Agricultural development                                                    27.6%                26.0%                 28.8%                26.4%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                       11.8%                11.0%                 15.3%                14.5%
 Financial markets                                                            0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 1.8%
 Trade and exports                                                            2.1%                 1.4%                  0.0%                 0.9%
 Anti-corruption                                                             18.8%                26.0%                 16.9%                 8.2%




                                                                           87
The World Bank                                                           Benin                                                      Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Benin (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
   Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                    Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi          Other Cities        Other Areas
  Poverty reduction                                                         15.4%               11.1%                  19.0%                15.5%
  Energy                                                                    29.0%               34.7%                  20.7%                27.3%
  Equality of opportunity                                                   1.5%                 2.8%                  1.7%                 4.5%
  Social protection                                                         1.5%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 1.8%
  Global integration                                                        1.5%                 0.0%                  1.7%                 2.7%
  Climate change                                                            0.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 1.8%
  Anti-corruption                                                           26.9%               44.4%                  34.5%                27.3%
  Disaster management                                                       0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
  Rural development                                                         19.5%               16.7%                  20.7%                25.5%
  Foreign investment                                                        10.7%               12.5%                  17.2%                17.3%
  Urban development                                                         0.9%                 0.0%                  1.7%                 0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                                      2.1%                 2.8%                  3.4%                 1.8%
  Education                                                                 18.3%               13.9%                  19.0%                13.6%
  Global information and communications technology                          4.7%                 2.8%                  3.4%                 1.8%
  Regulatory framework                                                      3.8%                 1.4%                  1.7%                 3.6%
  Communicable/non-communicable disease                                     0.6%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
  Trade and exports                                                         20.4%               15.3%                  24.1%                15.5%
  Public sector governance                                                  9.5%                13.9%                  1.7%                 9.1%
  Regional integration                                                      1.8%                 0.0%                  3.4%                 5.5%
  Domestic private sector development                                       25.1%               27.8%                  19.0%                20.0%
  Labor markets/job creation/employment                                     6.2%                 4.2%                  5.2%                 4.5%
  Agricultural development                                                  29.0%               40.3%                  31.0%                34.5%
  Food security                                                             2.7%                 1.4%                  1.7%                 1.8%
  Transport                                                                 23.1%               19.4%                  10.3%                14.5%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                                 2.4%                 1.4%                  3.4%                 0.9%
  Gender                                                                    0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
  Natural resource management                                               2.4%                 5.6%                  6.9%                 6.4%
  Environmental sustainability                                              1.5%                 1.4%                  1.7%                 1.8%
  Health                                                                    7.4%                 1.4%                  19.0%                7.3%
  Basic infrastructure                                                      7.7%                 4.2%                  3.4%                 7.3%
  Law and justice                                                           4.1%                 4.2%                  0.0%                 3.6%
  Public financial management                                               17.2%               13.9%                  19.0%                15.5%
  Financial markets                                                         2.1%                 2.8%                  5.2%                 6.4%




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                          88
The World Bank                                                                Benin                                                   Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Benin, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank
  should focus most of its attention and resources in Benin? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                      Cotonou         Abomey-Calavi            Other Cities          Other Areas
 Rural development                                                          30.0%              27.8%                   42.4%                 33.9%
 Education                                                                  51.3%              55.6%                   47.5%                 69.7%
 Social protection                                                           2.4%               1.4%                   0.0%                  6.4%
 Transport                                                                  22.6%              23.6%                   13.6%                 12.8%
 Poverty reduction                                                          10.1%              12.5%                   13.6%                 19.3%
 Public sector governance                                                   11.0%               6.9%                   3.4%                  8.3%
 Regional integration                                                        0.3%               0.0%                   0.0%                  0.9%
 Gender                                                                      1.2%               1.4%                   1.7%                  0.9%
 Domestic private sector development                                        16.9%              15.3%                   13.6%                 11.0%
 Foreign investment                                                          1.8%               1.4%                   0.0%                  1.8%
 Water and sanitation                                                        8.0%               9.7%                   8.5%                  13.8%
 Energy                                                                     20.5%              25.0%                   15.3%                 13.8%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                   2.1%               1.4%                   3.4%                  4.6%
 Public financial management                                                 9.5%               8.3%                   3.4%                  2.8%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                       6.2%              11.1%                   3.4%                  6.4%
 Financial markets                                                           0.3%               1.4%                   0.0%                  2.8%
 Urban development                                                           1.5%               1.4%                   1.7%                  0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                1.2%               0.0%                   3.4%                  2.8%
 Equality of opportunity                                                     0.6%               1.4%                   0.0%                  0.9%
 Health                                                                     27.3%              15.3%                   44.1%                 27.5%
 Global integration                                                          0.3%               0.0%                   0.0%                  0.0%
 Food security                                                               4.5%               5.6%                   3.4%                  0.9%
 Climate change                                                              0.6%               1.4%                   0.0%                  0.9%
 Agricultural development                                                   27.9%              26.4%                   27.1%                 25.7%
 Trade and exports                                                           2.4%               4.2%                   5.1%                  2.8%
 Economic growth                                                            10.1%               8.3%                   18.6%                 8.3%
 Law and justice                                                             3.9%               4.2%                   3.4%                  0.9%
 Regulatory framework                                                        1.8%               0.0%                   1.7%                  0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                       0.3%               1.4%                   0.0%                  0.9%
 Basic infrastructure                                                        8.6%              13.9%                   8.5%                  11.9%
 Natural resource management                                                 1.5%               1.4%                   0.0%                  1.8%
 Anti-corruption                                                             9.5%              11.1%                   13.6%                 3.7%
 Disaster management                                                         0.3%               0.0%                   0.0%                  0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                            3.9%               0.0%                   0.0%                  0.9%




                                                                               89
The World Bank                                                               Benin                                                          Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Benin?
 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi           Other Cities          Other Areas
 Financial resources                                                           45.0%                37.3%                  56.9%                 53.4%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                    12.5%                10.4%                  15.7%                 15.5%
 Technical assistance                                                          10.5%                 9.0%                   5.9%                  5.8%
 Policy advice                                                                 13.1%                13.4%                   3.9%                  5.8%
 Donor coordination                                                             5.4%                11.9%                   5.9%                  4.9%
 Data                                                                           1.3%                 0.0%                   0.0%                  1.0%
 Training/capacity building                                                     7.3%                11.9%                   9.8%                  9.7%
 Studies/analyses                                                               2.2%                 1.5%                   2.0%                  1.0%
 Convening/facilitating                                                         2.6%                 4.5%                   2.0%                  1.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing)            0.0%                 0.0%                   0.0%                  1.9%
 Other                                                                          0.0%                 0.0%                   0.0%                  0.0%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Benin?
   nd
 2 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi           Other Cities          Other Areas
 Financial resources                                                            8.7%                11.9%                  12.2%                 11.9%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                     9.4%                14.9%                   8.2%                 14.9%
 Technical assistance                                                          22.6%                 9.0%                  32.7%                 14.9%
 Policy advice                                                                 14.5%                17.9%                  26.5%                 16.8%
 Donor coordination                                                             7.1%                 4.5%                   0.0%                  7.9%
 Data                                                                           2.6%                 3.0%                   4.1%                  5.9%
 Training/capacity building                                                    18.7%                22.4%                   6.1%                 12.9%
 Studies/analyses                                                               6.8%                 3.0%                   0.0%                  5.9%
 Convening/facilitating                                                         6.5%                10.4%                   6.1%                  5.9%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing)            2.3%                 1.5%                   2.0%                  3.0%
 Other                                                                          1.0%                 1.5%                   2.0%                  0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                      Cotonou             Abomey-Calavi          Other Cities             Other Areas
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities      34.9%                  34.8%                35.8%                    33.7%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                   11.9%                  14.5%                26.4%                    14.7%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                20.4%                  17.4%                 5.7%                    13.7%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                      6.9%                   7.2%                 7.5%                     4.2%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                    0.6%                   0.0%                 3.8%                     0.0%
 Not client focused                                                          1.6%                   2.9%                 3.8%                     7.4%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                       0.9%                   4.3%                 0.0%                     1.1%
 Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the
                                                                            14.5%                  18.8%                17.0%                      4.2%
 country
 Too influenced by developed countries                                      26.4%                  29.0%                39.6%                     41.1%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                   26.1%                  26.1%                32.1%                     25.3%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                  23.6%                  10.1%                11.3%                     15.8%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                        11.6%                  14.5%                 9.4%                     14.7%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                                         5.3%                   4.3%                 0.0%                     2.1%
 Other                                                                       3.5%                   4.3%                 1.9%                     0.0%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                     Cotonou             Abomey-Calavi         Other Cities               Other Areas
 Investment lending                                                         60.8%                  71.2%               84.5%                     70.0%
 Capacity development                                                       31.9%                  26.0%               25.9%                     35.5%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                     31.9%                  30.1%               25.9%                     28.2%
 Analytical work                                                             5.0%                  5.5%                0.0%                       6.4%
 Technical assistance                                                       19.8%                  15.1%               20.7%                     17.3%
 Trust Fund management                                                       3.5%                  4.1%                1.7%                       7.3%
 Credits to finance the sector wide approaches (SWAP)                       23.6%                  23.3%               17.2%                     20.9%
 Loan/grant for rehabilitation and reconstruction in emergency              11.2%                  11.0%               15.5%                     10.0%
 Other                                                                       1.2%                  4.1%                1.7%                       0.0%
 Don’t know                                                                  5.0%                  0.0%                1.7%                       0.9%




                                                                              90
The World Bank                                                               Benin                                                         Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce poverty in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                       Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi         Other Cities             Other Areas
 Investment lending                                                           5.6%                  4.3%                 5.7%                    8.9%
 Capacity development                                                         12.8%                17.1%                 7.5%                    6.7%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                       28.5%                30.0%                 34.0%                  25.6%
 Analytical work                                                              18.4%                27.1%                 13.2%                  14.4%
 Technical assistance                                                         19.0%                17.1%                 15.1%                  16.7%
 Trust Fund management                                                        19.9%                12.9%                 24.5%                  25.6%
 Credits to finance the sector wide approaches (SWAP)                         6.5%                  5.7%                 9.4%                    7.8%
 Loan/grant for rehabilitation and reconstruction in emergency                17.5%                11.4%                 13.2%                  18.9%
 Other                                                                        1.5%                  1.4%                 3.8%                    0.0%
 Don’t know                                                                   28.2%                27.1%                 30.2%                  25.6%

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate
with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)?
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                          Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi          Other Cities         Other Areas
  NGOs                                                                           39.4%                38.6%                 49.2%                 41.3%
  Local Government                                                               35.6%                32.9%                 52.5%                 49.5%
  Beneficiaries                                                                  24.1%                24.3%                 32.2%                 27.5%
  Private sector                                                                 39.4%                41.4%                 13.6%                 18.3%
  Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                           23.2%                28.6%                 28.8%                 25.7%
  Donor community                                                                10.0%                 4.3%                  3.4%                 6.4%
  Foundations                                                                     0.6%                 0.0%                  1.7%                 2.8%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                       11.2%                12.9%                  3.4%                 9.2%
  Parliament                                                                      3.8%                 5.7%                  1.7%                 2.8%
  Media                                                                           7.4%                 2.9%                  1.7%                 5.5%
  Faith based organizations                                                       2.1%                 4.3%                  3.4%                 6.4%
  Other                                                                           1.2%                 1.4%                  1.7%                 0.0%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Benin, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Benin in terms of…, on a ten point scale?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                              91
The World Bank                                                               Benin                                                          Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                         Cotonou           Abomey-Calavi           Other Cities         Other Areas
 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                                  4.8%                 5.7%                   1.9%                 7.1%
 The Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                 37.0%                40.0%                  27.8%                 37.4%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation         38.2%                48.6%                  44.4%                 38.4%
 Poor donor coordination                                                        4.5%                 7.1%                   1.9%                 3.0%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                   5.1%                11.4%                  20.4%                 1.0%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                           26.0%                14.3%                  20.4%                 17.2%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                             37.0%                32.9%                  33.3%                 49.5%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges               39.4%                34.3%                  42.6%                 30.3%
 Other                                                                          1.2%                 1.4%                   1.9%                 1.0%


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between locations

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Benin, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                               92
The World Bank                                                                Benin                                                     Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

When thinking about the development challenges in Benin, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and
  knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                     Cotonou           Abomey-Calavi            Other Cities           Other Areas
 Public sector governance                                                  20.9%                 19.2%                  12.1%                  13.8%
 Gender                                                                     3.2%                  4.1%                  3.4%                    3.7%
 Domestic private sector development                                       26.5%                 34.2%                  25.9%                  20.2%
 Foreign investment                                                         2.9%                  1.4%                  1.7%                    1.8%
 Water and sanitation                                                       8.8%                  9.6%                  15.5%                  12.8%
 Trade and exports                                                          3.5%                  6.8%                  5.2%                    4.6%
 Economic growth                                                           14.2%                  9.6%                  19.0%                  13.8%
 Energy                                                                    23.6%                 31.5%                  12.1%                  21.1%
 Disaster management                                                        0.3%                  1.4%                  0.0%                    3.7%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                  4.7%                  0.0%                  5.2%                    4.6%
 Education                                                                 27.4%                 24.7%                  32.8%                  42.2%
 Social protection                                                          3.2%                  2.7%                  0.0%                    5.5%
 Climate change                                                             5.6%                  2.7%                  6.9%                    7.3%
 Poverty reduction                                                         13.9%                 12.3%                  22.4%                  19.3%
 Law and justice                                                            4.7%                  5.5%                  0.0%                    1.8%
 Anti-corruption                                                           13.0%                 13.7%                  19.0%                   5.5%
 Financial markets                                                          0.6%                  1.4%                  0.0%                    0.9%
 Equality of opportunity                                                    1.5%                  2.7%                  1.7%                    2.8%
 Urban development                                                          1.5%                  1.4%                  1.7%                    0.0%
 Regional integration                                                       1.2%                  0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                           4.4%                  2.7%                  6.9%                    3.7%
 Transport                                                                 15.3%                 21.9%                  5.2%                   11.0%
 Agricultural development                                                  28.3%                 34.2%                  24.1%                  23.9%
 Natural resource management                                                4.4%                  4.1%                  1.7%                    5.5%
 Public financial management                                                7.7%                  4.1%                  5.2%                    4.6%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                      9.1%                  9.6%                  5.2%                    5.5%
 Health                                                                    20.1%                 11.0%                  31.0%                  21.1%
 Rural development                                                          9.7%                 15.1%                  13.8%                  18.3%
 Global integration                                                         0.0%                  0.0%                  1.7%                    0.0%
 Food security                                                              3.2%                  5.5%                  3.4%                    6.4%
 Environmental sustainability                                               3.2%                  1.4%                  5.2%                    3.7%
 Regulatory framework                                                       1.8%                  0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                       6.5%                  4.1%                  8.6%                    6.4%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                      1.5%                  1.4%                  0.0%                    3.7%



How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at …? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                               93
The World Bank                                                                      Benin                                                                  Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research …? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between locations




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between locations




E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                                     94
The World Bank                                                                Benin                                                          Country Survey 2012




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Benin




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                       Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi        Other Cities                Other Areas
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Benin's specific
                                                                             33.7%                 35.7%              27.3%                        40.2%
 challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                     45.4%                 51.4%              50.9%                        41.1%
 Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                           4.5%                 8.6%                7.3%                        14.0%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets            26.6%                 27.1%              27.3%                        30.8%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                      17.0%                 15.7%              18.2%                        13.1%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Benin's
                                                                             13.7%                 10.0%              12.7%                        12.1%
 economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                                    29.3%                 22.9%              25.5%                        26.2%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                    16.7%                 10.0%              12.7%                        10.3%
 Other                                                                        5.1%                 8.6%                9.1%                        4.7%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                     Cotonou           Abomey-Calavi          Other Cities                 Other Areas
 Local newspapers                                                          48.1%                 49.3%                48.3%                       34.6%
 International newspapers                                                   9.3%                 14.1%                1.7%                         8.4%
 Local radio                                                               10.4%                 15.5%                27.6%                       25.2%
 International radio                                                       11.6%                  5.6%                5.2%                         8.4%
 Local television                                                          40.9%                 49.3%                69.0%                       55.1%
 International television                                                  20.0%                  5.6%                17.2%                       18.7%
 Periodicals                                                                6.6%                  5.6%                1.7%                         3.7%
 Internet                                                                  43.9%                 40.8%                24.1%                       32.7%
 Blogs                                                                      0.3%                  0.0%                0.0%                         0.9%
 Mobile phones                                                              0.0%                  1.4%                1.7%                         3.7%
 Instant messaging                                                          0.3%                  1.4%                0.0%                         0.0%
 Other                                                                      5.4%                  5.6%                0.0%                         5.6%


How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                     Cotonou          Abomey-Calavi                  Other Cities          Other Areas
 World Bank website                                                        55.8%              51.4%                         39.0%                 60.7%
 Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face
                                                                           25.4%              38.9%                          40.7%                 24.3%
 meetings/discussions)
 e-Newsletters                                                             13.3%               5.6%                          10.2%                 3.7%
 Instant messaging                                                          7.7%               4.2%                          6.8%                  12.1%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                 37.2%              34.7%                          55.9%                 38.3%
 World Bank Public Information Center                                       7.7%              18.1%                          8.5%                  8.4%
 World Bank publications and other written materials                       40.7%              27.8%                          28.8%                 29.9%
 Mobile phones                                                              3.2%               8.3%                          5.1%                  8.4%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)                                  4.1%               6.9%                          1.7%                  4.7%
 Blogs                                                                      0.3%               0.0%                          0.0%                  0.9%
 Other                                                                      0.0%               2.8%                          1.7%                  3.7%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of
exceptions?
  Percentage of Respondents                                                 Cotonou           Abomey-Calavi            Other Cities            Other Areas
  Yes                                                                        12.0%                  5.6%                   3.5%                   8.4%
  No                                                                         88.0%                 94.4%                   96.5%                  91.6%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                   Cotonou              Abomey-Calavi           Other Cities          Other Areas
 Yes                                                                          35.2%                  37.9%                  20.7%                 26.5%
 No                                                                           64.8%                  62.1%                  79.3%                 73.5%




                                                                               95
The World Bank                                                               Benin                                                      Country Survey 2012




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Were you able to obtain this information?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi           Other Cities     Other Areas
 Yes                                                                           90.1%                84.6%                  72.7%            89.3%
 No                                                                             9.9%                15.4%                  27.3%            10.7%

Do you have access to the Internet?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi           Other Cities     Other Areas
 Yes                                                                           95.7%                91.4%                  88.9%            89.4%
 No                                                                             4.3%                 8.6%                  11.1%            10.6%

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                   Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi           Other Cities     Other Areas
  Yes                                                                          60.7%                51.4%                  28.6%            36.2%
  No                                                                           39.3%                48.6%                  71.4%            63.8%
*Significantly different between locations

Which do you primarily use?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                   Cotonou            Abomey-Calavi           Other Cities     Other Areas
  The World Bank's country website (www.banquemondial.org/benin)               57.5%                68.7%                  70.6%            69.7%
  The World Bank's main website (www.worldbank.org)                            42.5%                31.3%                  29.4%            30.3%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Benin?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Cotonou              Abomey-Calavi           Other Cities     Other Areas
 Yes                                                                         10.2%                  14.5%                   6.9%            10.8%
 No                                                                          51.7%                  42.0%                  58.6%            54.9%
 I don’t know what a PIC is                                                  38.1%                  43.5%                  34.5%            34.3%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations



H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Cotonou              Abomey-Calavi           Other Cities     Other Areas
 Yes                                                                          61.1%                 43.1%                  47.4%            46.4%
 No                                                                           38.9%                 56.9%                  52.6%            53.6%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                       Cotonou           Abomey-Calavi              Other Cities     Other Areas
 Observer                                                                    24.0%               28.1%                     29.1%            39.4%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                                 30.3%               21.9%                     23.6%            11.5%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                    40.4%               29.7%                     58.2%            51.0%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                               49.3%               35.9%                     38.2%            39.4%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                21.4%               40.6%                     18.2%             8.7%




                                                                              96
The World Bank                                                                Benin                                                          Country Survey 2012




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions by Year 1
                           FY ’07 Response Number = 389  FY ’12 Response Number = 600
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
*Significantly different between country surveys.




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between country surveys.

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Benin?
    Greatest Value
  Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY 2007                 FY 2012
  Financial resources*                                                         60.0%                   47.0%
  Mobilizing third party financial resources                                    1.0%                   13.0%
  Technical assistance                                                          6.0%                   9.0%
  Policy advice                                                                 7.0%                   11.0%
  Donor coordination                                                           10.0%                   6.0%
  Data**                                                                          -                    1.0%
  Training/capacity building                                                    3.0%                   9.0%
  Studies/analyses                                                             13.0%                   2.0%
  Convening/facilitating                                                        1.0%                   2.0%
  Linkage to non-Bank expertise**                                                 -                    0.0%
  Other                                                                         0.0%                   0.0%
*Includes “Lending when others won’t”, “Providing loans to finance development projects”, and “Providing loans to promote pol icy reforms” response options from
    the FY 2007 questionnaire. **Not included in FY 2007 questionnaire.

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Benin?
    2nd Greatest Value
  Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY 2007                 FY 2012
  Financial resources*                                                         49.0%                   10.2%
  Mobilizing third party financial resources                                    4.2%                   10.9%
  Technical assistance                                                          6.5%                   20.2%
  Policy advice                                                                10.1%                   16.7%
  Donor coordination                                                            9.0%                   6.1%
  Data**                                                                          -                    3.3%
  Training/capacity building                                                    9.0%                   16.7%
  Studies/analyses                                                              9.6%                   5.6%
  Convening/facilitating                                                        2.3%                   7.1%
  Linkage to non-Bank expertise**                                                 -                    2.2%
  Other                                                                         0.3%                   0.9%
*Includes “Lending when others won’t”, “Providing loans to finance development projects”, and “Providing loans to promote pol icy reforms” response options from
    the FY 2007 questionnaire. **Not included in FY 2007 questionnaire.




1
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’0 7 and FY ’12 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.



                                                                               97
The World Bank                                                               Benin                                                          Country Survey 2012




To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Benin, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Benin in terms of…, on a ten point scale?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.



C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Benin, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between country surveys.




                                                                               98
The World Bank                                                               Benin                                                   Country Survey 2012




E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.



G. Communication and Information Sharing

Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                     FY 2007               FY 2012
 Local newspapers                                                          42.1%                 45.5%
 International newspapers                                                  7.9%                   8.8%
 Local radio                                                               21.7%                 16.0%
 International radio                                                       16.8%                 10.0%
 Local television                                                          42.7%                 47.4%
 International television                                                  6.5%                  18.0%
 Periodicals                                                               9.0%                   5.3%
 Internet                                                                  30.2%                 39.0%
 Blogs*                                                                       -                   0.3%
 Mobile phones*                                                               -                   1.0%
 Instant messaging*                                                           -                   0.3%
 Other                                                                     10.9%                  4.8%
*Not included in FY 2007 questionnaire.

Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    FY 2007               FY 2012
 Yes                                                                           53.3%                 51.3%
 No                                                                            46.7%                 48.7%

Which do you primarily use?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY 2007               FY 2012
  The World Bank's country website (www.banquemondial.org/benin)               45.1%                 62.6%
  The World Bank's main website (www.worldbank.org)                            54.9%                 37.4%
*Significantly different between country surveys.

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Benin?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                 FY 2007                 FY 2012
  Yes                                                                        35.5%                   10.5%
  No                                                                         32.4%                   51.4%
  I don’t know what a PIC is                                                 32.1%                   38.1%
*Significantly different between country surveys.




                                                                              99
The World Bank                                                                                         Benin                                                                         Country Survey 2012




Appendix E: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank
                                                 H3. Currently, do you
                                                                               H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Benin? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              professionally collaborate/
                                              work with the World Bank?              Observer            Use WB reports/data   Engage in WB activities        Collaborate          Use WB website

Indicator Question                             No Mean         Yes Mean     No Mean        Yes Mean     No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean     Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the
World Bank's effectiveness in Benin, on a         6.46           7.27         7.18              6.28      6.98         6.88      6.56           7.44      6.70          7.24     6.97          6.89
ten-point scale.
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank's financial instruments meet the             6.04           6.87        6.75               5.87      6.62         6.30      6.29           6.85       6.13         6.97     6.53          6.53
needs of Benin, on a ten-point scale?
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank meets Benin's needs for knowledge            6.14           6.69        6.69               5.76      6.44         6.58      6.26           6.75      6.26          6.69     6.45          6.57
services, on a ten-point scale?
Overall the World Bank currently plays a
                                                  6.95           7.55        7.54               6.73      7.37         7.17      7.08           7.64      7.08          7.61     7.34          7.26
relevant role in development in Benin
The World Bank's work is aligned with
what I consider the development priorities        5.86           6.98        6.85               5.68      6.65         6.22      6.22           6.96       6.19         6.94     6.57          6.43
for this country
Responsiveness                                    5.98           6.70        6.66               5.61      6.43         6.28      6.15           6.68       6.18         6.62     6.38          6.47
Openness (sharing data and other
                                                  6.43           7.29         7.31              5.95      6.93         7.03      6.70           7.29      6.62          7.36     6.97          6.92
information)
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                  6.31           6.83        6.96               5.69      6.62         6.61      6.19           7.14       6.31         7.02     6.69          6.36
Government
Collaboration with the Government                 8.09           8.36        8.36               7.86      8.27         8.08      8.00           8.51      8.03          8.47     8.22          8.23

Collaboration with other donors                   7.41           7.81        7.84               7.24      7.70         7.68      7.47           7.96      7.55          7.85      7.71         7.62
To what degree does the World Bank's
work help achieve sustainable
                                                  6.69           7.38        7.27               6.64      7.16         6.95      6.88           7.40      6.79          7.47      7.12         7.03
development results in Benin, on a ten
point scale?
Are adaptable to Benin's development
                                                  6.17           6.90        6.89               5.85      6.74         6.39      6.35           7.00       6.31         6.98     6.59          6.80
challenges
Overall, how significant a contribution do
you believe the World Bank's knowledge
                                                  6.77           7.34        7.33               6.51      7.10         7.16      6.88           7.43      6.90          7.37      7.13         7.07
and research make to development results
in your country, on a ten point scale?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank's                       7.36           7.81         7.81              7.18      7.64         7.70      7.53           7.82      7.50          7.83     7.65          7.69
knowledge/research, on a ten point scale?
Where country systems are adequate, the
World Bank makes appropriate use of               7.72           8.13        8.05               7.77      8.02         7.87      7.80           8.18      7.97          7.99      8.01         7.87
them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.




                                                                                                       100
The World Bank                                         Benin                                       Country Survey 2012



Appendix E: Benin FY 2012 Questionnaire




                                 World Bank Client Survey FY12 – BENIN


The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in BENIN or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey is meant to give the World Bank’s team that works in BENIN, more in-depth insight into how the Bank’s
work is perceived. This is one tool the World Bank uses to assess the views of its critical stakeholders. With this
understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies, outreach and programs that support
development in BENIN. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm to oversee the logistics of this effort
in BENIN. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the survey, please
circle the number that most accurately reflects your answer. If you prefer not to answer a question, please
leave it blank.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO
NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED
IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BENIN

 A1. In general would you say that BENIN is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                       101
The World Bank                                               Benin                            Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BENIN (CONT...)

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in BENIN.
                                                   FIRST most        SECOND most          THIRD most
 Please identify which of these you consider    important priority important priority   important priority
 the FIRST, SECOND, and THIRD most               (Choose only       (Choose only        (Choose only
 important development priority.                     ONE)               ONE)               ONE)
 1    Rural development                                                                    
 2    Education                                                                            
 3    Social protection                                                                    
 4    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                     
 5    Poverty reduction                                                                    
 6    Public sector governance                                                             
 7    Regional integration                                                                 
 8    Gender                                                                               
 9    Domestic private sector development                                                  
 10   Foreign investment                                                                   
 11   Water and sanitation                                                                 
 12   Energy                                                                               
 13   Monitoring and evaluation                                                            
      Public financial management (e.g., public
 14                                                                                        
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 15   Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                
 16   Financial markets                                                                    
 17   Urban development                                                                    
 18   Environmental sustainability                                                         
 19   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                               
 20   Health                                                                               
 21   Global integration                                                                   
 22   Food security                                                                        
 23   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                        
 24   Agricultural development                                                             
 25   Trade and exports                                                                    
 26   Economic growth                                                                      
 27   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                              
 28   Regulatory framework                                                                 
 29   Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                
 30   Basic infrastructure                                                                 
 31   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                 
 32   Anti corruption                                                                      
 33   Disaster management                                                                  
 34   Global information and communications technology                                     




                                                             102
The World Bank                                               Benin                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BENIN (CONT...)

 A 3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
 areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute
 most to reducing poverty in BENIN? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy
 2    Water and sanitation
 3    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 4    Economic growth
 5    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Disaster management
 7    Regional integration
 8    Gender
 9    Rural development
 10   Urban development
 11   Education
 12   Regulatory framework
 13   Basic infrastructure
 14   Social protection
 15   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 16   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 17   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 18   Global information and communications technology
 19   Public sector governance
 20   Domestic private sector development
 21   Foreign investment
 22   Global integration
 23   Food security
 24   Monitoring and evaluation
 25   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 26   Environmental sustainability
 27   Health
 28   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 29   Agricultural development
 30   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 31   Financial markets
 32   Trade and exports
 33   Anti corruption




                                                             103
The World Bank                                               Benin                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BENIN (CONT…)

 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating
 economic growth in BENIN? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Poverty reduction
 2    Energy
 3    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 4    Social protection
 5    Global integration
 6    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 7    Anti corruption
 8    Disaster management
 9    Rural development
 10   Foreign investment
 11   Urban development
 12   Water and sanitation
 13   Education
 14   Global information and communications technology
 15   Regulatory framework
 16   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 17   Trade and exports
 18   Public sector governance
 19   Regional integration
 20   Domestic private sector development
 21   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 22   Agricultural development
 23   Food security
 24   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 25   Monitoring and evaluation
 26   Gender
 27   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 28   Environmental sustainability
 29   Health
 30   Basic infrastructure
 31   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 32   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 33   Financial markets




                                                             104
The World Bank                                              Benin                                                             Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in BENIN, on a ten point
 scale?
         1              2       3       4       5       6         7           8         9                  10

 Not familiar at all                                                                             Extremely familiar




 B2. *Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in BENIN,
 on a ten point scale?
          1             2   3       4       5       6   7         8       9             10                       

 Not effective at all                                                                 Very effective       Don't Know




 To what extent do you believe …
                                                            To no                                                To a very
                                                            degree                                              significant      Don't
                                                            at all                                                 degree        know
        *The World Bank's financial instruments meet
 B3                                                           1       2       3   4    5     6   7     8     9        10          
        the needs of BENIN, on a ten point scale?
        *The World Bank meets BENIN’s needs for
 B4     knowledge services (e.g., research, analysis,         1       2       3   4    5     6   7     8     9        10          
        technical assistance), on a ten point scale?
        *The World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the
 B5     global development agenda, on a ten point             1       2       3   4    5     6   7     8     9        10          
        scale?
        *The World Bank DOES seek to influence the
 B6     global development agenda, on a ten point             1       2       3   4    5     6   7     8     9        10          
        scale?




                                                             105
The World Bank                                               Benin                     Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B7. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on
 development results in BENIN, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank
 should focus most of its attention and resources in BENIN? (Choose no more than
 THREE)
 1    Rural development
 2    Education
 3    Social protection
 4    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 5    Poverty reduction
 6    Public sector governance
 7    Regional integration
 8    Gender
 9    Domestic private sector development
 10   Foreign investment
 11   Water and sanitation
 12   Energy
 13   Monitoring and evaluation
 14   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 15   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 16   Financial markets
 17   Urban development
 18   Environmental sustainability
 19   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 20   Health
 21   Global integration
 22   Food security
 23   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 24   Agricultural development
 25   Trade and exports
 26   Economic growth
 27   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 28   Regulatory framework
 29   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 30   Basic infrastructure
 31   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 32   Anti corruption
 33   Disaster management
 34   Global information and communications technology




                                                             106
The World Bank                                                Benin                                        Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B8. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in BENIN?
                                                                            Greatest Value   Second Greatest Value
                                                                         (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)
 1    Financial resources                                                                           
 2    Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                    
 3    Technical assistance                                                                          
 4    Policy advice                                                                                 
 5    Donor coordination                                                                            
 6    Data                                                                                          
 7    Training/capacity building                                                                    
 8    Studies/analyses                                                                              
 9    Convening/facilitating                                                                        
      Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge
 10                                                                                                 
      sharing)
 11   Other (please specify):______________________________                                         



 B9. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in BENIN? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 4    Staff too inaccessible
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not client focused
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12   Not aligned with country priorities
 13   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 14   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________




                                                               107
The World Bank                                               Benin                        Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B10. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in BENIN? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    Credits to finance the sector wide approaches (SWAP)
 8    Loan / grant for rehabilitation and reconstruction in emergency
 9    Others (specify): _______________________________________________________________
 10   Don’t know


 B11. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce
 poverty in BENIN? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    Credits to finance the sector wide approaches (SWAP)
 8    Loan / grant for rehabilitation and reconstruction in emergency
 9    Others (specify): _______________________________________________________________
 10   Don’t know


 B12. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor,
 which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank work with more in your country to
 ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    NGOs
 2    Local Government
 3    Beneficiaries
 4    Private sector
 5    Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 6    Donor community
 7    Foundations
 8    Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 9    Parliament
 10   Media
 11   Faith based organizations
 12   Other (please specify): __________________________




                                                             108
The World Bank                                                    Benin                                          Country Survey 2012




SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in
 BENIN, on a ten point scale?
                                                                     Strongly                                Strongly   Don't
                                                                     disagree                                   agree   know
        *Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
 B13                                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        role in development in BENIN
        *The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
 B14                                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        consider the development priorities for this country
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies
 B15                                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        that are realistic for BENIN
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
 B16                                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        BENIN with respect



 To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in BENIN in terms of ..., on
 a ten point scale?
                                                                     To no                                To a very
                                                                                                                        Don't
                                                                     degree at                           significant
                                                                                                                        know
                                                                     all                                    degree
 B17    Follow up and follow through                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
 B19    *Responsiveness                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B20                                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        services)
        Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B21                                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        circumstances)
 B22    Being inclusive                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
 B23    *Openness (sharing data and other information)                  1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
 B24    Staff accessibility                                             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
 B25    Straightforwardness and honesty                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        *Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B26                                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Government
 B27    *Collaboration with the Government                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
 B28    *Collaboration with other donors                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      




                                                                  109
The World Bank                                                Benin                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B29. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which
 TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly
 2    The Government works inefficiently/too slowly
 3    There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4    Poor donor coordination
 5    The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 6    Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 7    Political pressures and obstacles
 8    Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 9    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                               110
The World Bank                                   Benin                                         Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C1. *To what degree does the World Bank’s work, help achieve sustainable
 development results in BENIN, on a ten point scale?
        1          2   3   4     5     6     7           8   9          10                
 To no degree at                                                          To a very
                                                                                      Don't Know
 all                                                             significant degree




                                                 111
The World Bank                                             Benin                                            Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS (CONT...)

 How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in BENIN, on a ten point scale?
                                                               Not
                                                                                                           Very    Don't
                                                               effective
                                                                                                       effective   know
                                                               at all
 C2     Anti corruption                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C3     Global information and communications technology         1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C4     Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)         1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C5     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                  1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C6     Urban development                                        1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C7     Environmental sustainability                             1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C8     Regulatory framework                                     1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C9     Basic infrastructure                                     1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C10    Communicable/non-communicable disease                    1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C11    Poverty reduction                                        1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C12    Gender                                                   1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C13    Domestic private sector development                      1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C14    Foreign investment                                       1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C15    Water and sanitation                                     1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C16    Trade and exports                                        1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C17    Economic growth                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C18    Energy                                                   1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C19    Disaster management                                      1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C20    Monitoring and evaluation                                1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Public financial management (e.g., public
 C21                                                             1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 C22    Labor markets/job creation/employment                    1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C23    Financial markets                                        1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C24    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                   1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C25    Health                                                   1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C26    Rural development                                        1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C27    Global integration                                       1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C28    Food security                                            1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C29    Education                                                1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C30    Social protection                                        1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C31    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)            1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C32    Public sector governance                                 1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C33    Regional integration                                     1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C34    Agricultural development                                 1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C35    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)     1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                           112
The World Bank                                               Benin                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 D1. When thinking about the development challenges in BENIN, where do you believe
 it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge
 efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Public sector governance
 2    Gender
 3    Domestic private sector development
 4    Foreign investment
 5    Water and sanitation
 6    Trade and exports
 7    Economic growth
 8    Energy
 9    Disaster management
 10   Monitoring and evaluation
 11   Education
 12   Social protection
 13   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 14   Poverty reduction
 15   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 16   Anti corruption
 17   Financial markets
 18   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 19   Urban development
 20   Regional integration
 21   Global information and communications technology
 22   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 23   Agricultural development
 24   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 25   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 26   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 27   Health
 28   Rural development
 29   Global integration
 30   Food security
 31   Environmental sustainability
 32   Regulatory framework
 33   Basic infrastructure
 34   Communicable/non-communicable disease




                                                             113
The World Bank                                                 Benin                                                     Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 How effective do you believe the World Bank's knowledge and research are at …
                                                          Not
                                                                                                                       Very    Don't
                                                          effective
                                                                                                                   effective   know
                                                          at all
 D2    Raising your awareness of the particular topic      1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D3    Stimulating public debate/dialogue                  1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D4    Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills              1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D5    Contributing to good policy making                  1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       Providing support for program
 D6                                                        1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       implementation



 To what extent do you believe that the World Bank's knowledge and research …

                                                          To no                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                               Don't
                                                          degree at                                             significant
                                                                                                                               know
                                                          all                                                      degree
 D7      Are timely                                        1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
 D9                                                        1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to BENIN’s development
 D10                                                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         priorities
 D11     Provide feasible recommendations                  1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D12                                                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         understand)
         A source of relevant information on global
 D13                                                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         good practices
 D14     Are adequately disseminated                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D15     Are appropriately translated                      1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Are adaptable to BENIN’s development
 D16                                                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         challenges



 D17. *Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's
 knowledge and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point
 scale?
           1              2    3     4      5         6        7         8       9         10                   

 Not significant at all                                                              Very significant       Don't know




                                                                   114
The World Bank                                          Benin                                              Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 D18. *Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's
 knowledge/research, on a ten point scale?
         1              2       3   4       5       6   7         8   9         10                
 Very low                                                                        Very high
                                                                                              Don't know
 technical quality                                                        technical quality




 D19. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank
 expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing, etc.), on a ten point scale?
           1                2   3   4   5       6       7         8   9          10               

 Not effective at all                                                       Very effective    Don't know




                                                            115
The World Bank                                              Benin                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK

 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                       Strongly                                 Strongly   Don't
                                                       disagree                                    agree   know
 E1    The World Bank disburses funds promptly          1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       The World Bank effectively monitors and
 E2    evaluates the projects and programs it           1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       supports
       The World Bank's approvals and reviews are
 E3                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       done in a timely fashion
       The World Bank's safeguard policy
 E4                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       requirements are reasonable
       The World Bank imposes reasonable
 E5                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       conditions on its lending
       Working with the World Bank increases
 E6                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       BENIN’s institutional capacity
       The World Bank ensures consistency and
 E7                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       continuity through staff changes
       The World Bank's teams and visits are well
 E8                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       coordinated
       Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
 E9    financial management, etc.) are adequate, the    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       World Bank makes appropriate use of them




                                                            116
The World Bank                                                 Benin                                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN BENIN

 F1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play in BENIN’s
 development over the medium term in the near future, on a ten point scale?
        1            2       3       4      5       6      7           8   9               10               
 Not a significant                                                                   Very significant
                                                                                                        Don't Know
 role at all                                                                                     role




 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value
 in BENIN? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Improve the quality of its experts as related to BENIN’s specific challenges
 2    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3    Focus primarily on advocacy issues
      Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, and other
 4
      terms)
 5    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 6    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on BENIN’s economy
 7    Offer more innovative financial products
 8    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9    Others (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                               117
The World Bank                                              Benin                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social
 development issues in BENIN? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Blogs
 10   Mobile phones
 11   Instant messaging
 12   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2     Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Public Information Center
 7    World Bank publications and other written materials
 8    Mobile phones
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________



       Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will
 G3                                                                                               Yes        No
       now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 G4                                                                                               Yes        No
       (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                  Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                        Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?                                           Yes        No




                                                             118
The World Bank                                               Benin                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING (CONT...)

 G8. Which do you primarily use?
 1     The World Bank’s country website (www.banquemondiale.org/benin)
 2     The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 G9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in
 BENIN?
 1     Yes
 2     No
 3     I don’t know what PIC is

 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                                     Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                     disagree                              agree   know
         I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the
 G10                                                                  1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         organization's Open Data policy
         The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of
 G11     information related to development in BENIN. (Only           1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used the PIC)
         I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only
 G12                                                                  1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used a World Bank website)
         I find the information on the World Bank’s websites
 G13     useful. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank           1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         website)
         When I need information from the World Bank I know
 G14     how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them,     1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         etc.)
         The World Bank is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                  1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries




                                                              119
The World Bank                                             Benin                                         Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position? (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   Other (please specify): ________________________




                                                           120
The World Bank                                               Benin                    Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Agricultural development
 2    Anti corruption
 3    Basic infrastructure
 4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5    Communicable/non-communicable disease
 6    Disaster management
 7    Domestic private sector development
 8    Economic growth
 9    Education
 10   Energy
 11   Environmental sustainability
 12   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 13   Financial markets
 14   Food security
 15   Foreign investment
 16   Gender
 17   Global information and communications technology
 18   Global integration
 19   Health
 20   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 21   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 22   Monitoring and evaluation
 23   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 24   Poverty reduction
 25   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 26   Public sector governance
 27   Regional integration
 28   Regulatory framework
 29   Rural development
 30   Social protection
 31   Trade and exports
 32   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 33   Urban development
 34   Water and sanitation
 35   Other (please specify): _____________________________________________




                                                             121
The World Bank                                                Benin                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your
 country?
 1    Yes
 2    No



 H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in
 BENIN? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.



 H5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Cotonou
 2    Abomey-Calavi
 3    Porto Novo
 4    Parakou
 5    Autres villes (Préciser)
 6    Zones rurale (préciser la commune)




                                 Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                              122
