                                   88149




Central African Republic Country
    Opinion Survey Report

      (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                 Central African Republic                           Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. General Issues facing CAR .........................................................10
          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank .................................14
         VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................20
        VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments ..................................24
       VIII. How the World Bank Operates ..................................................34
         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR ................................39
          X. Communication and Openness..................................................43
         XI. Appendices ................................................................................50




                                                          2
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in CAR
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in CAR regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in CAR;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in CAR;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank ’s effectiveness and results, knowledge
               and research, and communication and information sharing in CAR; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in CAR.

       Use data to help inform the CAR country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In March and April 2012, 650 stakeholders of the World Bank in CAR were invited to provide
their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country survey.
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President; the office of the
Prime Minister; the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry,
ministerial department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World
Bank supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing
implementation of project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral
agencies; private sector organizations; private foundations; financial sector/private banks; local
NGOs; International NGOs; community based organizations; the media; independent
government institutions; trade unions; faith-based groups; academia, research institutes or think
tanks; and the judiciary branch. A total of 322 stakeholders participated in the country survey
(50%).

Respondents received the questionnaire via post. Respondents were asked about: general issues
facing CAR, their overall attitudes toward the Bank; the World Bank’s effectiveness and results;
the Bank’s knowledge; working with the World Bank; the Bank’s future role in CAR, and the
Bank’s communication and information sharing in CAR:

A. General Issues facing CAR: Respondents were asked to indicate whether CAR is headed in
   the right direction, what they thought were the top three most important development
   priorities, and which areas would contribute most to poverty reduction and economic growth.




                                                   3
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their familiarity
   with the World Bank, the Bank’s effectiveness in CAR, the extent to which the Bank meets
   CAR’s need for knowledge services and financial instruments, the extent to which the Bank
   should and does seek to influence the global development agenda, their agreement with
   various statements regarding the Bank’s work in CAR, and the extent to which the Bank is an
   effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the sectoral areas on
   which it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its resources, the Bank’s greatest
   values and greatest weaknesses in its work, the Bank instruments that are most and least
   effective in reducing poverty, with which groups the Bank should work more, and to what
   reasons respondents attributed failed or slow reform efforts.
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
   the Bank’s work helps achieve sustainable development results in CAR and the Bank’s level
   of effectiveness across forty development areas, such as poverty reduction, anti-corruption,
   and economic growth.
D. The World Bank’s Knowledge: Respondents were asked to indicate the areas on which the
   Bank should focus its research efforts and to rate the effectiveness and quality of the Bank’s
   knowledge/research, including how significant of a contribution the Bank’s knowledge and
   research make to development results, the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge/
   research, and the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement with
   a series of statements regarding working with the Bank, such as the World Bank safeguard
   policies requirements being reasonable, working with the World Bank increasing CAR’s
   institutional capacity, and whether the Bank is adequately staffed in CAR.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR: Respondents were asked to rate how significant
   a role the Bank should play in CAR’s development over the medium term and to indicate
   what the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in CAR.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate where they
   get information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their access to the Internet, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s website. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s Access to
   Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of agreement
   that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank ’s Open Data policy.
   Respondents were also asked their level of agreement that they know how to find information
   from the Bank and that the Bank is responsive to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank, their exposure
   to the Bank in CAR, and their geographic location.

In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 200 respondents (64% response rate) who completed the
country survey in FY 2009. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were
possible.


                                                   4
The World Bank                        Central African Republic                Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
    For further analyses: the small number of respondents from the office of the President
       and the office of the Prime Minister were combined into one group; the small number of
       consultants/contractors working on World Bank supported projects/programs and Project
       Management Units (PMUs) were combined into one group; the small number of
       respondents from community-based organizations were combined with those from local
       NGOs; respondents from bilateral agencies were combined with those from multilateral
       agencies; the small number of respondents from private sector organizations and the
       financial sector/private banks were combined into one group; and the three respondents
       from the judiciary branch were included in the “Other” category.




                                                 5
The World Bank                   Central African Republic   Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                            6
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The vast majority of respondents indicated that they were located in Bangui. Because of
        the small number of respondents from other cities and those from rural areas, respondents
        from these locations were combined into one category, “Other Areas”, for all further
        analyses.




                                                  7
The World Bank                      Central African Republic   Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Professional Collaboration with the World Bank




Exposure to the World Bank




                                               8
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank
   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 4.8 on a
    10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar. This was
    statistically similar to the FY ’09 survey, in which familiarity with the Bank received a mean
    rating of 5.2 across all respondents.
         Consultants on Bank projects/respondents from PMUs indicated the highest levels of
             familiarity with the Bank whereas respondents from private/financial sector, faith-
             based groups, the media, academia, international NGOs and other organizations
             indicated significantly lower levels of familiarity.
         Respondents from Bangui and Other Areas had statistically similar ratings of
             familiarity with the World Bank.
         It should be noted that respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the Bank were
             significantly, strongly correlated with their impressions of the Bank’s overall
             effectiveness in CAR as well as significantly, moderately correlated with their
             perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results and
             the Bank’s relevance to CAR’s development.




                                                   9
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                 Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing CAR

Headed in the Right Direction

       When asked whether CAR was headed in the right or wrong direction, 40% of
        respondents indicated that CAR was headed in the right direction.
             The majority of respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister,
              office of a Minister, office of a Parliamentarian, employees of a ministry,
              consultants on Bank Projects/PMUs, local government, bilateral or multilateral
              agencies, independent government institution, and trade unions indicated that
              CAR was headed in the right direction. In contrast, respondents from the
              private/financial sector, academia, and other organizations were more likely to
              say that CAR was headed in the wrong direction. Respondents from private
              foundations, local NGOs/CBOs, the media, and faith-based groups were more
              likely to say that they were not sure if CAR was headed in the right or wrong
              direction. Respondents from international NGOs were equally split between
              those who felt that CAR was headed in the right direction and those who were
              not sure.
             A plurality of respondents from Bangui indicated that CAR was headed in the
              right direction whereas respondents from Other Areas were fairly evenly split
              between CAR being headed in the right direction, the wrong direction, or being
              not sure.




                                                 10
The World Bank                        Central African Republic                Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing CAR (continued)

Development Priority

       Respondents indicated that education, transport, and energy were the most important
        development priorities in CAR. Rural development and security/stabilization/
        reconstruction were also considered top priorities.
             In the FY ’09 country survey, government effectiveness (42%), education (25%),
               and HIV/AIDS/other communicable diseases (23%) were considered the most
               important development priorities for CAR.




                                                11
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                 Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing CAR (continued)
Poverty Reduction
    Respondents indicated that rural development, education, and agricultural development
       would contribute most to poverty reduction in CAR. Economic growth, transport, energy,
       food security, water and sanitation, job creation/employment, and security/stabilization/
       reconstruction were also considered key contributors to poverty reduction.
            Respondents from the FY ’09 country survey indicated agricultural development
              (58%) as the contributing most to reducing poverty in FY ’09.
            Respondents across most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated these key contributors to poverty reduction except respondents from the
              media who indicated law and justice would contribute most to poverty reduction.




                                                 12
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing CAR (continued)

Economic Growth

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that energy would contribute most to generating
        economic growth in CAR. Agricultural development, trade and exports, rural
        development, education, anti-corruption, and jobs creation/employment were also
        identified as key to economic growth.
             Respondents from the FY ’09 country survey indicated that increasing
                agricultural productivity (58%) would contribute most to generating
                economic growth in CAR.




                                                  13
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Focusing World Bank Resources

       Respondents indicated that the Bank would have the most impact on development results
        in CAR by focusing most of its attention and resources on agricultural development,
        education, and rural development. Energy, transport, and health were also seen as key.
             In the FY ’09 country survey, respondents indicated that it would be most
              productive for the Bank to focus its resources on employment (25%), agricultural
              productivity (24%), and government effectiveness (23%).




                                                 14
The World Bank                           Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Overall Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, ratings of the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in CAR
        received a mean rating of 5.3 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10
        being very effective. This was statistically similar to the FY ’09 survey, in which the
        Bank’s overall effectiveness received a mean rating of 5. 4 across all respondents.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Bangui and
              Other Areas, gave statistically similar ratings for the World Bank’s overall
              effectiveness in CAR.




                                                   15
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Achieving Sustainable Development Results

       Across all respondents, the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results
        in CAR received a mean rating of 5.7 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at all
        and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Bangui and
              Other Areas, gave statistically similar ratings for the World Bank helping achieve
              sustainable development results in CAR.




                                                  16
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest value to CAR was its
        training/capacity building. The Bank’s technical assistance, financial resources, strategy
        formulation, studies/analyses, and mobilization of third party financial resources were
        also considered of great value.
             Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that the Bank’s greatest
              values to CAR were lending when others won’t (34%), its financial resources
              (34%), and its policy and economic advice (30%).




                                                  17
The World Bank                           Central African Republic                    Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Greatest Weakness
       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in CAR were
        being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures and imposing
        technocratic solutions without regard to political realities.
             Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that the Bank’s greatest
                weaknesses were imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
                realities (54%), not providing sufficient financial resources (45%), and being too
                bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures (38%).
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups, as well as Bangui and Other Areas,
                indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses were being too bureaucratic and
                imposing technocratic solutions except respondents from the office of a Minister
                who indicated that its staff is too inaccessible and the credibility of its knowledge/
                data and respondents from independent government institutions who indicated
                that the Bank is arrogant in its approach.




                                                   18
The World Bank                           Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, respondents
        indicated that they most often attribute this to the Bank working too slowly. Respondents
        also indicated that political pressures and obstacles, ongoing conflict and instability, the
        government working inefficiently, and an inadequate level of citizen/ civil society
        participation can also lead to Bank assisted reform efforts failing or taking place slowly.
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups, as well as those from Bangui and
              Other Areas, identified these as reasons for Bank assisted reform efforts failing or
              being slow to take place, except respondents from the office of the President/
              Prime Minister who were more likely to identify inadequate funding as the reason
              Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place.




                                                   19
The World Bank                           Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Specific Areas of Effectiveness
       Respondents saw the Bank as most effective at health, communicable/non-communicable
        disease, and education, receiving mean ratings of 6.5, 6.4, and 6.3, respectively, across all
        respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not effective at all and 10 being very
        effective.




                                                   20
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder differences in their ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness
        across several of these forty areas. For the most part, respondents from independent
        government institutions, consultants on Bank projects/PMUs, and trade unions had the
        highest ratings across these areas whereas respondents from the office of a
        Parliamentarian, international NGOs, the media, academia, and other organizations had
        significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness across these areas. Those areas
        with significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Basic infrastructure”;
             “Communicable/non-communicable disease”;
             “Energy”;
             “Disaster management”;
             “Public financial management”;
             “Job creation/ employment”;
             “Social cohesion”;
             “Education”;
             “Security/stabilization/ reconstruction”;
             “Public sector reform”; and
             “Agricultural development”.

       Respondents from Other Areas gave significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
        effectiveness at “Domestic private sector development” compared to respondents from
        Bangui. Respondents from Bangui and Other Areas gave statistically similar ratings of
        the Bank’s effectiveness across the other thirty-nine areas.

       Responses across all stakeholder groups, geographic locations, and both country surveys
        can be found in the Appendix.




                                                  21
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s
        effectiveness at all areas that could be compared, except for “Health”, compared to
        respondents in the FY ’09 country survey.




                                                  22
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                    Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness and
ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable development results in CAR, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the forty specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help achieve susta inable
development results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of
effectiveness in one specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness or perceptions of the Bank’s ability t o help achieve sustainable
development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in CAR. The areas determined
        to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at global information and communications technology;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at poverty reduction;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at financial markets; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at public financial management.

       Achieving Sustainable Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest
        Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results in CAR,
        suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions
        of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at security/stabilization/reconstruction;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at financial markets.




                                                  23
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                    Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments

Knowledge: Meeting CAR’s Knowledge Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank meets CAR’s needs for knowledge
        services received a mean rating of 5.6 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at all
        and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Bangui and
              Other Areas, gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank meeting CAR’s needs
              for knowledge services.




                                                  24
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Knowledge: Focusing Bank Research
       Respondents indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
        and knowledge efforts on energy. Respondents also indicated that education, transport,
        agricultural development, and poverty reduction would be valuable research endeavors.
             Respondents in the FY ’09 country survey indicated that it would be most
                valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on education (40%), agri-
                business/agricultural productivity (22%), rural development (22%), health (20%),
                and poverty (19%).




                                                 25
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, the effectiveness of the World Bank’s knowledge and research to
        provide support for program implementation received the highest mean rating, 6.0, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Bangui and
              Other Areas, had statistically similar ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s
              knowledge and research in these areas.




                                                  26
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Qualities

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s knowledge and research being a source of
        relevant information on global good practices received the highest mean rating, 6.2, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from this country survey had significantly higher ratings for “Are
               adaptable to CAR’s development challenges” compared to respondents from the
               FY ’09 country survey (5.3) , but statistically similar ratings for “A source of
               relevant information on global good practices” ( 6.2; note only these two areas
               could be compared).
             Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest ratings for
               the extent to which the Bank’s knowledge and research “Are timely”, “Include an
               appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation”, and “Are
               accessible” whereas respondents from faith-based groups, academia, and other
               organizations had significantly lower ratings. Respondents across all stakeholder
               groups had statistically similar ratings for the other qualities of the World B ank’s
               knowledge and research.
             Respondents from Bangui had higher ratings for all of these qualities of the World
               Bank’s knowledge and research compared to respondents from Other Areas,
               significantly so for “Are timely”, “Include an appropriate level of sta keholder
               involvement during preparation”, and “Are adaptable to CAR’s development
               challenges”.




                                                  27
The World Bank                           Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Contribution

       Across all respondents, the significance of the contribution that the World Bank’s
        knowledge and research make to development results in CAR received a mean rating of
        6.4 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not significant at all and 10 being very significant.
             Respondents from Bangui gave significantly higher ratings for the contribution
              that the Bank’s knowledge and research make to development results in CAR
              compared to respondents from Other Areas.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar significance
              ratings for the contribution that the World Bank’s knowledge and research make
              to development results in CAR.




                                                   28
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Technical Quality

       Across all respondents, the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge and
        research received a mean rating of 5.9 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being very low
        technical quality and 10 being very high technical quality.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Bangui and
              Other Areas, gave statistically similar ratings for the technical quality of the
              World Bank’s knowledge and research.




                                                  29
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                    Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Linkage to Non-Bank Expertise

       Across all respondents, the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank
        expertise received a mean rating of 5.7 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at
        all and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents from independent government institutions gave the highest ratings
              for the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise whereas
              respondents from faith-based groups gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Bangui and Other Areas gave statistically similar ratings for
              the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise.




                                                  30
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Most Effective

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank’s investment lending was its
        most effective instrument in reducing poverty in CAR.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated that the World Bank’s investment lending was its most effective
              instrument in reducing poverty in CAR, except respondents from faith-based
              groups who indicated that the Bank’s emergency recovery lending was most
              effective.




                                                 31
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                 Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Least Effective

       Nearly a third of all respondents indicated that they didn’t know which of the World
        Bank’s instruments was least effective in reducing poverty in CAR.
             A plurality of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they didn’t
              know which Bank instruments were least effective, except respondents from the
              private/financial sector, faith-based groups, academia, and other organizations
              who indicated that the World Bank’s investment lending was least effective in
              reducing poverty in CAR. In contrast, respondents from local NGOs/CBOs,
              international NGOs, and trade unions indicated that the Bank’s technical
              assistance was least effective. Respondents from the media indicated that the
              Bank’s emergency recovery lending was least effective. Respondents from
              independent government institutions indicated that the Bank’s Trust Fund
              management was least effective.
             Respondents from Bangui indicated that they didn’t know which of the World
              Bank’s instruments was least effective in reducing poverty in CAR. In contrast,
              respondents from Other Areas indicated that the Bank’s policy based lending/
              budget support to the Government was least effective.




                                                  32
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Meeting CAR’s Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank’s financial instruments meet CAR’s
        needs received a mean rating of 5.5 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at all
        and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Bangui and
              Other Areas, gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s financial instruments
              meeting CAR’s needs.




                                                  33
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates

The World Bank’s Work in CAR

       In terms of the Bank’s work in CAR, the World Bank treating clients and stakeholders in
        CAR with respect received the highest mean level of agreement, 5.9, across all
        respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly
        agree.
             Respondents from the FY ’09 country survey had statistically similar levels of
              agreement across all four statements compared to respondents in this ye ar’s
              country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement across these statements.
             Respondents from Bangui had significantly higher levels of agreement that the
              Bank treats clients and stakeholders with respect compared to respondents from
              Other Areas. Respondents across both locations had statistically similar levels of
              agreement for the other three statements.




                                                  34
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions

   Across all respondents, the Bank’s teams and visits being well coordinated and working with
    the Bank increasing institutional capacity both received the highest mean rating, 6.8, on a 10-
    point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
         Ratings for “The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending ” in this
          year’s country survey were significantly higher compared to the FY ’09 country
          survey. Ratings for the other two statements that could be compared were statistically
          similar in the FY ’12 and FY ’09 country surveys.
         Respondents from the Office of the President/ Prime Minister, consultants on Bank
          projects/PMUs, and independent government institutions had the highest ratings for
          “The World Bank disburses funds promptly”, “The World Bank effectively monitors
          and evaluates the projects and programs it supports”, and “The World Bank’s
          approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion” whereas respondents from the
          media had significantly lower ratings. Respondents across all stakeholder groups had
          statistically similar ratings for the other aspects of working with the World Bank.
         Respondents from Bangui and Other Areas had statistically similar ratings for these
          aspects of working with the World Bank in CAR.




                                                  35
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

Adequately Staffed

   Across all respondents, the World Bank being adequately staffed in CAR received a mean
    rating of 5.6 on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very
    significant degree.
         Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Bangui and Other
          Areas, had statistically similar ratings that the Bank is adequately staffed in CAR.




                                                 36
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                    Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development
        partner in terms of its collaboration with other donors in CAR received the highest rating,
        7.0, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant
        degree.
       Ratings on the Bank’s flexibility in the face of changing country circumstances increased
        significantly from FY 09 to FY 12.




                                                  37
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner (continued)

       Ratings for the extent to which the Bank displayed flexibility in terms of the country’s
        changing circumstances was significantly higher in this country survey compared to the
        FY ’09 country survey. The other four areas that could be compared received statistically
        similar ratings across both country surveys.

       There were some interesting stakeholder group significant differences in their perceptions
        of the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development partner in CAR.
             Respondents from local government and the office of the President/Prime
              Minister had the highest ratings regarding the Bank’s follow up and follow
              through whereas respondents from international NGOs, private/financial sector,
              and the office of a Parliamentarian had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest ratings
              regarding the Bank’s responsiveness whereas respondents from international
              NGOs and the office of a Parliamentarian had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest ratings
              regarding the Bank’s openness whereas respondents from private/financial sector
              had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest ratings
              regarding Bank staff accessibility whereas respondents from faith-based groups
              and other organizations had significantly lower ratings.
             Employees of ministries, consultants on Bank projects/PMUs, and respondents
              from bilateral or multilateral agencies had the highest ratings regarding the
              Bank’s collaboration with the government in CAR whereas respondents from the
              office of a Parliamentarian had significantly lower ratings.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from independent government
              institutions had the highest ratings regarding the Bank’s collaboration with other
              donors in CAR whereas respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian had
              significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings across
              the other areas.

       Respondents from Bangui had higher ratings across all of these areas compared to
        respondents from Other Areas, significantly so for “Follow up and follow through”,
        “Straightforwardness and honesty”, “Co llaboration with the Government”, and
        “Collaboration with other donors”.




                                                  38
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR

Role Significance

       The Bank was expected to play a somewhat significant role in CAR’s development over
        the medium term, receiving a mean rating of 6.7 across all respondents on a 10-point
        scale with 1 being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role.
             Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly lower ratings for the
              role the Bank was expected to play in CAR’s development over the medium term
              compared to respondents from the FY ’09 country survey (8.0).
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as from Bangui and Other
              Areas, gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s role significance.




                                                 39
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                 Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should work faster, improve the quality of its
        experts as related to CAR’s specific challenges, focus on issues that are unique to post-
        conflict countries, and reduce the complexity of obtaining Bank financing to make itself
        of greater value in CAR.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups, as well as from Bangui and Other
              Areas, indicated that the Bank should do these things to make itself of greater
              value in CAR, except respondents from consultants on Bank projects/PMUs and
              local governments who indicated that the Bank should also ensure greater
              selectivity in its work and respondents from independent government institutions
              who indicated that the Bank should also offer more innovative financial products.




                                                  40
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                 Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR (continued)

Collaborating in CAR

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely
        with NGOs to ensure better development results in CAR.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated that the Bank should work more closely with NGOs, except respondents
              from the office of the President/Prime Minister who were more likely to indicate
              that the Bank should work more closely with academia, consultants on Bank
              projects/PMUs who were more likely to indicate that the Bank should work with
              beneficiaries and CBOs, respondents from independent government institutions
              who were more likely to indicate that the Bank should work with CBOs, and
              respondents from faith-based groups who were more likely to indicate that the
              Bank should work more with beneficiaries and faith-based organizations.




                                                 41
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                 Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR (continued)

Influencing the Global Development Agenda

       Across all respondents, the extent to which respondents believed the World Bank should
        influence the global development agenda received a mean rating of 6.1 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree. The
        extent to which respondents believed the World Bank does influence the global
        development agenda received a mean rating of 5.7 across all respondents.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups as well as those from Bangui and Other
              Areas gave statistically similar ratings for the extent to which the Bank should
              and does influence the global development agenda.




                                                 42
The World Bank                         Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Respondents indicated that they got most of their information about economic and social
        development issues in CAR from local newspapers and local radio.
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated that they get information from local newspapers and radio, except
              employees of ministries who were more likely to utilize international radio.




                                                 43
The World Bank                        Central African Republic                 Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank,
        respondents indicated a variety of sources, including World Bank seminars/workshops/
        conferences, World Bank publications and other written materials, mobile phones, the
        World Bank website, and direct contact with World Bank staff.




                                                44
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that they were aware of the Bank’s new Access
        to Information policy.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of awareness for the Bank’s new Access to Informat ion
              policy.




       Just 12% of all respondents indicated that they had requested information from the World
        Bank in the past year.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of requesting information from the World Bank.




                                                  45
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Nearly half of all the respondents who indicated that they had requested information from
        the World Bank indicated that they were able to obtain this information.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of obtaining their requested information.




       Agreement that respondents use more data from the World Bank as a result of its Open
        Data policy received a mean rating of 4.5, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement that they use more data from the World
              Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data policy.




                                                  46
The World Bank                            Central African Republic                    Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       Just over half of all respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet, statistically
        similar to the rates of Internet access found in the FY ’09 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of Internet access.




Website Usage

       Just over a quarter of all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website ,
        statistically similar to the rates of website usage found in the FY ’09 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of Bank website usage.




                                                    47
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Website Usage
       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, a slight majority indicated that they
        used the World Bank’s country website.
             Employees of ministries, consultants on Bank projects/PMUs, and respondents
               from bilateral or multilateral agencies, private/financial sector, and trade unions
               had significantly higher rates of usage for the World Bank’s main website
               compared to those from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from Bangui and Other Areas had statistically similar rates of usage
               for the World Bank’s main and country websites.




Website Evaluation
       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, agreement that
        respondents find the information on the Bank’s websites useful received the highest mean
        rating, 5.8, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and
        10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of
                agreement that they find the information on the Bank’s websites useful compared
                to respondents from the FY ’09 country survey (4.5; note only this one statement
                could be compared).
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
                statistically similar levels of agreement that they find the information on the
                Bank’s websites useful and that the Bank websites are easy to navigate.




                                                  48
The World Bank                          Central African Republic                 Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       In terms of the Bank’s information sharing in CAR, respondents had the highest level of
        agreement that “When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it ”,
        receiving a mean rating of 5.5, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being
        strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement that “The Bank is appropriately
              responsive to my information requests and inquiries” and that “When I need
              information from the World Bank I know how to find it”.




                                                  49
The World Bank                            Central African Republic                    Country Survey 2012



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 51


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 66


          C. Responses to All Questions by Geographic Locations ................... 85


          D. Responses to All Questions by Year .............................................. 99


          E. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank ........ 102


          F. World Bank Client Survey 2012 – CAR Questionnaire ................ 103




                                    CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC




                                                    50
The World Bank                                Central African Republic                      Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=322)
A. General Issues facing CAR
1. In general, would you say that CAR is headed in...?                     Percentage of Respondents (N=264)
The right direction                                                                      40.2%
The wrong direction                                                                      30.3%
Not sure                                                                                 29.5%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in             Percentage of Respondents (N=246)
                                                         st                   nd          rd
   CAR. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 ,       Most      2 Most       3 Most
    nd       rd
   2 , and 3 most important development priority.               Important Important Important Combined
Education                                                         20.7%        9.3%        3.3%      33.4%
Transport                                                         19.5%        5.7%        6.6%      31.8%
Energy                                                            6.2%        13.4%       12.0%      31.6%
Rural development                                                 11.2%        9.8%        5.8%      26.7%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                             8.7%         6.1%        5.4%      20.2%
Health                                                            3.3%         6.5%        4.5%      14.4%
Water and sanitation                                              2.9%         8.1%        1.7%      12.7%
Poverty reduction                                                 7.1%         1.6%        3.7%      12.4%
Agricultural development                                          2.9%         4.5%        3.7%      11.1%
Job creation/employment                                           1.2%         3.3%        5.8%      10.3%
Food security                                                     0.4%         2.4%        6.2%       9.1%
Regional conflict and tensions                                    1.7%         2.8%        4.1%       8.6%
Domestic private sector development                               2.5%         3.3%        2.5%       8.2%
Natural resource management                                       0.8%         2.4%        2.5%       5.7%
Economic growth                                                   0.8%         2.8%        1.7%       5.3%
Social protection                                                 2.5%         1.6%        0.8%       4.9%
Foreign direct investment                                         1.2%         2.0%        1.7%       4.9%
Basic infrastructure                                              0.4%         2.0%        2.5%       4.9%
Trade and exports                                                 1.2%         0.8%        2.1%       4.1%
Public sector reform                                              1.2%         1.2%        1.7%       4.1%
Anti-corruption                                                   0.4%         0.4%        2.9%       3.7%
Regional integration                                              0.8%         0.8%        2.1%       3.7%
Global information and communications technology                  0.4%         0.8%        2.1%       3.3%
Gender                                                            0.4%         2.0%        0.8%       3.3%
Public financial management                                       0.4%         0.4%        2.1%       2.9%
Governance                                                        0.0%         0.4%        2.1%       2.5%
Environmental sustainability                                      0.0%         0.8%        1.7%       2.5%
Law and justice                                                   0.0%         0.8%        1.7%       2.5%
Equality of opportunity                                           0.0%         1.6%        0.8%       2.5%
Global integration                                                0.0%         0.0%        1.7%       1.7%
Local governance and institutions                                 0.4%         0.8%        0.4%       1.6%
Urban development                                                 0.0%         0.8%        0.4%       1.2%
Social cohesion                                                   0.4%         0.0%        0.4%       0.8%
Monitoring and evaluation                                         0.0%         0.0%        0.8%       0.8%
Climate change                                                    0.0%         0.0%        0.8%       0.8%
Financial markets                                                 0.0%         0.4%        0.4%       0.8%
Crime and violence                                                0.0%         0.0%        0.4%       0.4%
Regulatory framework                                              0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                             0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
Disaster management                                               0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%


                                                         51
The World Bank                             Central African Republic                 Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
   different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do
   you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in CAR?         Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                         (Responses Combined; N=302)
Rural development                                                                  23.2%
Education                                                                          21.9%
Agricultural development                                                           20.9%
Economic growth                                                                    18.9%
Transport                                                                          18.5%
Energy                                                                             18.5%
Food security                                                                      16.9%
Water and sanitation                                                               16.2%
Job creation/employment                                                            14.9%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                              14.6%
Law and justice                                                                    9.6%
Anti-corruption                                                                    8.3%
Domestic private sector development                                                7.3%
Health                                                                             7.3%
Basic infrastructure                                                               6.6%
Trade and exports                                                                  5.6%
Governance                                                                         5.3%
Regional integration                                                               5.0%
Social protection                                                                  5.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                          4.6%
Natural resource management                                                        4.6%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                          4.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                            4.0%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                     4.0%
Public financial management                                                        3.3%
Global information and communications technology                                   3.0%
Public sector reform                                                               3.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                       3.0%
Disaster management                                                                2.6%
Local governance and institutions                                                  2.6%
Urban development                                                                  2.3%
Financial markets                                                                  2.3%
Global integration                                                                 2.0%
Climate change                                                                     1.7%
Gender                                                                             1.7%
Crime and violence                                                                 1.7%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              1.0%
Regulatory framework                                                               0.7%
Social cohesion                                                                    0.7%




                                                     52
The World Bank                                Central African Republic                         Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE
   areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating                Percentage of Respondents
   economic growth in CAR? (Choose no more than THREE)                         (Responses Combined; N=300)
Energy                                                                                     44.7%
Agricultural development                                                                   22.7%
Trade and exports                                                                          22.0%
Rural development                                                                          18.3%
Education                                                                                  17.7%
Anti-corruption                                                                            16.3%
Job creation/employment                                                                    14.7%
Foreign direct investment                                                                  10.7%
Transport                                                                                  9.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                       8.3%
Public sector reform                                                                       8.3%
Natural resource management                                                                8.3%
Food security                                                                              8.0%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                      7.0%
Public financial management                                                                6.3%
Global information and communications technology                                           6.0%
Basic infrastructure                                                                       6.0%
Financial markets                                                                          6.0%
Domestic private sector development                                                        5.7%
Health                                                                                     5.7%
Urban development                                                                          5.0%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                  5.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                               3.7%
Global integration                                                                         3.0%
Climate change                                                                             3.0%
Social cohesion                                                                            3.0%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                             2.7%
Law and justice                                                                            2.7%
Local governance and institutions                                                          2.7%
Social protection                                                                          2.3%
Disaster management                                                                        2.3%
Governance                                                                                 2.3%
Regulatory framework                                                                       2.0%
Regional integration                                                                       1.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                                    1.0%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                      0.7%
Gender                                                                                     0.0%
Crime and violence                                                                         0.0%

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Familiarity and Overall Effectiveness                                                    N       Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in CAR, on a ten-point
                                                                                         299      4.81     2.55
   scale? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank's effectiveness in CAR, on a
                                                                                         261      5.25     2.37
   ten-point scale. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)



                                                        53
The World Bank                                 Central African Republic                         Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)    N      Mean       SD
3. The World Bank's financial instruments meet the needs of CAR, on a ten-point
                                                                                          252      5.52     2.67
    scale?
4. The World Bank meets CAR's needs for knowledge services, on a ten-point scale?         250      5.62     2.44

5. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact
   on development results in CAR, in which sectoral areas do you believe
   the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in               Percentage of Respondents
   CAP? (Choose no more than THREE)                                               (Responses Combined; N=306)
Agricultural development                                                                      29.7%
Education                                                                                     27.1%
Rural development                                                                             24.4%
Energy                                                                                        20.9%
Transport                                                                                     20.6%
Health                                                                                        19.0%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                         13.1%
Job creation/employment                                                                       12.1%
Poverty reduction                                                                             11.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                           11.8%
Food security                                                                                 9.8%
Water and sanitation                                                                          7.5%
Governance                                                                                    7.2%
Public financial management                                                                   6.9%
Natural resource management                                                                   6.9%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                     5.6%
Anti-corruption                                                                               5.6%
Basic infrastructure                                                                          5.2%
Economic growth                                                                               4.2%
Law and justice                                                                               4.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                                     3.9%
Global information and communications technology                                              3.9%
Crime and violence                                                                            3.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                                  3.6%
Financial markets                                                                             3.3%
Urban development                                                                             3.3%
Trade and exports                                                                             3.3%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                                2.6%
Global integration                                                                            2.3%
Local governance and institutions                                                             2.3%
Social protection                                                                             2.0%
Public sector reform                                                                          2.0%
Regional integration                                                                          1.6%
Social cohesion                                                                               1.6%
Disaster management                                                                           1.6%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                         1.3%
Gender                                                                                        0.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                                       0.7%
Climate change                                                                                0.7%
Regulatory framework                                                                          0.3%



                                                         54
The World Bank                                   Central African Republic                          Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                               Percentage of Respondents (N=273)
6. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do
                                                                                           nd
   you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second         Greatest     2 Greatest
   greatest value in CAR?                                                    Value         Value        Combined
Training/capacity building                                                   18.8%         22.7%          41.5%
Technical assistance                                                         19.2%         12.1%          31.3%
Financial resources                                                          19.6%          6.2%          25.8%
Strategy formulation                                                          4.8%         20.5%          25.3%
Studies/analyses                                                             11.4%          9.2%          20.6%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                   15.5%          4.4%          19.9%
Data                                                                          1.1%          7.3%           8.4%
Policy advice                                                                 3.0%          4.0%           7.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                 1.8%          5.1%           7.0%
Donor coordination                                                            2.6%          2.2%           4.8%
Convening/facilitating                                                        1.1%          3.3%           4.4%
Other                                                                         1.1%          2.9%           4.0%

7. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest                 Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=280)
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                      42.9%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                            36.4%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                        13.2%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                           12.1%
Not client focused                                                                               11.8%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                            11.1%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                         10.4%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                         9.6%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                            9.6%
Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries                          8.9%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                   7.5%
Inadequately aligned with country priorities                                                     6.8%
Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country                     6.4%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                         5.4%
Not aligned with other donors' work                                                              2.1%
Other                                                                                            2.1%

8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in               Percentage of Respondents
   reducing poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)                                (Responses Combined; N=305)
Investment lending                                                                               55.4%
Analytical work                                                                                  22.0%
Emergency recovery lending                                                                       21.0%
Technical assistance                                                                             19.0%
Policy based lending/Budget support to the Government                                            15.1%
Capacity development                                                                             14.8%
Sector-wide approaches                                                                           14.1%
Don't know                                                                                       11.1%
Co-financing arrangements                                                                        10.2%
Trust Fund management                                                                            6.9%
Other                                                                                            3.0%




                                                           55
The World Bank                                 Central African Republic                         Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

9. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in               Percentage of Respondents
   helping to reduce poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)                    (Responses Combined; N=308)
Don't know                                                                                    30.2%
Emergency recovery lending                                                                    20.5%
Capacity development                                                                          17.9%
Policy based lending/Budget support to the Government                                         17.9%
Investment lending                                                                            16.9%
Technical assistance                                                                          15.6%
Trust Fund management                                                                         15.3%
Sector-wide approaches                                                                        15.3%
Analytical work                                                                               12.7%
Co-financing arrangements                                                                     11.0%
Other                                                                                         3.2%

To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)    N      Mean       SD
10. The World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the global development agenda, on a
                                                                                          243      6.11     3.01
    ten point scale?
11. The World Bank DOES seek to influence the global development agenda, on a ten
                                                                                          249      5.66     2.54
    point scale?

12. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
   main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
   Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better                      Percentage of Respondents
   development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                           (Responses Combined; N=312)
NGOs                                                                                          50.6%
Community-based organizations (CBOs)                                                          21.2%
Beneficiaries                                                                                 19.6%
Private sector                                                                                17.3%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                      14.1%
Faith-based organizations                                                                     13.8%
Local government                                                                              11.2%
UN agencies                                                                                   9.9%
Foundations                                                                                   9.6%
Media                                                                                         8.3%
Donor community                                                                               5.8%
Regional organizations                                                                        5.4%
UN and regional peace-keeping forces                                                          4.2%
Emerging donors                                                                               3.8%
Parliament                                                                                    3.5%
Other                                                                                         1.3%

                                                                                           Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s
work in CAR, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                N     Mean        SD
13. Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in CAR          274     5.80      2.73
14. The World Bank's work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                          270     5.88      2.72
    for this country
15. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for CAR            249     5.86      2.53
16. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in CAR with respect                    234     5.90      2.51



                                                         56
The World Bank                                      Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                                                Degree
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in CAR in terms
of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)      N      Mean       SD
17. Follow up and follow through                                                        258     6.30      2.78
18. Responsiveness                                                                      224      5.62     2.52
19. Flexibility (in terms of the institution's products and services)                   217      5.39     2.38
20. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                            227      5.49     2.48
21. Being inclusive                                                                     221      5.59     2.41
22. Openness (sharing data and other information)                                       229      5.87     2.52
23. Staff accessibility                                                                 229      5.39     2.52
24. Straightforwardness and honesty                                                     222      6.61     2.24
25. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                                 250      6.34     2.42
26. Collaboration with the Government                                                   258      6.82     2.59
27. Collaboration with other donors                                                     233      6.98     2.56

28. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
   place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to?                Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                                 (Responses Combined; N=298)
The World Bank works too slowly                                                            38.3%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                          29.5%
Ongoing conflict and instability                                                           28.9%
The Government works inefficiently                                                         25.5%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                      24.5%
Inadequate funding                                                                         19.1%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                            15.8%
The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                               15.1%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                        12.4%
Poor donor coordination                                                                    10.4%
Other                                                                                      2.3%




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

                                                                                                Degree
Achieving Sustainable Results                                                            N      Mean       SD
1. To what degree does the World Bank's work help achieve sustainable development
    results in CAR, on a ten point scale?                                               248      5.65     2.10
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                               57
The World Bank                                Central African Republic                     Country Survey 2012


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the         Effectiveness
following areas of development in CAR, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                           N       Mean      SD
2.    Anti-corruption                                                                266      5.52     3.02
3.    Global information and communications technology                               245      5.31     2.47
4.    Transport                                                                      251      5.19     2.32
5.    Crime and violence                                                             240      4.22     2.57
6.    Regional conflict and tensions                                                 238      4.87     2.38
7.    Law and justice                                                                245      5.09     2.38
8.    Urban development                                                              245      4.96     2.22
9.    Environmental sustainability                                                   257      5.02     2.38
10.   Regulatory framework                                                           229      4.82     2.28
11.   Basic infrastructure                                                           246      4.69     2.43
12.   Communicable/non-communicable disease                                          266      6.36     2.29
13.   Poverty reduction                                                              270      5.23     2.51
14.   Gender                                                                         233      4.92     2.26
15.   Domestic private sector development                                            245      4.91     2.13
16.   Foreign direct investment                                                      231      4.87     2.32
17.   Local governance and institutions                                              233      4.99     2.31
18.   Water and sanitation                                                           253      4.94     2.40
19.   Trade and exports                                                              232      4.78     2.40
20.   Economic growth                                                                251      5.05     2.40
21.   Energy                                                                         245      4.19     2.58
22.   Disaster management                                                            237      4.26     2.19
23.   Monitoring and evaluation                                                      249      5.43     2.53
24.   Public financial management                                                    259      5.53     2.72
25.   Job creation/employment                                                        245      4.47     2.47
26.   Social cohesion                                                                229      4.55     2.32
27.   Financial markets                                                              227      4.80     2.43
28.   Equality of opportunity                                                        232      4.47     2.33
29.   Health                                                                         262      6.49     2.32
30.   Rural development                                                              252      5.34     2.23
31.   Global integration                                                             224      4.84     2.28
32.   Governance                                                                     251      5.11     2.49
33.   Food security                                                                  244      5.07     2.38
34.   Education                                                                      258      6.31     2.46
35.   Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                          239      4.90     2.32
36.   Social protection                                                              235      4.54     2.23
37.   Climate change                                                                 229      4.31     2.44
38.   Public sector reform                                                           244      4.80     2.33
39.   Regional integration                                                           241      4.94     2.24
40.   Agricultural development                                                       256      5.30     2.21
41.   Natural resource management                                                    229      4.12     2.56



                                                        58
The World Bank                               Central African Republic                   Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

1. When thinking about the development challenges in CAR, where do
   you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its
   research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?                     Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                             (Responses Combined; N=294)
Energy                                                                                 31.3%
Education                                                                              23.8%
Transport                                                                              22.1%
Agricultural development                                                               22.1%
Poverty reduction                                                                      17.3%
Law and justice                                                                        11.2%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                  10.9%
Public sector reform                                                                   10.5%
Job creation/employment                                                                9.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                   9.5%
Economic growth                                                                        9.5%
Domestic private sector development                                                    8.8%
Anti-corruption                                                                        8.8%
Natural resource management                                                            8.8%
Basic infrastructure                                                                   8.8%
Health                                                                                 7.5%
Social protection                                                                      6.5%
Food security                                                                          6.5%
Rural development                                                                      5.8%
Governance                                                                             5.4%
Trade and exports                                                                      4.8%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                              4.8%
Crime and violence                                                                     4.4%
Foreign direct investment                                                              3.7%
Financial markets                                                                      3.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                           3.7%
Social cohesion                                                                        3.1%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                         2.7%
Climate change                                                                         2.7%
Local governance and institutions                                                      2.7%
Public financial management                                                            2.7%
Global information and communications technology                                       2.4%
Regional integration                                                                   2.0%
Disaster management                                                                    1.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                                1.7%
Urban development                                                                      1.7%
Regulatory framework                                                                   1.7%
Gender                                                                                 1.4%
Global integration                                                                     1.4%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                  0.0%




                                                       59
The World Bank                                         Central African Republic                     Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at …              Level of Effectiveness
in CAR? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                         N      Mean        SD
2. Raising your awareness of the particular topic                                          228      5.02      2.50
3.   Stimulating public debate/dialogue                                                    208       5.15      2.59
4.   Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                                                231       5.14      2.47
5.   Contributing to good policy making                                                    240       5.52      2.65
6.   Providing support for program implementation                                          250       5.98      2.53


To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research …                        Degree
in CAR? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                            N       Mean       SD
7.   Are timely                                                                            233       6.13     2.81
8.   Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation               231       5.82     2.52
9.   Are relevant to CAR’s development priorities                                          248       5.72     2.48
10. Provide feasible recommendations                                                       241       5.78     2.49
11. Are accessible                                                                         227       5.79     2.53
12. A source of relevant information on global good practices                              229       6.25     2.46
13. Are adequately disseminated                                                            227       5.96     2.78
14. Are appropriately translated                                                           218       5.50     2.33
15. Are adaptable to CAR’s development challenges                                          233       5.99     2.47


Overall Evaluations                                                                             N     Mean       SD
16. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge
    and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?          243       6.43     2.29
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
17. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's knowledge/
    research, on a ten point scale?                                                          252       5.89     2.25
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
18. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise,
                                                                                             218       5.73     2.09
    on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                 60
The World Bank                                          Central African Republic                     Country Survey 2012


E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten               Level of Agreement
point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                      N      Mean     SD
1. The World Bank disburses funds promptly                                                261      5.34   3.15
2. The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                          280         6.73       2.47
    supports
3. The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                    256         5.25       2.69
4.   The World Bank’s safeguard policy requirements are reasonable                        251         6.24       2.63
5.   The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                          262         6.57       2.60
6.   Working with the World Bank increases CAR’s institutional capacity                   264         6.77       2.65
7.   The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes              240         6.71       2.40
8.  The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated                                253         6.80       2.29
9.  Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank makes appropriate use of
                                                                                          241         6.68       2.57
    them
10. The World Bank provides effective implementation support                              259         6.27       2.37

                                                                                                     Degree
Adequate Staffing                                                                          N         Mean        SD
11. To what extent do you believe the World Bank is adequately staffed in CAR, on a
                                                                                          238         5.63       2.31
    ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



F. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR

The Bank’s Role                                                                                N          Mean    SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank SHOULD play in CAR’s development
over the medium term in the near future, on a ten point scale?                              258           6.68    2.30
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of                 Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)                                (Responses Combined; N=283)
Work faster                                                                                    30.0%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to CAR’s specific challenges                     28.5%
Focus more on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries                                27.6%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                        26.9%
Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                                  17.7%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                               15.9%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                         12.4%
Improve its coordination with other donors                                                     10.6%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                       10.2%
Increase the level of World Bank staffing in CAR's office                                      7.8%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                       4.6%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on CAR's
                                                                                                   4.2%
economy
Other                                                                                              1.4%




                                                                  61
The World Bank                                 Central African Republic                Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social      Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)                    (Responses Combined; N=290)
Local newspapers                                                                      54.8%
Local radio                                                                           42.4%
International radio                                                                   25.9%
Internet                                                                              22.1%
Local television                                                                      16.9%
International newspapers                                                              10.0%
International television                                                              10.0%
Periodicals                                                                           4.8%
Mobile phones                                                                         1.4%
Other                                                                                 1.4%
Instant messaging                                                                     1.0%
Blogs                                                                                 0.7%

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?         Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                               (Responses Combined; N=277)
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                             39.4%
World Bank publications and other written materials                                   32.9%
Mobile phones                                                                         29.6%
World Bank website                                                                    26.4%
Direct contact with World Bank                                                        23.1%
e-Newsletters                                                                         11.9%
Instant messaging                                                                     6.5%
Social media                                                                          5.4%
Other                                                                                 5.1%
Blogs                                                                                 1.4%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under
    which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession     Percentage of Respondents
    that is not a list of exceptions?                                               (N=234)
Yes                                                                                  47.4%
No                                                                                   52.6%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities    Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                               (N=236)
Yes                                                                                  11.9%
No                                                                                   88.1%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                        (N=64)
Yes                                                                                  43.8%
No                                                                                   56.3%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                              (N=265)
Yes                                                                                  53.2%
No                                                                                   46.8%




                                                         62
The World Bank                               Central African Republic                         Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank website?                                            (N=262)
Yes                                                                                         27.5%
No                                                                                          72.5%

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                             (N=59)
The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/car)                                    50.8%
The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                           49.2%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point            Level of Agreement
scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N       Mean      SD
9. I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the organization ’s Open
                                                                                      182      4.49      2.84
    Data policy
10. I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate                                   123      5.15      2.87
11. I find the information on the World Bank’s websites useful                        120      5.78      2.93
12. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it                 141      5.48      2.78
13. The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries             157      4.64      2.63



H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                      (N=283)
Employee of a Ministry                                                                     12.7%
Local NGO                                                                                  12.0%
Media                                                                                      8.8%
Academia                                                                                   7.1%
Private Foundation                                                                         6.0%
Private Sector Organization                                                                5.7%
International NGO                                                                          5.3%
Faith-Based Group                                                                          5.3%
Office of Minister                                                                         3.5%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                  3.2%
Consultant on Bank Project                                                                 3.2%
Bilateral Agency                                                                           3.2%
Community-Based Organization                                                               3.2%
Trade Union                                                                                3.2%
Local Government                                                                           2.8%
Financial Sector                                                                           2.8%
Other                                                                                      2.8%
Multilateral Agency                                                                        2.5%
Independent Government Institution                                                         2.1%
Project Management Unit                                                                    1.8%
Office of Prime Minister                                                                   1.4%
Judiciary Branch                                                                           1.1%
Office of the President                                                                    0.4%




                                                       63
The World Bank                                Central African Republic                Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.              Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                              (N=282)
Education                                                                          15.6%
Health                                                                             8.2%
Agricultural development                                                           7.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                6.7%
Job creation/employment                                                            6.7%
Other                                                                              5.3%
Poverty reduction                                                                  5.3%
Energy                                                                             4.6%
Global information and communications technology                                   4.3%
Law and justice                                                                    3.9%
Economic growth                                                                    2.8%
Transport                                                                          2.1%
Environmental sustainability                                                       2.1%
Finance markets                                                                    2.1%
Anti-corruption                                                                    1.8%
Food security                                                                      1.8%
Governance                                                                         1.8%
Local governance and institutions                                                  1.8%
Water and sanitation                                                               1.4%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                          1.4%
Rural development                                                                  1.1%
Crime and violence                                                                 1.1%
Public sector reform                                                               1.1%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                     1.1%
Trade and exports                                                                  0.7%
Basic infrastructure                                                               0.7%
Climate change                                                                     0.7%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                            0.7%
Foreign direct investment                                                          0.7%
Gender                                                                             0.7%
Natural resource management                                                        0.7%
Public financial management                                                        0.7%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                              0.4%
Social cohesion                                                                    0.4%
Urban development                                                                  0.4%
Global integration                                                                 0.4%
Infrastructure                                                                     0.0%
Regional integration                                                               0.0%
Regulatory framework                                                               0.0%
Social protection                                                                  0.0%




                                                        64
The World Bank                              Central African Republic                  Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World      Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in your country?                                                           (N=273)
Yes                                                                                38.5%
No                                                                                 61.5%

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World   Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)                                          (N=210)
Observer                                                                           51.0%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                      39.5%
Use World Bank reports/data                                                        30.0%
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                           24.8%
Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                       14.8%

                                                                         Percentage of Respondents
5. Which best represents your geographic location?                                (N=290)
Bangui                                                                             83.4%
Rural Areas                                                                        14.8%
Other Cities                                                                       1.7%




                                                      65
The World Bank                                                                                         Central African Republic                                                                              Country Survey 2012


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

A. General Issues facing CAR
In general, would you say that CAR is headed in...?
                                         Office of                                                                        Bi- or
                                        President/                 Office of   Employee Consultant                       Multi-    Private/              Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
                                          Prime       Office of   Parliamen-      of a     on Bank         Local         lateral   Financial   Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 Percentage of Respondents               Minister     Minister      tarian      Ministry project/PMU    Government       Agency     Sector     Found.     CBO    al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group      Academia    Other
 The right direction                      60.0%        60.0%        71.4%        57.1%      50.0%          66.7%         53.8%       25.0%     23.1%     35.3%   36.4%     22.7%   50.0%    50.0%   30.8%       26.3%       33.3%
 The wrong direction                      20.0%        20.0%        14.3%        17.9%      33.3%          0.0%          23.1%       45.0%     30.8%     26.5%   27.3%     36.4%   33.3%    12.5%   23.1%       42.1%       44.4%
 Not sure                                 20.0%        20.0%        14.3%        25.0%      16.7%          33.3%         23.1%       30.0%     46.2%     38.2%   36.4%     40.9%   16.7%    37.5%   46.2%       31.6%       22.2%




                                                                                                                66
The World Bank                                                                                                  Central African Republic                                                                             Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)
                                                                                                           st    nd      rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in CAR. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
    st
                                          Office of                                                                            Bi- or
  1 Most Important                       President/                   Office of    Employee Consultant                        Multi-    Private/                 Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
                                            Prime       Office of Parliamen-           of a       on Bank          Local      lateral Financial   Private        NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
  Percentage of Respondents               Minister      Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government           Agency     Sector   Found.          CBO    al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
  Rural development                          0.0%         0.0%         14.3%          14.8%         8.3%          12.5%       10.0%       9.5%      0.0%         16.2%   28.6%     14.3%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%      15.8%      42.9%
  Education                                 20.0%         0.0%         14.3%          22.2%        25.0%          12.5%       10.0%       9.5%     33.3%         10.8%   28.6%     64.3%    0.0%    33.3%    7.7%      26.3%      14.3%
  Social protection                          0.0%        22.2%          0.0%           3.7%         0.0%          12.5%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Transport                                 40.0%        44.4%         42.9%          14.8%        33.3%          37.5%       20.0%       14.3%    20.0%         13.5%   14.3%      0.0%   40.0%    22.2%   23.1%      10.5%      14.3%
  Security/stabilization/reconstruction      0.0%         0.0%         14.3%          11.1%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       9.5%      0.0%         13.5%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   15.4%      10.5%       0.0%
  Poverty reduction                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          14.8%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       14.3%    13.3%          8.1%     0.0%     7.1%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       5.3%      14.3%
  Public sector reform                       0.0%        11.1%          0.0%           3.7%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Regional integration                       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.7%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Gender                                     0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Domestic private sector development        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%   40.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Foreign direct investment                  0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      6.7%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.3%       0.0%
  Water and sanitation                       0.0%         0.0%         14.3%           7.4%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%    14.3%   20.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Energy                                     0.0%        22.2%          0.0%           3.7%        25.0%          12.5%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%   14.3%      0.0%    0.0%    22.2%    0.0%      15.8%       0.0%
  Regional conflict and tensions             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    11.1%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Monitoring and evaluation                  0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Public financial management                0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Job creation/employment                    0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       0.0%      6.7%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Governance                                 0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Financial markets                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Urban development                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Environmental sustainability               0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Equality of opportunity                    0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Health                                     0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       4.8%      0.0%          8.1%   14.3%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.3%       0.0%
  Global integration                         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Food security                              0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    11.1%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Social cohesion                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         8.3%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Climate change                             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Agricultural development                  20.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          12.5%         0.0%      14.3%     0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       5.3%       0.0%
  Trade and exports                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      6.7%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%      14.3%
  Crime and violence                         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Economic growth                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%      6.7%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Law and justice                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Regulatory framework                       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable
                                             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  disease
  Basic infrastructure                       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      6.7%         0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Local governance and institutions          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Natural resource management               20.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       0.0%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Anti-corruption                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Disaster management                        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Global information and communications
                                             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  technology




                                                                                                                         67
The World Bank                                                                                                  Central African Republic                                                                             Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)
                                                                                                           st    nd      rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in CAR. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
    nd
                                          Office of                                                                            Bi- or
  2 Most Important                       President/                   Office of    Employee Consultant                        Multi-    Private/                 Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
                                            Prime       Office of Parliamen-           of a       on Bank          Local      lateral Financial   Private        NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
  Percentage of Respondents               Minister      Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government           Agency     Sector   Found.          CBO    al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
  Rural development                          0.0%         0.0%         14.3%           7.1%        25.0%           0.0%       10.0%       0.0%      6.7%          2.9%   11.1%     40.0%   20.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%      25.0%
  Education                                  0.0%        11.1%          0.0%          10.7%        16.7%           0.0%       10.0%       4.8%      6.7%         14.3%   11.1%      6.7%    0.0%     0.0%   15.4%      23.5%       0.0%
  Social protection                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          8.6%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Transport                                  0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          10.7%        16.7%           0.0%       10.0%       19.0%     6.7%          2.9%     0.0%     6.7%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.9%       0.0%
  Security/stabilization/reconstruction      0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          14.3%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      9.5%      0.0%          2.9%   22.2%      0.0%    0.0%    11.1%   15.4%       5.9%      12.5%
  Poverty reduction                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           7.1%         0.0%          12.5%         0.0%      0.0%      6.7%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Public sector reform                       0.0%        11.1%          0.0%           3.6%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Regional integration                       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       0.0%      0.0%          2.9%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Gender                                     0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.6%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.9%   11.1%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.9%       0.0%
  Domestic private sector development        0.0%         0.0%         14.3%           3.6%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%     13.3%          0.0%     0.0%    13.3%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.9%       0.0%
  Foreign direct investment                 25.0%         0.0%         14.3%           3.6%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.9%     0.0%     0.0%   20.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Water and sanitation                       0.0%        44.4%         14.3%           7.1%         8.3%          12.5%       30.0%       0.0%      0.0%          5.7%   11.1%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Energy                                    50.0%        11.1%         28.6%          21.4%         0.0%          12.5%       10.0%       19.0%    26.7%         14.3%     0.0%     6.7%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%      11.8%      12.5%
  Regional conflict and tensions             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      9.5%      0.0%          0.0%   11.1%      6.7%    0.0%     0.0%   15.4%       5.9%       0.0%
  Monitoring and evaluation                  0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Public financial management                0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.9%       0.0%
  Job creation/employment                    0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%        16.7%           0.0%       10.0%       4.8%      6.7%          8.6%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Governance                                 0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Financial markets                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%   20.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Urban development                          0.0%        11.1%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          12.5%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Environmental sustainability              25.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.9%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Equality of opportunity                    0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.6%         0.0%          12.5%         0.0%      0.0%      6.7%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%      12.5%
  Health                                     0.0%         0.0%         14.3%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%         11.4%   11.1%      6.7%    0.0%    22.2%   15.4%      17.6%      12.5%
  Global integration                         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Food security                              0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          12.5%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%          5.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    11.1%    0.0%       5.9%       0.0%
  Social cohesion                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Climate change                             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Agricultural development                   0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          25.0%       10.0%       4.8%      6.7%          2.9%     0.0%     6.7%    0.0%    22.2%    0.0%       0.0%      12.5%
  Trade and exports                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Crime and violence                         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Economic growth                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         8.3%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      6.7%          2.9%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    11.1%    0.0%       5.9%      12.5%
  Law and justice                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     6.7%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Regulatory framework                       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable
                                             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  disease
  Basic infrastructure                       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      6.7%         0.0%    11.1%     0.0%     0.0%    11.1%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Local governance and institutions          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         2.9%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Natural resource management                0.0%        11.1%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%         2.9%     0.0%     0.0%    40.0%    11.1%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Anti-corruption                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.6%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Disaster management                        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Global information and communications
                                             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         8.3%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%        0.0%       0.0%
  technology




                                                                                                                         68
The World Bank                                                                                                  Central African Republic                                                                             Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)
                                                                                                           st    nd      rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in CAR. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
    rd
                                          Office of                                                                            Bi- or
  3 Most Important                       President/                   Office of    Employee Consultant                        Multi-    Private/                 Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
                                            Prime       Office of Parliamen-           of a       on Bank          Local      lateral Financial   Private        NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
  Percentage of Respondents               Minister      Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government           Agency     Sector   Found.          CBO    al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
  Rural development                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           7.4%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       4.8%     13.3%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%      22.2%       0.0%
  Education                                  0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.7%         8.3%           0.0%         0.0%      9.5%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   15.4%      11.1%       0.0%
  Social protection                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     6.7%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Transport                                  0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          18.5%         8.3%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          5.4%   12.5%      6.7%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       5.6%      50.0%
  Security/stabilization/reconstruction      0.0%         0.0%         12.5%           7.4%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       9.5%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%    33.3%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%      12.5%
  Poverty reduction                          0.0%         0.0%         12.5%           7.4%         0.0%          25.0%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Public sector reform                       0.0%        11.1%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%      11.1%       0.0%
  Regional integration                       0.0%        11.1%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       20.0%       0.0%      6.7%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Gender                                     0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.6%       0.0%
  Domestic private sector development        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      9.5%      6.7%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.6%      12.5%
  Foreign direct investment                  0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       0.0%      0.0%          2.7%   12.5%      6.7%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Water and sanitation                       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           7.4%         8.3%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Energy                                    25.0%        22.2%          0.0%          11.1%         0.0%          12.5%         0.0%      4.8%     20.0%         18.9%   12.5%     13.3%   20.0%    22.2%   15.4%       5.6%       0.0%
  Regional conflict and tensions            25.0%         0.0%         12.5%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%     13.3%          8.1%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Monitoring and evaluation                  0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%    11.1%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Public financial management                0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           7.4%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       0.0%      6.7%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Job creation/employment                    0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.7%         8.3%          12.5%         0.0%      9.5%      6.7%          0.0%   25.0%      6.7%    0.0%    33.3%    0.0%       5.6%       0.0%
  Governance                                 0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.7%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     6.7%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       5.6%       0.0%
  Financial markets                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Urban development                          0.0%         0.0%         12.5%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Environmental sustainability               0.0%         0.0%         12.5%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      9.5%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.6%       0.0%
  Equality of opportunity                    0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         8.3%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Health                                     0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.7%         8.3%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      6.7%          5.4%     0.0%     6.7%   20.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%      12.5%
  Global integration                         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.7%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%   20.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Food security                              0.0%        11.1%          0.0%           0.0%        16.7%          25.0%       10.0%       9.5%     13.3%          5.4%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.6%       0.0%
  Social cohesion                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Climate change                            25.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.7%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Agricultural development                   0.0%         0.0%         12.5%           3.7%        16.7%           0.0%         0.0%      9.5%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%   20.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.6%       0.0%
  Trade and exports                          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.7%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       0.0%      6.7%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%   20.0%    11.1%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Crime and violence                         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%      12.5%
  Economic growth                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       10.0%       4.8%      0.0%          2.7%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Law and justice                            0.0%         0.0%         12.5%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          2.7%   12.5%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%
  Regulatory framework                       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable
                                             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  disease
  Basic infrastructure                       0.0%        22.2%          0.0%           0.0%         8.3%          12.5%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         5.4%     0.0%      0.0%   0.0%      0.0%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Local governance and institutions          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         0.0%    12.5%      0.0%   0.0%      0.0%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Natural resource management                0.0%        11.1%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          12.5%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         8.1%     0.0%      0.0%   0.0%      0.0%   0.0%        5.6%       0.0%
  Anti-corruption                            0.0%         0.0%         12.5%           3.7%         8.3%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%     13.3%   0.0%     11.1%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Disaster management                        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         0.0%     0.0%      0.0%   0.0%      0.0%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  Global information and communications
                                            25.0%        11.1%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%         5.4%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     11.1%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  technology




                                                                                                                         69
The World Bank                                                                                            Central African Republic                                                                                   Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                            Office of                                                                        Bi- or
                                           President/               Office of     Employee Consultant                       Multi-   Private/                Local      Inter-               Ind.              Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                   Prime     Office of Parliamen-          of a      on Bank        Local         lateral Financial    Private     NGO/      nation               Govt.    Trade     Based
 (Responses Combined)                       Minister   Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government          Agency    Sector     Found.      CBO       al NGO     Media      Inst.   Union     Group    Academia   Other
 Water and sanitation                        80.0%       20.0%        11.1%         14.7%       35.7%         62.5%          25.0%     12.5%      18.8%      7.0%      13.3%       8.7%     33.3%    22.2%      7.7%      5.0%      0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                      0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       14.3%         0.0%            6.3%      8.3%       0.0%      7.0%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%     15.4%      5.0%     11.1%
 Economic growth                              0.0%       0.0%         11.1%         23.5%       21.4%         0.0%           12.5%     25.0%      25.0%     18.6%      33.3%      13.0%      0.0%     0.0%     23.1%      15.0%    55.6%
 Climate change                              20.0%       10.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            6.3%      0.0%       0.0%      2.3%        0.0%      4.3%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions              20.0%       20.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            6.3%      4.2%      12.5%      2.3%        0.0%      8.7%     16.7%     0.0%      7.7%      0.0%      0.0%
 Disaster management                          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      8.3%       0.0%      4.7%        0.0%      4.3%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
 Regional integration                         0.0%       10.0%         0.0%          2.9%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      0.0%       6.3%     11.6%        0.0%      0.0%     33.3%     0.0%      0.0%      5.0%      0.0%
 Gender                                       0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          5.9%        0.0%         12.5%           6.3%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%      5.0%      0.0%
 Rural development                            0.0%       10.0%        33.3%         32.4%       28.6%         0.0%           31.3%     29.2%      25.0%     25.6%      33.3%      17.4%      0.0%    33.3%     23.1%      15.0%    11.1%
 Urban development                            0.0%       10.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      4.7%        0.0%      4.3%     16.7%     0.0%      0.0%      5.0%      0.0%
 Education                                    0.0%       10.0%        33.3%         26.5%       28.6%         37.5%          25.0%     16.7%      12.5%     18.6%      26.7%      26.1%     16.7%    22.2%     15.4%      15.0%    33.3%
 Regulatory framework                         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      7.7%      0.0%      0.0%
 Local governance and institutions           20.0%       0.0%         11.1%          0.0%        7.1%         0.0%            0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      2.3%      13.3%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%     15.4%      0.0%      0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         11.8%       14.3%         12.5%           6.3%      4.2%       6.3%      9.3%        0.0%      8.7%     33.3%     0.0%      7.7%      0.0%      0.0%
 Social protection                            0.0%       10.0%         0.0%          5.9%       14.3%         0.0%            0.0%      4.2%       6.3%      2.3%        6.7%      4.3%      0.0%    11.1%     15.4%      0.0%      0.0%
 Law and justice                              0.0%       0.0%         22.2%         14.7%        0.0%         0.0%           12.5%      8.3%       6.3%      7.0%        0.0%     30.4%      0.0%     0.0%     15.4%      5.0%     11.1%
 Transport                                    0.0%       50.0%        11.1%         14.7%       14.3%         62.5%          25.0%     29.2%      31.3%      9.3%      40.0%      17.4%      0.0%    11.1%      7.7%      25.0%     0.0%
 Crime and violence                           0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      4.2%       0.0%      4.7%        0.0%      4.3%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     11.1%
 Communicable/non-communicable
                                              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      2.3%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%
 disease
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction        0.0%       10.0%        11.1%         17.6%        7.1%         0.0%            6.3%     12.5%       6.3%     25.6%        6.7%      8.7%      0.0%    11.1%     15.4%      30.0%    22.2%
 Global information and communications
                                             20.0%       10.0%        11.1%          2.9%        7.1%         0.0%            0.0%      0.0%      12.5%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    11.1%      0.0%      0.0%     11.1%
 technology
 Public sector reform                         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        7.1%         12.5%           0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      7.0%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    11.1%      0.0%      5.0%      0.0%
 Domestic private sector development          0.0%       0.0%         11.1%          8.8%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%     12.5%       6.3%      9.3%        6.7%     26.1%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                    0.0%       0.0%         11.1%          8.8%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      8.3%       6.3%      0.0%        6.7%      0.0%      0.0%    22.2%      7.7%      10.0%    11.1%
 Global integration                           0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      7.0%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    11.1%      0.0%      5.0%      0.0%
 Energy                                       0.0%       20.0%        33.3%          8.8%       21.4%         37.5%          31.3%     25.0%      12.5%     14.0%      20.0%      26.1%     16.7%    33.3%     30.8%      20.0%     0.0%
 Food security                               40.0%       40.0%        33.3%         23.5%       35.7%         12.5%          12.5%      4.2%      18.8%     14.0%      13.3%      17.4%     16.7%     0.0%      7.7%      20.0%     0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                   20.0%       0.0%          0.0%          5.9%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      9.3%        0.0%      4.3%      0.0%     0.0%     23.1%      5.0%      0.0%
 Governance                                   0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          2.9%        0.0%         0.0%            6.3%      0.0%       6.3%      9.3%        6.7%      8.7%     16.7%     0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     11.1%
 Social cohesion                              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      7.7%      0.0%      0.0%
 Natural resource management                  0.0%       0.0%         11.1%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%     12.5%       0.0%      0.0%      13.3%       0.0%      0.0%    11.1%     15.4%      10.0%    11.1%
 Environmental sustainability                 0.0%       20.0%         0.0%          0.0%        7.1%         0.0%            6.3%      4.2%       0.0%      4.7%        0.0%      4.3%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
 Health                                       0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         11.8%        7.1%         0.0%           18.8%      8.3%      12.5%      0.0%      13.3%       8.7%      0.0%    11.1%      7.7%      5.0%     33.3%
 Public financial management                  0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         11.8%        0.0%         0.0%            6.3%      4.2%      12.5%      0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     16.7%     0.0%      0.0%      5.0%      0.0%
 Agricultural development                    20.0%       30.0%        22.2%         20.6%       21.4%         25.0%          18.8%     16.7%      18.8%     23.3%      20.0%      13.0%     16.7%    33.3%      7.7%      35.0%    22.2%
 Job creation/employment                     40.0%       20.0%        22.2%         14.7%        7.1%         12.5%          12.5%     16.7%      12.5%     16.3%      20.0%       4.3%     16.7%    11.1%      7.7%      20.0%     0.0%
 Financial markets                            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%            0.0%      4.2%       0.0%      9.3%        6.7%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
 Trade and exports                           20.0%       0.0%          0.0%          2.9%        0.0%         0.0%           12.5%      8.3%       6.3%      4.7%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    11.1%      7.7%      10.0%    11.1%
 Anti-corruption                              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          5.9%        0.0%         12.5%           6.3%      4.2%       0.0%      7.0%        0.0%     21.7%     50.0%     0.0%      0.0%      15.0%    33.3%




                                                                                                                   70
The World Bank                                                                                           Central African Republic                                                                                Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in CAR? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                          Office of                                                                        Bi- or
                                         President/                Office of   Employee Consultant                         Multi-    Private/              Local     Inter-             Ind.            Faith-
  Percentage of Respondents                Prime       Office of Parliamen-       of a        on Bank         Local       lateral Financial    Private     NGO/     nation             Govt.    Trade   Based
  (Responses Combined)                    Minister     Minister     tarian      Ministry project/PMU Government           Agency      Sector    Found.      CBO     al NGO     Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
  Energy                                    0.0%        20.0%       50.0%        51.5%         46.2%          62.5%        40.0%       59.1%    41.2%      50.0%    40.0%      30.4%   33.3%    33.3%   50.0%      57.9%      50.0%
  Equality of opportunity                   0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       2.4%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%      10.0%
  Social protection                         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          7.7%          12.5%         6.7%       4.5%      5.9%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%   16.7%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Global integration                       20.0%        0.0%         0.0%         3.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       4.8%      0.0%      4.3%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.3%      10.0%
  Climate change                            0.0%        20.0%        0.0%         3.0%          7.7%          0.0%          6.7%       0.0%      5.9%       2.4%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Anti-corruption                           0.0%        10.0%       37.5%        15.2%         23.1%          0.0%         13.3%       9.1%     11.8%      21.4%    26.7%      39.1%    0.0%    11.1%    0.0%      15.8%      10.0%
  Disaster management                      20.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          12.5%         0.0%       4.5%      0.0%       4.8%      0.0%      0.0%   16.7%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Regional conflict and tensions            0.0%        10.0%        0.0%         3.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.1%       0.0%       0.0%
  Rural development                         0.0%        30.0%       25.0%        21.2%          0.0%          25.0%        26.7%       18.2%    17.6%      19.0%    20.0%      17.4%   16.7%    22.2%   14.3%       5.3%      20.0%
  Foreign direct investment                 0.0%        10.0%       37.5%        12.1%         15.4%          0.0%         13.3%       9.1%     17.6%      16.7%      6.7%      0.0%    0.0%    22.2%   14.3%      10.5%       0.0%
  Urban development                        20.0%        0.0%        12.5%         6.1%          7.7%          25.0%        13.3%       0.0%      5.9%       2.4%      0.0%      0.0%   16.7%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Water and sanitation                     20.0%        30.0%       12.5%         3.0%          7.7%          0.0%         13.3%       13.6%     0.0%       2.4%      6.7%      4.3%   16.7%     0.0%    0.0%       5.3%       0.0%
  Education                                40.0%        10.0%       25.0%        33.3%          7.7%          25.0%        20.0%       0.0%     23.5%      16.7%      6.7%     30.4%    0.0%    11.1%   14.3%      21.1%      30.0%
  Global information and communications
                                            0.0%        30.0%        0.0%         0.0%         23.1%          0.0%          0.0%       9.1%      5.9%       7.1%      0.0%      8.7%   16.7%    11.1%   0.0%        5.3%       0.0%
  technology
  Regulatory framework                     20.0%        0.0%         0.0%         3.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       4.5%      0.0%       2.4%      6.7%      0.0%   0.0%     0.0%    7.1%        0.0%       0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable
                                            0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       2.4%      0.0%      4.3%   0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
  disease
  Trade and exports                         0.0%        0.0%        12.5%        15.2%         30.8%          0.0%         33.3%       36.4%    29.4%      33.3%    33.3%      13.0%   16.7%     0.0%   14.3%       21.1%     50.0%
  Social cohesion                           0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         3.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       4.5%      0.0%       0.0%      6.7%     13.0%   33.3%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Public sector reform                      0.0%        10.0%        0.0%         3.0%          0.0%          12.5%         6.7%       9.1%     11.8%       7.1%      0.0%     13.0%    0.0%    11.1%    7.1%       15.8%     10.0%
  Regional integration                      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      5.9%       2.4%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    22.2%    0.0%       5.3%       0.0%
  Domestic private sector development      20.0%        10.0%        0.0%         6.1%         15.4%          0.0%         13.3%       13.6%     0.0%       0.0%      6.7%      4.3%    0.0%     0.0%    7.1%       5.3%      10.0%
  Job creation/employment                  40.0%        10.0%       12.5%         9.1%         23.1%          37.5%        13.3%       13.6%    17.6%       7.1%    26.7%      17.4%   16.7%    22.2%   14.3%       15.8%     10.0%
  Agricultural development                  0.0%        20.0%       50.0%        21.2%         30.8%          37.5%        20.0%       22.7%    29.4%      11.9%    33.3%      21.7%    0.0%    11.1%   50.0%       26.3%     20.0%
  Food security                             0.0%        10.0%        0.0%         9.1%         15.4%          12.5%         0.0%       9.1%      5.9%       9.5%      6.7%      8.7%   16.7%    22.2%    0.0%       5.3%      10.0%
  Governance                                0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         3.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      5.9%       0.0%      6.7%     13.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Transport                                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        15.2%         23.1%          0.0%          6.7%       9.1%     11.8%       9.5%      6.7%      0.0%   16.7%    11.1%   28.6%       10.5%     20.0%
  Security/stabilization/reconstruction     0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        18.2%          0.0%          12.5%        13.3%       0.0%      5.9%       7.1%      6.7%      4.3%    0.0%    11.1%   14.3%       10.5%      0.0%
  Monitoring and evaluation                 0.0%        10.0%        0.0%         6.1%          7.7%          12.5%         0.0%       4.5%      0.0%       4.8%      6.7%      4.3%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.3%       0.0%
  Gender                                    0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Natural resource management               0.0%        10.0%       25.0%         3.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       9.1%      5.9%      11.9%      6.7%      4.3%    0.0%    11.1%   14.3%       15.8%     20.0%
  Environmental sustainability              0.0%        20.0%        0.0%         6.1%          0.0%          0.0%          6.7%       4.5%      0.0%       7.1%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.3%      10.0%
  Health                                   40.0%        0.0%         0.0%         3.0%          0.0%          12.5%        13.3%       0.0%      5.9%      14.3%      6.7%      4.3%    0.0%    11.1%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Basic infrastructure                     20.0%        20.0%        0.0%         9.1%          0.0%          0.0%         13.3%       13.6%     0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      8.7%    0.0%    22.2%    7.1%       0.0%      10.0%
  Law and justice                           0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         3.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       4.5%      0.0%       4.8%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.1%       10.5%      0.0%
  Local governance and institutions         0.0%        10.0%        0.0%         3.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       4.5%      0.0%       2.4%      0.0%      0.0%   16.7%    11.1%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Crime and violence                        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Public financial management              20.0%        0.0%         0.0%         6.1%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       9.1%      5.9%       2.4%    20.0%       4.3%   33.3%    22.2%   21.4%       5.3%       0.0%
  Financial markets                        20.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          7.7%          0.0%          6.7%       0.0%     11.8%       9.5%    13.3%       8.7%    0.0%     0.0%    7.1%       5.3%       0.0%




                                                                                                                  71
The World Bank                                                                              Central African Republic   Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                     72
The World Bank                                                                                             Central African Republic                                                                                   Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in CAR, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in CAR? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                         Office of                                                                          Bi- or
                                        President/               Office of   Employee Consultant                           Multi-    Private/               Local     Inter-                  Ind.               Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                 Prime     Office of Parliamen-       of a        on Bank           Local        lateral Financial     Private    NGO/     nation                  Govt.     Trade    Based
 (Responses Combined)                    Minister    Minister      tarian     Ministry project/PMU Government              Agency     Sector     Found.      CBO     al NGO       Media       Inst.    Union    Group    Academia     Other
 Rural development                         0.0%       40.0%        44.4%       29.4%         30.8%           12.5%         21.4%        4.3%     23.5%      23.3%     20.0%       41.7%       0.0%     33.3%    14.3%     35.0%      27.3%
 Education                                 20.0%      30.0%        22.2%       32.4%         30.8%           37.5%         14.3%        0.0%     29.4%      34.9%     33.3%       25.0%       0.0%     33.3%    21.4%     35.0%      45.5%
 Governance                                0.0%       0.0%         22.2%        2.9%          7.7%           12.5%         14.3%        0.0%     11.8%       4.7%      0.0%        8.3%       0.0%     11.1%    21.4%      5.0%       0.0%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction     0.0%       10.0%        11.1%       14.7%          0.0%            0.0%          7.1%       13.0%      5.9%      23.3%      6.7%       29.2%      20.0%      0.0%    14.3%     10.0%       9.1%
 Social protection                         20.0%      0.0%          0.0%        5.9%          0.0%            0.0%          7.1%        0.0%      5.9%       0.0%      0.0%        4.2%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Transport                                 20.0%      20.0%        11.1%       20.6%         15.4%            0.0%         14.3%       26.1%     17.6%      18.6%     46.7%       12.5%      20.0%     11.1%    28.6%     15.0%      54.5%
 Poverty reduction                         0.0%       0.0%         11.1%       23.5%         15.4%           25.0%          0.0%        8.7%      5.9%      18.6%      6.7%        4.2%       0.0%     11.1%     7.1%     20.0%       0.0%
 Public sector reform                      0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          7.1%        4.3%      5.9%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     7.1%      0.0%       0.0%
 Regional integration                      20.0%      0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        4.3%      0.0%       2.3%      0.0%        4.2%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      5.0%       0.0%
 Gender                                    0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Crime and violence                        0.0%       0.0%         11.1%        2.9%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%       17.4%      0.0%       2.3%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     7.1%      0.0%       9.1%
 Domestic private sector development       20.0%      10.0%         0.0%        8.8%         15.4%            0.0%         14.3%       21.7%     11.8%       7.0%      6.7%       12.5%      20.0%      0.0%    21.4%     20.0%       9.1%
 Foreign direct investment                 0.0%       10.0%        11.1%        2.9%          7.7%            0.0%          7.1%       13.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      5.0%       0.0%
 Water and sanitation                      20.0%      10.0%        11.1%       17.6%         15.4%            0.0%         21.4%        8.7%      0.0%       7.0%      0.0%        4.2%      20.0%      0.0%     7.1%      0.0%       0.0%
 Energy                                    20.0%      10.0%        11.1%       23.5%         38.5%           25.0%         14.3%       34.8%     29.4%      20.9%     26.7%       12.5%       0.0%     11.1%    21.4%     35.0%       9.1%
 Monitoring and evaluation                 0.0%       0.0%         11.1%        2.9%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        4.3%     11.8%      11.6%      6.7%        8.3%       0.0%      0.0%     7.1%      0.0%       0.0%
 Social cohesion                           0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          7.7%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%        4.2%      20.0%      0.0%     7.1%      0.0%       0.0%
 Public financial management               20.0%      0.0%         11.1%        5.9%          0.0%           12.5%          0.0%        4.3%      5.9%      11.6%      0.0%       25.0%       0.0%     11.1%     7.1%      0.0%       0.0%
 Job creation/employment                   20.0%      10.0%         0.0%       17.6%          7.7%           25.0%          0.0%       17.4%     11.8%      14.0%      0.0%        4.2%       0.0%     22.2%     0.0%     30.0%      18.2%
 Financial markets                         20.0%      0.0%          0.0%        5.9%          7.7%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      5.9%       2.3%      0.0%        4.2%       0.0%     11.1%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Urban development                         20.0%      10.0%         0.0%        5.9%          7.7%           12.5%          7.1%        8.7%      0.0%       2.3%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Environmental sustainability              0.0%       10.0%         0.0%        2.9%          0.0%           12.5%          0.0%        4.3%      5.9%       9.3%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     7.1%      0.0%       0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                   0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          7.7%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        4.3%      5.9%       2.3%      0.0%        4.2%       0.0%     11.1%     0.0%      5.0%       0.0%
 Health                                    0.0%       10.0%         0.0%       14.7%         15.4%           12.5%         14.3%       17.4%     17.6%      20.9%     46.7%       20.8%      20.0%     11.1%    28.6%     20.0%      18.2%
 Global integration                        0.0%       0.0%         11.1%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       4.7%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%     11.1%     0.0%      5.0%       9.1%
 Food security                             20.0%      20.0%        33.3%        5.9%         30.8%           25.0%         28.6%        4.3%      5.9%       4.7%      0.0%        4.2%      40.0%     22.2%     7.1%      0.0%       0.0%
 Climate change                            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           12.5%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%     11.1%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Agricultural development                  40.0%      60.0%        11.1%       23.5%          0.0%           50.0%         28.6%       39.1%     41.2%      30.2%     53.3%       20.8%      40.0%     22.2%    35.7%     15.0%      36.4%
 Trade and exports                         0.0%       10.0%         0.0%        2.9%          0.0%            0.0%         14.3%        8.7%      0.0%       0.0%      6.7%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      5.0%       9.1%
 Economic growth                           0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          7.7%            0.0%          7.1%        8.7%      5.9%       4.7%      0.0%       12.5%       0.0%     11.1%     0.0%      0.0%       9.1%
 Law and justice                           0.0%       0.0%         22.2%        2.9%          0.0%            0.0%          7.1%        4.3%      5.9%       2.3%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%     10.0%      18.2%
 Local governance and institutions         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        5.9%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       2.3%      0.0%        0.0%      20.0%     11.1%     0.0%      5.0%       0.0%
 Regulatory framework                      0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable
                                           0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%      6.7%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 disease
 Basic infrastructure                      20.0%      10.0%        11.1%        5.9%          0.0%            0.0%          7.1%        0.0%      5.9%       2.3%     13.3%        0.0%      40.0%      0.0%     7.1%     10.0%       9.1%
 Natural resource management               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        5.9%          7.7%           12.5%         14.3%        8.7%      5.9%       0.0%     13.3%       12.5%      20.0%     11.1%    14.3%      5.0%       9.1%
 Anti-corruption                           0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.9%          7.7%            0.0%          0.0%        4.3%      0.0%       9.3%      6.7%       16.7%       0.0%      0.0%     7.1%      5.0%       0.0%
 Disaster management                       0.0%       10.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           12.5%          7.1%        0.0%      0.0%       2.3%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Global information and communications
                                           0.0%       10.0%        22.2%        0.0%          7.7%            0.0%          7.1%        4.3%     11.8%       0.0%      0.0%        4.2%       0.0%     22.2%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 technology




                                                                                                                    73
The World Bank                                                                                                 Central African Republic                                                                              Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in CAR?
                                           Office of                                                                              Bi- or
 Greatest Value                           President/                  Office of     Employee Consultant                          Multi-    Private/              Local    Inter-           Ind.             Faith-
                                            Prime       Office of Parliamen-           of a       on Bank           Local        lateral Financial     Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 Percentage of Respondents                 Minister     Minister       tarian        Ministry project/PMU Government            Agency      Sector     Found.     CBO    al NGO    Media   Inst.    Union   Group     Academia    Other
 Financial resources                         0.0%         0.0%         12.5%          31.0%        23.1%           14.3%         16.7%       17.4%     13.3%     19.0%   33.3%     15.8%   0.0%     0.0%    21.4%      38.9%      11.1%
 Mobilizing third party financial
                                            20.0%         0.0%         25.0%          27.6%         0.0%           14.3%         16.7%       21.7%     13.3%     19.0%    8.3%     31.6%   16.7%    0.0%    0.0%        5.6%      22.2%
 resources
 Technical assistance                        0.0%         30.0%        12.5%          24.1%         7.7%           57.1%         16.7%       13.0%     26.7%     14.3%   25.0%     26.3%   33.3%     0.0%   21.4%       5.6%      33.3%
 Policy advice                               0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%         16.7%        4.3%      0.0%      4.8%    0.0%      5.3%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.6%       0.0%
 Donor coordination                         20.0%         0.0%         12.5%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%      2.4%    8.3%      5.3%    0.0%     0.0%    7.1%       0.0%      11.1%
 Data                                        0.0%         10.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          8.3%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Training/capacity building                 40.0%         30.0%        12.5%           6.9%        38.5%           14.3%          8.3%       13.0%     26.7%     23.8%    8.3%      5.3%    0.0%    50.0%   28.6%       16.7%     11.1%
 Studies/analyses                           20.0%         20.0%        12.5%           6.9%        15.4%            0.0%          8.3%       13.0%      6.7%      4.8%    8.3%      5.3%   33.3%    37.5%   14.3%       22.2%     11.1%
 Convening/facilitating                      0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        4.3%      6.7%      2.4%    0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise               0.0%         0.0%         12.5%           0.0%         7.7%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      6.7%      2.4%    8.3%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Strategy formulation                        0.0%         10.0%         0.0%           3.4%         7.7%            0.0%          8.3%       13.0%      0.0%      4.8%    0.0%      5.3%   16.7%     0.0%    0.0%       5.6%       0.0%
 Other                                       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%      2.4%    0.0%      0.0%    0.0%    12.5%    7.1%       0.0%       0.0%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in CAR?
                                           Office of                                                                              Bi- or
 2nd Greatest Value                       President/                  Office of     Employee Consultant                          Multi-    Private/              Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
                                            Prime       Office of Parliamen-           of a      on Bank            Local        lateral Financial     Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 Percentage of Respondents                 Minister     Minister       tarian        Ministry project/PMU Government            Agency      Sector     Found.    CBO     al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia     Other
 Financial resources                         0.0%         10.0%        12.5%           3.4%        0.0%             0.0%          0.0%        8.7%      6.3%     2.5%      0.0%    0.0%    16.7%    22.2%   15.4%       5.6%       0.0%
 Mobilizing third party financial
                                             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           6.9%       15.4%             0.0%          0.0%        4.3%     12.5%     2.5%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     11.1%   7.7%        5.6%       0.0%
 resources
 Technical assistance                       20.0%         10.0%        25.0%          10.3%        7.7%            14.3%         25.0%       17.4%      6.3%      5.0%   27.3%     26.3%    0.0%    11.1%   15.4%       11.1%      0.0%
 Policy advice                               0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.4%        0.0%             0.0%          0.0%        4.3%      0.0%      2.5%    0.0%      5.3%    0.0%    11.1%    0.0%       5.6%      22.2%
 Donor coordination                         20.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.4%        0.0%            14.3%          0.0%        4.3%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   15.4%       0.0%       0.0%
 Data                                       20.0%         0.0%         25.0%           6.9%       15.4%            14.3%          8.3%        0.0%     12.5%      7.5%    9.1%      5.3%   33.3%     0.0%    0.0%       5.6%       0.0%
 Training/capacity building                  0.0%         10.0%        12.5%          31.0%       30.8%            42.9%         41.7%       21.7%     12.5%     25.0%   27.3%     21.1%    0.0%    22.2%    7.7%       33.3%     11.1%
 Studies/analyses                            0.0%         0.0%         12.5%           6.9%        7.7%             0.0%         16.7%       21.7%     12.5%      7.5%    0.0%      5.3%   16.7%     0.0%    7.7%       11.1%     11.1%
 Convening/facilitating                     20.0%         20.0%         0.0%           0.0%        7.7%             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%      5.3%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       11.1%     11.1%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise               0.0%         10.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%            14.3%          0.0%        0.0%      6.3%      7.5%    0.0%     10.5%   33.3%     0.0%    7.7%       5.6%      11.1%
 Strategy formulation                       20.0%         40.0%        12.5%          24.1%       15.4%             0.0%          8.3%       13.0%     31.3%     32.5%   36.4%     15.8%    0.0%    22.2%   15.4%       5.6%      33.3%
 Other                                       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           3.4%        0.0%             0.0%          0.0%        4.3%      0.0%      7.5%    0.0%      5.3%    0.0%     0.0%    7.7%       0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                        74
The World Bank                                                                                             Central African Republic                                                                             Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                             Office of                                                                      Bi- or
                                            President/               Office of   Employee Consultant                       Multi-     Private/              Local    Inter-           Ind.             Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                     Prime     Office of Parliamen-        of a       on Bank        Local       lateral    Financial   Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 (Responses Combined)                         Minister   Minister     tarian      Ministry project/PMU Government          Agency      Sector     Found.    CBO     al NGO    Media   Inst.    Union   Group     Academia     Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without
                                               50.0%      22.2%       22.2%         31.3%        23.1%         0.0%        50.0%        26.1%     31.3%     43.2%   26.7%     47.8%   0.0%     66.7%   53.8%       22.2%     22.2%
 regard to political realities
 Not exploring alternative policy options      0.0%        0.0%       11.1%         12.5%        15.4%         20.0%       21.4%        13.0%     25.0%     0.0%    13.3%     0.0%    25.0%    11.1%   15.4%       11.1%      0.0%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational
                                               25.0%      22.2%       33.3%         43.8%        30.8%         60.0%       14.3%        47.8%     50.0%     56.8%   20.0%     60.9%   25.0%    22.2%   46.2%       50.0%     44.4%
 policies and procedures
 Staff too inaccessible                        0.0%       44.4%       22.2%         15.6%        15.4%         0.0%        28.6%        13.0%     12.5%      5.4%    0.0%     0.0%    25.0%    33.3%   7.7%        11.1%     11.1%
 Arrogant in its approach                      25.0%      22.2%       11.1%         12.5%        15.4%         0.0%        14.3%        0.0%       6.3%     10.8%   13.3%     8.7%    50.0%    11.1%   7.7%        5.6%       0.0%
 Not client focused                            50.0%      11.1%       11.1%         15.6%        23.1%         40.0%        7.1%        0.0%      25.0%      5.4%    6.7%     4.3%     0.0%    11.1%   0.0%        27.8%     11.1%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data         25.0%      44.4%       11.1%          6.3%         7.7%         20.0%       28.6%        8.7%      18.8%      5.4%   13.3%     8.7%    25.0%     0.0%   7.7%        11.1%     22.2%
 Not willing to honestly criticize politics
                                               0.0%       11.1%        0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        13.0%      6.3%     5.4%    13.3%     8.7%    0.0%     11.1%   15.4%       5.6%      22.2%
 and reform efforts in the country
 Too influenced by developed countries         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         12.5%         7.7%         0.0%         0.0%        17.4%      6.3%     8.1%    20.0%     21.7%   25.0%     0.0%   0.0%        11.1%     22.2%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work      0.0%       11.1%       11.1%          0.0%        23.1%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%     5.4%    20.0%      4.3%    0.0%    11.1%   7.7%        5.6%      11.1%
 World Bank processes too slow and
                                               25.0%       0.0%       22.2%         25.0%         0.0%         0.0%        14.3%        21.7%      0.0%     16.2%   20.0%     13.0%   0.0%     0.0%    15.4%       16.7%     11.1%
 complex
 Inadequately aligned with country
                                               0.0%        0.0%       11.1%          0.0%         7.7%         20.0%        0.0%        4.3%       0.0%     13.5%    6.7%     0.0%    25.0%    11.1%   0.0%        5.6%       0.0%
 priorities
 Not aligned with other donors' work           0.0%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         20.0%        0.0%        13.0%      0.0%     0.0%     6.7%     4.3%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Not collaborating enough with non-
                                               0.0%        0.0%       11.1%          9.4%         7.7%         0.0%         7.1%        13.0%      0.0%     13.5%   13.3%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    15.4%       5.6%       0.0%
 state actors
 Not focused enough on issues that are
                                               0.0%       11.1%       11.1%         12.5%        15.4%         20.0%        7.1%        8.7%      18.8%     8.1%     6.7%     8.7%    0.0%     11.1%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 unique to post-conflict countries
 Other                                         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%     2.7%     0.0%     4.3%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        11.1%     11.1%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                          Office of                                                                         Bi- or
                                         President/                Office of    Employee Consultant                        Multi-     Private/              Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                 Prime     Office of Parliamen-          of a        on Bank        Local        lateral    Financial   Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 (Responses Combined)                     Minister    Minister       tarian      Ministry project/PMU Government           Agency      Sector     Found.     CBO    al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
 Investment lending                        100.0%      70.0%         44.4%        55.9%         85.7%        71.4%         71.4%        54.2%     64.7%     56.1%   53.3%     56.5%   80.0%    33.3%   26.7%      40.0%      54.5%
 Capacity development                       0.0%       0.0%          11.1%        20.6%          0.0%        14.3%          7.1%         8.3%     11.8%     14.6%   13.3%     21.7%   20.0%    33.3%   20.0%      15.0%       9.1%
 Policy based lending/Budget support to
                                            0.0%       10.0%         22.2%        14.7%          7.1%        14.3%          7.1%        12.5%     23.5%     17.1%   13.3%     13.0%   0.0%     11.1%   6.7%        25.0%     18.2%
 the Government
 Analytical work                            0.0%       30.0%         22.2%        17.6%         35.7%        28.6%          35.7%       37.5%     23.5%     17.1%   20.0%     13.0%   80.0%    33.3%   20.0%       20.0%     27.3%
 Technical assistance                       0.0%       10.0%         22.2%        17.6%          7.1%         0.0%          14.3%       20.8%     11.8%     19.5%   33.3%     43.5%    0.0%    11.1%   20.0%       15.0%     18.2%
 Trust Fund management                      0.0%       0.0%          11.1%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       16.7%      5.9%      7.3%    0.0%     17.4%    0.0%    22.2%   20.0%       15.0%      0.0%
 Co-financing arrangements                 40.0%       10.0%         11.1%        20.6%         14.3%         0.0%           0.0%       0.0%       5.9%      7.3%   13.3%      4.3%    0.0%    11.1%   13.3%       10.0%     27.3%
 Sector-wide approaches                    60.0%       20.0%         44.4%        20.6%         14.3%        28.6%          21.4%       4.2%       5.9%     14.6%    6.7%      8.7%    0.0%     0.0%    6.7%       10.0%      9.1%
 Emergency recovery lending                 0.0%       20.0%         11.1%        17.6%         35.7%        14.3%          21.4%       20.8%     29.4%     29.3%   20.0%     13.0%    0.0%    22.2%   33.3%       25.0%     18.2%
 Other                                      0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         5.9%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%       8.3%       5.9%      0.0%    0.0%      4.3%    0.0%     0.0%    6.7%       0.0%       9.1%
 Don't know                                 0.0%       20.0%          0.0%         2.9%          0.0%        14.3%          14.3%       12.5%      5.9%     14.6%   13.3%      4.3%   20.0%    11.1%   13.3%       20.0%      0.0%




                                                                                                                    75
The World Bank                                                                                               Central African Republic                                                                                       Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                          Office of                                                                          Bi- or
                                         President/                 Office of     Employee Consultant                       Multi-      Private/               Local      Inter-                Ind.               Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                 Prime      Office of Parliamen-           of a        on Bank        Local       lateral     Financial   Private    NGO/      nation                Govt.     Trade     Based
 (Responses Combined)                     Minister    Minister        tarian       Ministry project/PMU Government         Agency        Sector     Found.      CBO      al NGO     Media       Inst.    Union     Group     Academia     Other
 Investment lending                         0.0%        0.0%          25.0%         11.8%          7.1%         12.5%        0.0%         30.4%     11.8%      17.1%     13.3%      16.7%       0.0%     11.1%     26.7%      30.0%       45.5%
 Capacity development                      20.0%        30.0%          0.0%         23.5%         28.6%         25.0%       20.0%         21.7%     17.6%      12.2%     26.7%      12.5%      40.0%      0.0%     20.0%      15.0%       27.3%
 Policy based lending/Budget support to
                                            0.0%        20.0%         12.5%         23.5%         21.4%         0.0%         6.7%         13.0%      17.6%     22.0%      20.0%     20.8%      0.0%      33.3%     26.7%       15.0%      18.2%
 the Government
 Analytical work                            0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         23.5%          0.0%         37.5%        6.7%         17.4%      17.6%     14.6%       6.7%     12.5%       0.0%     22.2%      6.7%       5.0%        9.1%
 Technical assistance                       0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         11.8%         21.4%         12.5%        6.7%         17.4%       5.9%     29.3%      26.7%     16.7%       0.0%     44.4%     20.0%       20.0%       0.0%
 Trust Fund management                     20.0%        30.0%          0.0%         14.7%         21.4%         0.0%        20.0%         13.0%      17.6%     17.1%       6.7%      8.3%      60.0%     11.1%     20.0%       15.0%      27.3%
 Co-financing arrangements                  0.0%        10.0%          0.0%          5.9%          7.1%         0.0%         6.7%         4.3%       11.8%     17.1%      20.0%     12.5%       0.0%     44.4%     13.3%       10.0%      18.2%
 Sector-wide approaches                     0.0%        20.0%         25.0%          8.8%         14.3%         0.0%         0.0%         34.8%      11.8%     14.6%       6.7%     33.3%       0.0%      0.0%     13.3%       20.0%      18.2%
 Emergency recovery lending                 0.0%        0.0%          12.5%         17.6%         21.4%         12.5%       20.0%         26.1%      23.5%     26.8%      20.0%     37.5%      40.0%     22.2%     13.3%       25.0%       9.1%
 Other                                      0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          7.1%         0.0%         0.0%         4.3%        5.9%      2.4%       0.0%      4.2%       0.0%      0.0%      6.7%       5.0%        9.1%
 Don't know                                80.0%        50.0%         62.5%         29.4%         28.6%         50.0%       60.0%         8.7%       35.3%     22.0%      20.0%     16.7%      40.0%     11.1%     20.0%       25.0%       9.1%

To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)?
                                               Office of                                                                          Bi- or
                                              President/                Office of     Employee Consultant                        Multi-   Private/                Local      Inter-               Ind.              Faith-
  Percentage of Respondents                     Prime      Office of Parliamen-          of a       on Bank         Local        lateral Financial    Private    NGO/       nation               Govt.      Trade   Based
  (Responses Combined)                         Minister    Minister      tarian        Ministry project/PMU Government          Agency     Sector     Found.      CBO       al NGO    Media       Inst.    Union    Group      Academia   Other
  NGOs                                           0.0%       60.0%        44.4%          44.4%        35.7%          37.5%        43.8%      30.4%      56.3%     72.1%      60.0%     64.0%      16.7%     44.4%    33.3%        40.0%    63.6%
  Local government                               0.0%        0.0%        11.1%           2.8%         7.1%          25.0%        18.8%      17.4%      18.8%      7.0%      13.3%      8.0%      16.7%     33.3%     0.0%        10.0%     9.1%
  Beneficiaries                                 40.0%       10.0%        11.1%          30.6%        42.9%          12.5%        25.0%      17.4%       0.0%     14.0%      40.0%      8.0%      16.7%      0.0%    40.0%        10.0%    27.3%
  Private sector                                40.0%        0.0%        22.2%          25.0%         0.0%          12.5%        25.0%      30.4%      18.8%     20.9%        6.7%     8.0%       0.0%     11.1%    13.3%        30.0%    27.3%
  Community-based organizations (CBOs)           0.0%       50.0%        22.2%          27.8%        42.9%          25.0%        12.5%      17.4%      31.3%     14.0%      20.0%     20.0%      50.0%      0.0%     6.7%        25.0%     9.1%
  Donor community                                0.0%        0.0%         0.0%           5.6%         7.1%          0.0%         12.5%      4.3%        0.0%      4.7%        0.0%     4.0%      16.7%      0.0%     6.7%        5.0%     27.3%
  Foundations                                   40.0%       20.0%         0.0%          11.1%        21.4%          25.0%         0.0%      8.7%        6.3%      9.3%      20.0%      4.0%      16.7%     22.2%    13.3%        0.0%      0.0%
  Academia/think tanks/research
                                                60.0%       30.0%        11.1%          11.1%        14.3%          25.0%        12.5%      17.4%       6.3%      4.7%        0.0%    20.0%      16.7%     44.4%     6.7%        35.0%    0.0%
  institutes
  Parliament                                     0.0%        0.0%        33.3%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%      13.0%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%     4.0%      16.7%      0.0%    13.3%        5.0%      0.0%
  Media                                          0.0%        0.0%        11.1%           2.8%        14.3%          0.0%          6.3%      8.7%        6.3%     11.6%        0.0%    20.0%      16.7%     11.1%     6.7%        15.0%     0.0%
  Faith-based organizations                     20.0%       20.0%        11.1%           5.6%         7.1%          25.0%         6.3%      13.0%      25.0%     18.6%        6.7%    12.0%       0.0%     11.1%    40.0%        15.0%     0.0%
  UN and regional peace-keeping forces           0.0%        0.0%        11.1%           2.8%         7.1%          0.0%          0.0%      4.3%        0.0%      7.0%        0.0%     0.0%      16.7%      0.0%     0.0%        5.0%      0.0%
  Emerging donors                                0.0%        0.0%        11.1%           8.3%         0.0%          0.0%         12.5%      4.3%       12.5%      4.7%        6.7%     0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     0.0%        0.0%      0.0%
  UN agencies                                    0.0%       10.0%         0.0%          11.1%         0.0%          12.5%        25.0%      4.3%        0.0%      4.7%      26.7%     24.0%       0.0%     11.1%    13.3%        0.0%     18.2%
  Regional organizations                         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          11.1%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%      8.7%       18.8%      2.3%        0.0%     4.0%       0.0%     11.1%     0.0%        5.0%      0.0%
  Other                                          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%      0.0%        0.0%      4.7%        0.0%     0.0%       0.0%      0.0%     6.7%        0.0%      9.1%




                                                                                                                      76
The World Bank                                                                                                   Central African Republic                                                                               Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in CAR, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in CAR in terms of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                            Office of                                                                            Bi- or
                                          President/                   Office of  Employee Consultant                            Multi-   Private/                  Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                    Prime      Office of Parliamen-         of a       on Bank          Local         lateral Financial    Private        NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 (Responses Combined)                       Minister     Minister       tarian     Ministry project/PMU Government              Agency     Sector    Found.          CBO    al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
 The World Bank works too slowly              40.0%        11.1%        33.3%        27.8%          7.7%          42.9%          18.8%      43.5%     47.1%         46.2%   40.0%     33.3%   20.0%    77.8%   28.6%      36.8%      60.0%
 The Government works inefficiently           0.0%         22.2%        11.1%        25.0%         30.8%          14.3%          25.0%      21.7%      5.9%         25.6%   40.0%     37.5%   20.0%     0.0%   42.9%      36.8%      10.0%
 There is not an adequate level of
                                              40.0%        33.3%        11.1%        38.9%          7.7%          14.3%          25.0%      13.0%     29.4%         28.2%   26.7%     12.5%   20.0%    22.2%   42.9%       10.5%     30.0%
 citizen/civil society participation
 Poor donor coordination                      0.0%         0.0%         22.2%         5.6%         30.8%          14.3%           0.0%      8.7%      17.6%         10.3%    6.7%     20.8%   40.0%    0.0%    0.0%        10.5%     10.0%
 The World Bank does not do adequate
                                              40.0%        11.1%        11.1%        22.2%          7.7%          14.3%          25.0%      21.7%     17.6%         7.7%    13.3%     16.7%   0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        26.3%     10.0%
 follow through/follow-up
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in
                                              0.0%         11.1%        11.1%        13.9%         15.4%          14.3%          25.0%      8.7%       5.9%         12.8%    6.7%     8.3%    0.0%     33.3%   7.1%        21.1%      0.0%
 Government
 Political pressures and obstacles            0.0%         22.2%        44.4%        27.8%         23.1%          0.0%           37.5%      39.1%     23.5%         20.5%   40.0%     54.2%   0.0%     11.1%   50.0%       31.6%     40.0%
 Reforms are not well thought out in
                                              0.0%         11.1%         0.0%        25.0%         15.4%          28.6%          25.0%      21.7%     11.8%         20.5%   13.3%     16.7%   20.0%    0.0%    7.1%        10.5%      0.0%
 light of country challenges
 Ongoing conflict and instability             20.0%        22.2%        33.3%        19.4%         46.2%          42.9%          18.8%      34.8%     17.6%         30.8%   26.7%     29.2%    0.0%    11.1%   42.9%       31.6%     40.0%
 Inadequate funding                           60.0%        22.2%        22.2%        19.4%         30.8%          0.0%           25.0%      17.4%     23.5%         17.9%    6.7%      8.3%   80.0%    44.4%   14.3%       21.1%     20.0%
 Other                                        0.0%         11.1%         0.0%         2.8%          0.0%          14.3%           0.0%      4.3%       0.0%          0.0%    0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    7.1%       0.0%      10.0%




                                                                                                                          77
The World Bank                                                                                                    Central African Republic                                                    Country Survey 2012

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in CAR, on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                           78
The World Bank                                                                                              Central African Republic                                                                                      Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

When thinking about the development challenges in CAR, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                          Office of                                                                          Bi- or
                                         President/               Office of     Employee Consultant                         Multi-     Private/              Local        Inter-               Ind.              Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                 Prime      Office of Parliamen-         of a       on Bank          Local        lateral Financial      Private   NGO/        nation               Govt.    Trade     Based
 (Responses Combined)                     Minister    Minister     tarian        Ministry project/PMU Government           Agency       Sector     Found.     CBO        al NGO     Media      Inst.   Union     Group     Academia    Other
 Public sector reform                      40.0%       20.0%       33.3%           9.7%         7.1%           0.0%         12.5%        4.2%       31.3%     9.8%         6.7%      4.5%      0.0%     0.0%     14.3%      10.0%       0.0%
 Gender                                     0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           3.2%         7.1%           0.0%          6.3%        0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%      4.5%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Social cohesion                           20.0%        0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         7.1%           0.0%          6.3%        8.3%        0.0%     4.9%         0.0%      4.5%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Education                                  0.0%        0.0%       11.1%          22.6%        28.6%           12.5%        18.8%        12.5%      25.0%    26.8%       33.3%      31.8%      0.0%    11.1%     14.3%      55.0%      50.0%
 Domestic private sector development        0.0%        0.0%       11.1%           9.7%         0.0%           12.5%         6.3%        12.5%       6.3%     7.3%         0.0%      4.5%      0.0%    11.1%     28.6%      15.0%      10.0%
 Foreign direct investment                  0.0%        0.0%       11.1%           0.0%        14.3%           0.0%          0.0%        4.2%        0.0%     4.9%         0.0%      9.1%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Water and sanitation                       0.0%       20.0%        0.0%          22.6%         7.1%           37.5%        25.0%        0.0%        0.0%     7.3%         6.7%      0.0%     16.7%    22.2%      7.1%      10.0%       0.0%
 Trade and exports                         20.0%        0.0%        0.0%           6.5%         7.1%           0.0%          0.0%        4.2%        0.0%     9.8%         0.0%      0.0%     16.7%    11.1%      7.1%       5.0%      10.0%
 Economic growth                           20.0%       20.0%       11.1%           9.7%         7.1%           12.5%         6.3%        16.7%      12.5%     4.9%         6.7%     13.6%      0.0%     0.0%      7.1%       5.0%      30.0%
 Energy                                     0.0%       20.0%       33.3%          22.6%        35.7%           50.0%        12.5%        33.3%      37.5%    29.3%       26.7%      31.8%     33.3%    66.7%     35.7%      55.0%      20.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions             0.0%        0.0%       11.1%           3.2%         0.0%           0.0%          6.3%        8.3%        0.0%     0.0%         6.7%      4.5%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Disaster management                        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        6.3%     4.9%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                  0.0%       10.0%        0.0%           3.2%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        8.3%        0.0%     4.9%         6.7%      9.1%      0.0%     0.0%      7.1%      10.0%       0.0%
 Governance                                 0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           3.2%         7.1%           0.0%         18.8%        12.5%       0.0%     0.0%         0.0%      4.5%      0.0%     0.0%     14.3%       5.0%      10.0%
 Social protection                         20.0%       10.0%       33.3%           0.0%         7.1%           12.5%         0.0%        0.0%       18.8%     9.8%         0.0%      4.5%      0.0%     0.0%      7.1%      10.0%       0.0%
 Climate change                            20.0%       10.0%       11.1%           3.2%         7.1%           12.5%         0.0%        4.2%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       5.0%       0.0%
 Poverty reduction                          0.0%       10.0%       11.1%          29.0%        14.3%           12.5%        12.5%        20.8%      12.5%    24.4%       13.3%      13.6%     16.7%     0.0%     21.4%      10.0%      10.0%
 Law and justice                            0.0%       20.0%       11.1%           6.5%         0.0%           0.0%          6.3%        29.2%       0.0%     4.9%         0.0%     27.3%      0.0%    22.2%      7.1%      15.0%      20.0%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction      0.0%       10.0%       11.1%          16.1%         7.1%           0.0%          6.3%        20.8%       6.3%     4.9%       13.3%       9.1%     16.7%     0.0%     14.3%      20.0%      10.0%
 Anti-corruption                           20.0%       10.0%        0.0%           3.2%         0.0%           0.0%         18.8%        4.2%       12.5%    12.2%         6.7%     22.7%      0.0%     0.0%      7.1%       5.0%      20.0%
 Financial markets                         20.0%        0.0%        0.0%           9.7%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        8.3%        0.0%     0.0%         6.7%      4.5%     33.3%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                    0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           3.2%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%     4.9%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       5.0%      10.0%
 Urban development                          0.0%        0.0%       22.2%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%     4.9%         0.0%      4.5%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Crime and violence                         0.0%        0.0%       11.1%           6.5%         0.0%           0.0%          6.3%        4.2%       12.5%     4.9%         6.7%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       5.0%      10.0%
 Regional integration                       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           3.2%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%     18.2%      0.0%    11.1%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Global information and communications
                                            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         7.1%           12.5%         0.0%        4.2%        6.3%     2.4%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 technology
 Local governance and institutions          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           3.2%         0.0%           0.0%          6.3%        0.0%        0.0%     2.4%         6.7%      4.5%     16.7%    11.1%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Transport                                 20.0%       30.0%       11.1%          25.8%        21.4%           37.5%        43.8%        20.8%      18.8%    19.5%       33.3%       9.1%     33.3%    11.1%     28.6%       15.0%     30.0%
 Agricultural development                  40.0%       30.0%       33.3%          19.4%        28.6%           62.5%        18.8%        12.5%      18.8%    17.1%       33.3%      13.6%     16.7%    22.2%     21.4%       20.0%     20.0%
 Natural resource management                0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           9.7%        14.3%           0.0%          6.3%        12.5%      12.5%    12.2%       13.3%       4.5%     33.3%    11.1%      7.1%       0.0%      10.0%
 Public financial management                0.0%       10.0%        0.0%           3.2%         7.1%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        6.3%     0.0%         0.0%     18.2%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Job creation/employment                    0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           6.5%        28.6%           0.0%         12.5%        12.5%      12.5%    12.2%       20.0%       0.0%     33.3%    22.2%     21.4%       0.0%       0.0%
 Health                                     0.0%       10.0%        0.0%           6.5%         7.1%           0.0%         18.8%        0.0%       12.5%     7.3%       26.7%       4.5%      0.0%    11.1%      0.0%       5.0%      10.0%
 Rural development                          0.0%       10.0%        0.0%           9.7%         7.1%           0.0%          6.3%        4.2%        6.3%    12.2%         6.7%      4.5%      0.0%    11.1%      7.1%       0.0%       0.0%
 Global integration                         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        6.3%     0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      7.1%       0.0%      10.0%
 Food security                             40.0%       20.0%        0.0%           3.2%         0.0%           25.0%         0.0%        4.2%       12.5%     9.8%         6.7%      4.5%      0.0%    11.1%      0.0%       5.0%       0.0%
 Environmental sustainability               0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           6.5%         0.0%           0.0%          6.3%        4.2%        0.0%     4.9%         0.0%      4.5%      0.0%    11.1%      0.0%       5.0%       0.0%
 Regulatory framework                       0.0%       10.0%        0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        4.2%        0.0%     2.4%         0.0%      0.0%     16.7%     0.0%      7.1%       0.0%       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                      20.0%       10.0%       22.2%           6.5%        14.3%           0.0%         12.5%        4.2%        6.3%     7.3%       13.3%       4.5%      0.0%    22.2%      7.1%       5.0%      10.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable
                                            0.0%        0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 disease




                                                                                                                     79
The World Bank                                                                                                            Central African Republic         Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at … in CAR? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research … in CAR? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                   80
The World Bank                                                                                                 Central African Republic   Country Survey 2012

E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)




                                                                                                                        81
The World Bank                                                                                           Central African Republic                                                                             Country Survey 2012

F. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR (continued)
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                            Office of                                                                     Bi- or
                                           President/               Office of     Employee Consultant                    Multi-     Private/              Local    Inter-           Ind.             Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                   Prime    Office of Parliamen-           of a       on Bank        Local     lateral    Financial   Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 (Responses Combined)                       Minister  Minister       tarian        Ministry project/PMU Government       Agency      Sector     Found.    CBO     al NGO    Media   Inst.    Union   Group     Academia     Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as
                                             60.0%     40.0%         22.2%          21.9%        21.4%        12.5%       28.6%       20.8%     21.4%     28.6%   33.3%     35.0%   33.3%    44.4%   26.7%       35.0%     18.2%
 related to CAR’s specific challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining
                                              0.0%     20.0%         11.1%          45.2%        21.4%        25.0%       42.9%       29.2%     42.9%     21.4%   13.3%     30.0%   16.7%    33.3%   33.3%       10.0%     36.4%
 World Bank financing
 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy
                                             20.0%     20.0%         33.3%           6.5%         7.1%        25.0%       7.1%        20.8%      7.1%     26.2%   20.0%     20.0%   33.3%    11.1%   20.0%       15.0%     18.2%
 issues
 Improve the competitiveness of its
                                             20.0%     20.0%          0.0%           6.5%        21.4%        12.5%       21.4%       16.7%      7.1%     19.0%   40.0%     20.0%   0.0%     22.2%   6.7%        20.0%     18.2%
 financing compared to markets
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work      20.0%     20.0%          0.0%           6.5%        35.7%        37.5%       0.0%        25.0%      0.0%     9.5%    20.0%     5.0%    0.0%     22.2%   0.0%        15.0%     18.2%
 Provide more adequate
 data/knowledge/statistics/figures on         0.0%     10.0%         22.2%           0.0%        21.4%        12.5%       14.3%       0.0%       0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     5.0%    16.7%    0.0%    6.7%        0.0%       0.0%
 CAR's economy
 Offer more innovative financial
                                              0.0%     0.0%          11.1%           3.2%         7.1%         0.0%       35.7%       8.3%      21.4%     16.7%    6.7%     10.0%   50.0%    11.1%   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 products
 Offer more innovative knowledge
                                             40.0%     20.0%         11.1%           0.0%         0.0%        12.5%       14.3%       0.0%       7.1%     4.8%     6.7%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 services
 Work faster                                  0.0%     30.0%         22.2%          41.9%        28.6%        37.5%       0.0%        25.0%     28.6%     33.3%   20.0%     20.0%   50.0%    0.0%    60.0%       35.0%     27.3%
 Increase the level of World Bank staffing
                                              0.0%     0.0%          11.1%           9.7%         7.1%        12.5%       7.1%        4.2%      21.4%     7.1%     6.7%     0.0%    0.0%     22.2%   0.0%        15.0%      9.1%
 in CAR's office
 Improve its coordination with other
                                             40.0%     10.0%         22.2%           0.0%         7.1%         0.0%       7.1%        16.7%     14.3%     4.8%    13.3%     10.0%   0.0%     33.3%   13.3%       10.0%     18.2%
 donors
 Focus more on issues that are unique to
                                              0.0%     10.0%         22.2%          58.1%        21.4%        12.5%       21.4%       33.3%     28.6%     26.2%   20.0%     35.0%   0.0%     0.0%    20.0%       40.0%     18.2%
 post-conflict countries
 Other                                        0.0%     0.0%           0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     10.0%   0.0%     0.0%    0.0%        5.0%       9.1%




G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                           Office of                                                                      Bi- or
                                          President/               Office of  Employee Consultant                        Multi-     Private/              Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                  Prime    Office of Parliamen-         of a        on Bank        Local       lateral    Financial   Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 (Responses Combined)                      Minister  Minister        tarian    Ministry project/PMU Government           Agency      Sector     Found.     CBO    al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
 Local newspapers                           80.0%     55.6%          55.6%       30.3%         42.9%        75.0%        50.0%        41.7%     66.7%     61.9%   50.0%     70.8%   83.3%    75.0%   60.0%      55.0%      50.0%
 International newspapers                    0.0%     22.2%           0.0%       18.2%          7.1%        12.5%         6.3%         4.2%      6.7%      9.5%   21.4%      8.3%    0.0%    12.5%   13.3%       0.0%      10.0%
 Local radio                                40.0%     33.3%          66.7%       24.2%         42.9%        50.0%        37.5%        50.0%     60.0%     47.6%   28.6%     41.7%   50.0%     0.0%   66.7%      60.0%      40.0%
 International radio                         0.0%     55.6%          22.2%       42.4%         28.6%        12.5%        37.5%        25.0%     13.3%     11.9%   35.7%     25.0%    0.0%    50.0%    0.0%      30.0%      20.0%
 Local television                           20.0%     22.2%          11.1%       15.2%          7.1%         0.0%        12.5%        33.3%     40.0%     21.4%     0.0%    12.5%   50.0%    50.0%    6.7%       0.0%       0.0%
 International television                    0.0%      0.0%          22.2%       12.1%         28.6%         0.0%        12.5%         8.3%      0.0%     14.3%     7.1%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   20.0%       5.0%      20.0%
 Periodicals                                 0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          7.1%        12.5%         0.0%         8.3%      0.0%      0.0%     7.1%     8.3%    0.0%     0.0%   13.3%      15.0%      20.0%
 Internet                                    0.0%     11.1%          11.1%       39.4%         21.4%        12.5%        18.8%        29.2%      6.7%     23.8%   50.0%     29.2%    0.0%     0.0%    6.7%      15.0%      20.0%
 Blogs                                       0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      2.4%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%      10.0%
 Mobile phones                               0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        3.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%     4.2%    0.0%    12.5%    0.0%       5.0%       0.0%
 Instant messaging                           0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%      0.0%      2.4%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%   13.3%       0.0%       0.0%
 Other                                       0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         6.3%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     0.0%     0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%      10.0%      10.0%




                                                                                                                  82
The World Bank                                                                                                  Central African Republic                                                                                 Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                           Office of                                                                              Bi- or
                                          President/               Office of   Employee Consultant                               Multi-    Private/                Local      Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                   Prime    Office of Parliamen-        of a     on Bank                 Local         lateral   Financial    Private    NGO/      nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 (Responses Combined)                      Minister   Minister      tarian      Ministry project/PMU            Government       Agency     Sector      Found.      CBO      al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
 World Bank website                           0.0%     12.5%        22.2%        25.0%      42.9%                 25.0%          40.0%       31.8%      12.5%      17.9%     50.0%     45.8%   20.0%    14.3%   14.3%       5.6%      62.5%
 Direct contact with World Bank              20.0%     12.5%        33.3%        30.6%       0.0%                 25.0%          33.3%        9.1%      37.5%      25.6%     21.4%     16.7%    0.0%     0.0%   21.4%      44.4%       0.0%
 e-Newsletters                               40.0%     12.5%        22.2%        19.4%       7.1%                 25.0%          13.3%       13.6%      12.5%       7.7%     21.4%      8.3%    0.0%    14.3%    7.1%       0.0%       0.0%
 Instant messaging                            0.0%     25.0%         0.0%         2.8%       0.0%                 12.5%           0.0%       13.6%      12.5%       7.7%       0.0%     4.2%    0.0%     0.0%   21.4%       0.0%      12.5%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/
                                             20.0%     25.0%        44.4%        47.2%      42.9%                   0.0%         26.7%       22.7%       50.0%     41.0%     50.0%     45.8%   0.0%     42.9%   64.3%       50.0%      0.0%
 conferences
 World Bank publications and other
                                              0.0%      0.0%        11.1%        33.3%      28.6%                  12.5%         40.0%       63.6%       12.5%     33.3%     35.7%     16.7%   40.0%    57.1%   57.1%       38.9%     75.0%
 written materials
 Mobile phones                               80.0%     62.5%        33.3%        13.9%      50.0%                  87.5%         20.0%       22.7%       31.3%     28.2%      7.1%     25.0%   60.0%    42.9%   14.3%       27.8%     12.5%
 Social media                                 0.0%      0.0%         0.0%         8.3%       0.0%                  0.0%           0.0%       9.1%         6.3%     10.3%      7.1%      8.3%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       5.6%       0.0%
 Blogs                                        0.0%     12.5%         0.0%         2.8%       0.0%                  0.0%           0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      2.6%      0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%      12.5%
 Other                                        0.0%      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%                  0.0%           0.0%       4.5%         6.3%      5.1%      7.1%     16.7%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       22.2%     12.5%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                            Office of                                                                           Bi- or
                                           President/                Office of   Employee Consultant                           Multi-     Private/                   Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
                                              Prime     Office of Parliamen-        of a        on Bank          Local         lateral Financial        Private     NGO/     nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 Percentage of Respondents                  Minister    Minister      tarian      Ministry project/PMU Government              Agency      Sector        Found.      CBO     al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
 Yes                                          20.0%      25.0%        42.9%        53.3%          41.7%         75.0%          40.0%        42.9%        66.7%      38.9%    61.5%     41.2%   33.3%    85.7%   28.6%      66.7%      42.9%
 No                                           80.0%      75.0%        57.1%        46.7%          58.3%         25.0%          60.0%        57.1%        33.3%      61.1%    38.5%     58.8%   66.7%    14.3%   71.4%      33.3%      57.1%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
                                          Office of                                                                               Bi- or
                                         President/                   Office of    Employee Consultant                           Multi-    Private/                Local      Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
                                           Prime      Office of Parliamen-             of a    on Bank             Local         lateral   Financial    Private    NGO/      nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 Percentage of Respondents                Minister    Minister         tarian       Ministry project/PMU        Government       Agency     Sector      Found.      CBO      al NGO    Media   Inst.    Union   Group     Academia    Other
 Yes                                        0.0%        12.5%          28.6%         15.6%      20.0%              0.0%          21.4%       26.7%       6.7%       5.6%       7.7%    16.7%   0.0%     25.0%   0.0%        0.0%      12.5%
 No                                        100.0%       87.5%          71.4%         84.4%      80.0%             100.0%         78.6%       73.3%      93.3%      94.4%     92.3%     83.3%   100%     75.0%   100%       100.0%     87.5%

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                             Office of                                                                            Bi- or
                                            President/                 Office of    Employee Consultant                          Multi-    Private/                Local      Inter-           Ind.             Faith-
                                              Prime      Office of    Parliamen-       of a     on Bank            Local         lateral   Financial    Private    NGO/      nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 Percentage of Respondents                   Minister    Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU       Government       Agency     Sector      Found.      CBO      al NGO    Media   Inst.    Union   Group     Academia     Other
 Yes                                           0.0%       100.0%        50.0%         55.6%      50.0%               -           40.0%       33.3%       0.0%      20.0%     100.0%    70.0%     -      50.0%   20.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 No                                           100.0%       0.0%         50.0%         44.4%      50.0%               -           60.0%       66.7%       100%      80.0%       0.0%    30.0%     -      50.0%   80.0%      100.0%      100%

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                             Office of                                                                            Bi- or
                                            President/                 Office of    Employee Consultant                          Multi-    Private/                Local      Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
                                              Prime      Office of    Parliamen-       of a     on Bank            Local         lateral   Financial    Private    NGO/      nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 Percentage of Respondents                   Minister    Minister       tarian       Ministry project/PMU       Government       Agency     Sector      Found.      CBO      al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
 Yes                                          40.0%       25.0%         42.9%         67.7%      54.5%            25.0%          53.3%       47.6%      33.3%      56.1%     69.2%     47.8%   66.7%    75.0%   58.3%      55.6%      60.0%
 No                                           60.0%       75.0%         57.1%         32.3%      45.5%            75.0%          46.7%       52.4%      66.7%      43.9%     30.8%     52.2%   33.3%    25.0%   41.7%      44.4%      40.0%




                                                                                                                           83
The World Bank                                                                                                  Central African Republic                                                                             Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Do you use/have used the World Bank website?
                                         Office of                                                                               Bi- or
                                        President/                    Office of     Employee Consultant                         Multi-     Private/              Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
                                           Prime         Office of   Parliamen-        of a     on Bank           Local         lateral    Financial   Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 Percentage of Respondents               Minister        Minister      tarian        Ministry project/PMU      Government       Agency      Sector     Found.     CBO    al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia     Other
 Yes                                       40.0%          25.0%        33.3%          30.3%      41.7%           12.5%          35.7%        25.0%     40.0%     21.4%   15.4%     21.7%   33.3%    62.5%   18.2%      31.3%       0.0%
 No                                        60.0%          75.0%        66.7%          69.7%      58.3%           87.5%          64.3%        75.0%     60.0%     78.6%   84.6%     78.3%   66.7%    37.5%   81.8%      68.8%       100%

Which do you primarily use?*
                                             Office of                                                                           Bi- or
                                            President/                Office of     Employee Consultant                         Multi-     Private/              Local    Inter-           Ind.             Faith-
                                              Prime      Office of   Parliamen-       of a      on Bank           Local         lateral    Financial   Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
  Percentage of Respondents                  Minister    Minister      tarian        Ministry project/PMU      Government       Agency      Sector     Found.    CBO     al NGO    Media   Inst.    Union   Group     Academia     Other
  The World Bank’s country website
                                                  -       100.0%       100.0%        30.0%          0.0%          100.0%         0.0%        14.3%        -      83.3%   50.0%     70.0%     -      0.0%    100%        66.7%     50.0%
  (www.worldbank.org/car)
  The World Bank’s main website
                                                  -        0.0%         0.0%         70.0%         100.0%          0.0%         100.0%       85.7%        -      16.7%   50.0%     30.0%     -      100%    0.0%        33.3%     50.0%
  (www.worldbank.org)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
                                             Office of                                                                           Bi- or
                                            President/               Office of    Employee Consultant                           Multi-     Private/              Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                    Prime      Office of Parliamen-        of a     on Bank             Local         lateral    Financial   Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 (Responses Combined)                        Minister    Minister      tarian      Ministry project/PMU        Government       Agency      Sector     Found.     CBO    al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
 Yes                                          80.0%       80.0%        55.6%        53.1%      66.7%             62.5%          53.3%        28.6%     25.0%     23.1%   33.3%     31.8%   50.0%    62.5%   30.8%      11.1%      30.0%
 No                                           20.0%       20.0%        44.4%        46.9%      33.3%             37.5%          46.7%        71.4%     75.0%     76.9%   66.7%     68.2%   50.0%    37.5%   69.2%      88.9%      70.0%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                            Office of                                                                            Bi- or
                                           President/                Office of   Employee Consultant                            Multi-     Private/              Local    Inter-            Ind.            Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                    Prime     Office of Parliamen-        of a      on Bank      Local                lateral    Financial   Private   NGO/    nation            Govt.    Trade   Based
 (Responses Combined)                       Minister    Minister      tarian      Ministry project/PMU Government               Agency      Sector     Found.     CBO    al NGO    Media    Inst.   Union   Group     Academia    Other
 Observer                                     50.0%       40.0%       57.1%        31.3%       36.4%       50.0%                21.4%        28.6%     50.0%     62.5%   27.3%     60.0%   66.7%    33.3%   70.0%      86.7%      100%
 Use World Bank reports/data                  50.0%       70.0%        0.0%        31.3%       36.4%       33.3%                50.0%        21.4%     50.0%     20.8%   45.5%     30.0%    0.0%    33.3%   30.0%       6.7%      16.7%
 Engage in World Bank
                                               0.0%       20.0%       57.1%        28.1%       36.4%       16.7%                 28.6%       14.3%     12.5%     29.2%   36.4%     15.0%   0.0%     0.0%    40.0%       26.7%      0.0%
 related/sponsored events/activities
 Collaborate as part of my professional
                                              25.0%       30.0%       14.3%        40.6%       45.5%       16.7%                 28.6%       50.0%     50.0%     62.5%   36.4%     45.0%   33.3%    66.7%   20.0%       40.0%     33.3%
 duties
 Use World Bank website for
                                              25.0%       20.0%       28.6%         9.4%        9.1%       16.7%                 14.3%       42.9%     12.5%     8.3%     9.1%     20.0%   33.3%    16.7%   0.0%        13.3%     16.7%
 information, data, research, etc.
                                                                                                                          84
The World Bank                                                      Central African Republic                                     Country Survey 2012




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location

A. General Issues facing CAR
In general, would you say that CAR is headed in...?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 The right direction                                                               42.3%                      32.4%
 The wrong direction                                                               27.9%                      35.1%
 Not sure                                                                          29.8%                      32.4%

                                                                                                             st   nd        rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in CAR. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3
most important development priority.

 1st Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 Rural development                                                                 11.2%                      11.9%
 Education                                                                         19.8%                      21.4%
 Social protection                                                                  2.1%                       2.4%
 Transport                                                                         20.3%                      16.7%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                              7.5%                      11.9%
 Poverty reduction                                                                  7.5%                       4.8%
 Public sector reform                                                               1.6%                       0.0%
 Regional integration                                                               1.1%                       0.0%
 Gender                                                                             0.5%                       0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                                2.7%                       2.4%
 Foreign direct investment                                                          1.1%                       2.4%
 Water and sanitation                                                               3.2%                       2.4%
 Energy                                                                             5.9%                       9.5%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                     1.1%                       4.8%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                          0.0%                       0.0%
 Public financial management                                                        0.5%                       0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                            1.6%                       0.0%
 Governance                                                                         0.0%                       0.0%
 Financial markets                                                                  0.0%                       0.0%
 Urban development                                                                  0.0%                       0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                       0.0%                       0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                            0.0%                       0.0%
 Health                                                                             3.7%                       0.0%
 Global integration                                                                 0.0%                       0.0%
 Food security                                                                      0.5%                       0.0%
 Social cohesion                                                                    0.5%                       0.0%
 Climate change                                                                     0.0%                       0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                           3.2%                       2.4%
 Trade and exports                                                                  1.1%                       2.4%
 Crime and violence                                                                 0.0%                       0.0%
 Economic growth                                                                    0.5%                       2.4%
 Law and justice                                                                    0.0%                       0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                               0.0%                       0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.0%                       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                               0.5%                       0.0%
 Local governance and institutions                                                  0.0%                       2.4%
 Natural resource management                                                        1.1%                       0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                                    0.5%                       0.0%
 Disaster management                                                                0.0%                       0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                                   0.5%                       0.0%




                                                                              85
The World Bank                                                      Central African Republic                                     Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)
                                                                                                             st   nd        rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in CAR. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3
most important development priority.
   nd
 2 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 Rural development                                                                 10.1%                       2.6%
 Education                                                                          8.5%                      15.4%
 Social protection                                                                  1.6%                       0.0%
 Transport                                                                          5.8%                       7.7%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                              6.3%                       2.6%
 Poverty reduction                                                                  2.1%                       0.0%
 Public sector reform                                                               0.5%                       2.6%
 Regional integration                                                               1.1%                       0.0%
 Gender                                                                             1.6%                       2.6%
 Domestic private sector development                                                3.2%                       5.1%
 Foreign direct investment                                                          1.6%                       2.6%
 Water and sanitation                                                               7.9%                       5.1%
 Energy                                                                            14.8%                      10.3%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                     3.2%                       2.6%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                          0.0%                       0.0%
 Public financial management                                                        0.5%                       0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                            4.2%                       0.0%
 Governance                                                                         0.5%                       0.0%
 Financial markets                                                                  0.5%                       0.0%
 Urban development                                                                  1.1%                       0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                       0.5%                       2.6%
 Equality of opportunity                                                            1.6%                       2.6%
 Health                                                                             6.3%                       5.1%
 Global integration                                                                 0.0%                       0.0%
 Food security                                                                      1.6%                       7.7%
 Social cohesion                                                                    0.0%                       0.0%
 Climate change                                                                     0.0%                       0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                           4.8%                       5.1%
 Trade and exports                                                                  1.1%                       0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                                 0.0%                       0.0%
 Economic growth                                                                    3.2%                       2.6%
 Law and justice                                                                    0.0%                       5.1%
 Regulatory framework                                                               0.0%                       0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.0%                       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                               2.1%                       2.6%
 Local governance and institutions                                                  0.5%                       0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                        3.2%                       0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                                    0.0%                       2.6%
 Disaster management                                                                0.0%                       0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                                   0.0%                       5.1%




                                                                              86
The World Bank                                                      Central African Republic                                     Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)
                                                                                                             st   nd        rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in CAR. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3
most important development priority.
   rd
 3 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 Rural development                                                                  5.3%                       4.7%
 Education                                                                          3.7%                       0.0%
 Social protection                                                                  1.1%                       0.0%
 Transport                                                                          7.5%                       2.3%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                              5.3%                       4.7%
 Poverty reduction                                                                  4.3%                       2.3%
 Public sector reform                                                               1.6%                       2.3%
 Regional integration                                                               2.1%                       2.3%
 Gender                                                                             0.0%                       4.7%
 Domestic private sector development                                                2.1%                       4.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                                          2.1%                       0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                               2.1%                       0.0%
 Energy                                                                            11.8%                       9.3%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                     3.7%                       4.7%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                          1.1%                       0.0%
 Public financial management                                                        2.7%                       0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                            6.4%                       4.7%
 Governance                                                                         2.1%                       2.3%
 Financial markets                                                                  0.5%                       0.0%
 Urban development                                                                  0.5%                       0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                                       1.1%                       4.7%
 Equality of opportunity                                                            1.1%                       0.0%
 Health                                                                             4.3%                       4.7%
 Global integration                                                                 1.6%                       0.0%
 Food security                                                                      7.0%                       4.7%
 Social cohesion                                                                    0.5%                       0.0%
 Climate change                                                                     0.5%                       2.3%
 Agricultural development                                                           3.2%                       7.0%
 Trade and exports                                                                  1.6%                       4.7%
 Crime and violence                                                                 0.5%                       0.0%
 Economic growth                                                                    2.1%                       0.0%
 Law and justice                                                                    0.5%                       7.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                               0.0%                       0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.0%                       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                               2.7%                       2.3%
 Local governance and institutions                                                  0.0%                       2.3%
 Natural resource management                                                        1.6%                       4.7%
 Anti-corruption                                                                    3.2%                       2.3%
 Disaster management                                                                0.0%                       0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                                   1.6%                       4.7%




                                                                              87
The World Bank                                                    Central African Republic                                 Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than THREE)

 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                            Bangui                  Other Areas
 Water and sanitation                                                            16.7%                     13.6%
 Equality of opportunity                                                          4.3%                      4.5%
 Economic growth                                                                 18.4%                     20.5%
 Climate change                                                                   1.7%                      0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                   3.8%                      4.5%
 Disaster management                                                              2.1%                      2.3%
 Regional integration                                                             3.4%                      4.5%
 Gender                                                                           1.7%                      0.0%
 Rural development                                                               24.4%                     25.0%
 Urban development                                                                3.0%                      0.0%
 Education                                                                       23.9%                      9.1%
 Regulatory framework                                                             0.4%                      2.3%
 Local governance and institutions                                                1.7%                      6.8%
 Basic infrastructure                                                             7.7%                      2.3%
 Social protection                                                                5.1%                      4.5%
 Law and justice                                                                  9.0%                     11.4%
 Transport                                                                       19.2%                     18.2%
 Crime and violence                                                               2.1%                      0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                            0.9%                      0.0%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                           12.8%                     22.7%
 Global information and communications technology                                 3.4%                      0.0%
 Public sector reform                                                             2.6%                      2.3%
 Domestic private sector development                                              6.0%                     11.4%
 Foreign direct investment                                                        4.7%                      4.5%
 Global integration                                                               0.9%                      2.3%
 Energy                                                                          21.4%                     13.6%
 Food security                                                                   17.9%                     13.6%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                        3.4%                      9.1%
 Governance                                                                       5.1%                      4.5%
 Social cohesion                                                                  0.9%                      0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                      4.7%                      4.5%
 Environmental sustainability                                                     3.0%                      2.3%
 Health                                                                           6.8%                     13.6%
 Public financial management                                                      4.3%                      0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                        20.5%                     29.5%
 Job creation/employment                                                         14.5%                     13.6%
 Financial markets                                                                2.6%                      2.3%
 Trade and exports                                                                5.6%                      2.3%
 Anti-corruption                                                                  7.3%                     11.4%




                                                                            88
The World Bank                                                             Central African Republic                     Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing CAR (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in CAR? (Choose no more than THREE)

 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                                       Bangui     Other Areas
 Energy                                                                                     45.9%        42.2%
 Equality of opportunity                                                                     1.3%         0.0%
 Social protection                                                                           2.6%         2.2%
 Global integration                                                                          1.7%         2.2%
 Climate change                                                                              3.1%         2.2%
 Anti-corruption                                                                            14.8%        22.2%
 Disaster management                                                                         2.2%         0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                              2.2%         2.2%
 Rural development                                                                          20.1%        15.6%
 Foreign direct investment                                                                  12.2%         6.7%
 Urban development                                                                           5.2%         2.2%
 Water and sanitation                                                                        7.4%         8.9%
 Education                                                                                  19.7%        13.3%
 Global information and communications technology                                            6.6%         2.2%
 Regulatory framework                                                                        1.7%         0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                       0.4%         2.2%
 Trade and exports                                                                          23.1%        17.8%
 Social cohesion                                                                             2.2%         6.7%
 Public sector reform                                                                        8.3%         8.9%
 Regional integration                                                                        0.9%         6.7%
 Domestic private sector development                                                         6.1%         4.4%
 Job creation/employment                                                                    15.3%        13.3%
 Agricultural development                                                                   24.5%        17.8%
 Food security                                                                               7.9%        11.1%
 Governance                                                                                  3.1%         0.0%
 Transport                                                                                   8.7%        15.6%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                       5.7%        13.3%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                                   4.4%         2.2%
 Gender                                                                                      0.0%         0.0%
 Natural resource management                                                                 7.4%        11.1%
 Environmental sustainability                                                                3.9%         2.2%
 Health                                                                                      5.7%         6.7%
 Basic infrastructure                                                                        6.1%         6.7%
 Law and justice                                                                             2.2%         4.4%
 Local governance and institutions                                                           1.7%         4.4%
 Crime and violence                                                                          0.0%         0.0%
 Public financial management                                                                 6.1%        11.1%
 Financial markets                                                                           5.7%         6.7%



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                      89
The World Bank                                                      Central African Republic                                    Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in CAR, in which sectoral areas do
you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in CAR? (Choose no more than THREE)

 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                              Bangui                    Other Areas
 Rural development                                                                 26.1%                       23.4%
 Education                                                                         29.6%                       17.0%
 Governance                                                                         8.2%                        2.1%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                             12.0%                       12.8%
 Social protection                                                                  2.6%                        0.0%
 Transport                                                                         19.7%                       25.5%
 Poverty reduction                                                                 12.0%                        8.5%
 Public sector reform                                                               1.3%                        2.1%
 Regional integration                                                               1.7%                        0.0%
 Gender                                                                             0.4%                        0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                                 3.0%                        4.3%
 Domestic private sector development                                               10.3%                       19.1%
 Foreign direct investment                                                          4.3%                        0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                               8.2%                        6.4%
 Energy                                                                            23.2%                       19.1%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                          4.3%                        6.4%
 Social cohesion                                                                    1.7%                        0.0%
 Public financial management                                                        6.4%                       10.6%
 Job creation/employment                                                           12.0%                       14.9%
 Financial markets                                                                  3.0%                        4.3%
 Urban development                                                                  3.0%                        6.4%
 Environmental sustainability                                                       4.3%                        0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                            0.4%                        0.0%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                     2.6%                        2.1%
 Health                                                                            20.6%                       12.8%
 Global integration                                                                 1.3%                        4.3%
 Food security                                                                     11.2%                        8.5%
 Climate change                                                                     0.4%                        2.1%
 Agricultural development                                                          29.6%                       36.2%
 Trade and exports                                                                  2.6%                        2.1%
 Economic growth                                                                    5.2%                        2.1%
 Law and justice                                                                    2.6%                       12.8%
 Local governance and institutions                                                  1.7%                        2.1%
 Regulatory framework                                                               0.0%                        0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.4%                        0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                               5.6%                        6.4%
 Natural resource management                                                        5.6%                       12.8%
 Anti-corruption                                                                    5.2%                        8.5%
 Disaster management                                                                1.7%                        0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                                   3.9%                        4.3%


When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second
greatest value in CAR?
 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                    Other Areas
 Financial resources                                                               19.8%                       11.4%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                        16.0%                        9.1%
 Technical assistance                                                              20.3%                       18.2%
 Policy advice                                                                      2.8%                        4.5%
 Donor coordination                                                                 1.9%                        4.5%
 Data                                                                               0.9%                        0.0%
 Training/capacity building                                                        15.6%                       36.4%
 Studies/analyses                                                                  12.3%                       11.4%
 Convening/facilitating                                                             1.4%                        0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                      1.9%                        2.3%
 Strategy formulation                                                               5.7%                        2.3%
 Other                                                                              1.4%                        0.0%




                                                                              90
The World Bank                                                      Central African Republic                                     Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second
greatest value in CAR?
   nd
 2 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 Financial resources                                                                5.2%                      11.6%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                         5.2%                       2.3%
 Technical assistance                                                              11.8%                      14.0%
 Policy advice                                                                      4.2%                       2.3%
 Donor coordination                                                                 2.8%                       0.0%
 Data                                                                               8.0%                       4.7%
 Training/capacity building                                                        22.6%                      18.6%
 Studies/analyses                                                                   8.5%                      11.6%
 Convening/facilitating                                                             3.3%                       4.7%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                      5.2%                       4.7%
 Strategy formulation                                                              21.2%                      18.6%
 Other                                                                              1.9%                       7.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                           Bangui                    Other Areas
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities          35.8%                        29.5%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                       10.4%                         9.1%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                    41.5%                        47.7%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                         12.7%                        11.4%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                        9.9%                        11.4%
 Not client focused                                                             12.3%                         6.8%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                          12.7%                         9.1%
 Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the
                                                                                 5.7%                         9.1%
 country
 Too influenced by developed countries                                           9.0%                        13.6%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                        5.7%                         4.5%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                      15.1%                        11.4%
 Inadequately aligned with country priorities                                    5.2%                         9.1%
 Not aligned with other donors' work                                             2.4%                         2.3%
 Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                  7.5%                         6.8%
 Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict
                                                                                 7.5%                        15.9%
 countries
 Other                                                                           2.4%                         0.0%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                          Bangui                    Other Areas
 Investment lending                                                             58.9%                      46.8%
 Capacity development                                                           12.6%                      21.3%
 Policy based lending/Budget support to the Government                          14.7%                      14.9%
 Analytical work                                                                22.1%                      25.5%
 Technical assistance                                                           19.0%                      17.0%
 Trust Fund management                                                          7.4%                        4.3%
 Co-financing arrangements                                                      10.4%                       8.5%
 Sector-wide approaches                                                         15.6%                      10.6%
 Emergency recovery lending                                                     20.3%                      27.7%
 Other                                                                          2.2%                        4.3%
 Don't know                                                                     10.4%                      12.8%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                            Bangui                   Other Areas
 Investment lending                                                              15.9%                       21.3%
 Capacity development                                                            17.7%                       14.9%
 Policy based lending/Budget support to the Government                           17.7%                       25.5%
 Analytical work                                                                 12.1%                       19.1%
 Technical assistance                                                            16.4%                       12.8%
 Trust Fund management                                                           13.4%                       21.3%
 Co-financing arrangements                                                       10.3%                       12.8%
 Sector-wide approaches                                                          14.7%                       21.3%
 Emergency recovery lending                                                      23.7%                       10.6%
 Other                                                                            2.6%                        4.3%
 Don't know                                                                      31.0%                       23.4%




                                                                              91
The World Bank                                                       Central African Republic                                             Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should
the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)?
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                              Bangui                   Other Areas
  NGOs                                                                               50.2%                       45.8%
  Local government                                                                   10.0%                       10.4%
  Beneficiaries                                                                      20.1%                       18.8%
  Private sector                                                                     17.2%                       25.0%
  Community-based organizations (CBOs)                                               23.8%                       12.5%
  Donor community                                                                    6.3%                         4.2%
  Foundations                                                                        10.5%                        8.3%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                           13.8%                       18.8%
  Parliament                                                                         3.3%                         6.3%
  Media                                                                              7.9%                        12.5%
  Faith-based organizations                                                          13.4%                       18.8%
  UN and regional peace-keeping forces                                               3.3%                         4.2%
  Emerging donors                                                                    4.2%                         2.1%
  UN agencies                                                                        9.6%                         6.3%
  Regional organizations                                                             5.0%                         2.1%
  Other                                                                              0.8%                         4.2%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in CAR, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in CAR in terms of…, on a ten point scale?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                               92
The World Bank                                                      Central African Republic                                      Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to?
(Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                           Bangui                   Other Areas
  The World Bank works too slowly                                                37.0%                       41.3%
  The Government works inefficiently                                             26.5%                       23.9%
  There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation          25.2%                       21.7%
  Poor donor coordination                                                        10.9%                        8.7%
  The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                   13.0%                       21.7%
  Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                            13.9%                        6.5%
  Political pressures and obstacles                                              28.7%                       37.0%
  Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                14.3%                       19.6%
  Ongoing conflict and instability                                               29.6%                       28.3%
  Inadequate funding                                                             20.0%                       15.2%
  Other                                                                           2.6%                        2.2%




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                              93
The World Bank                                                      Central African Republic                                                Country Survey 2012




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in CAR, on a ten point scale?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                              94
The World Bank                                                       Central African Republic                                           Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

When thinking about the development challenges in CAR, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and
knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)

 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                               Bangui                   Other Areas
 Public sector reform                                                               10.0%                      10.9%
 Gender                                                                              0.9%                       2.2%
 Social cohesion                                                                     3.1%                       4.3%
 Education                                                                          23.6%                      21.7%
 Domestic private sector development                                                 8.3%                      13.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                                           3.5%                       2.2%
 Water and sanitation                                                               10.0%                       8.7%
 Trade and exports                                                                   5.2%                       4.3%
 Economic growth                                                                     9.2%                      10.9%
 Energy                                                                             32.3%                      30.4%
 Regional conflict and tensions                                                      3.1%                       0.0%
 Disaster management                                                                 0.9%                       2.2%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                           4.8%                       0.0%
 Governance                                                                          5.7%                       4.3%
 Social protection                                                                   5.7%                       8.7%
 Climate change                                                                      3.5%                       0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                                                  17.0%                      21.7%
 Law and justice                                                                    11.4%                      10.9%
 Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                              10.5%                      13.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                                     9.2%                       4.3%
 Financial markets                                                                   3.5%                       6.5%
 Equality of opportunity                                                             1.3%                       4.3%
 Urban development                                                                   1.7%                       0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                                  4.8%                       2.2%
 Regional integration                                                                1.7%                       4.3%
 Global information and communications technology                                    2.2%                       2.2%
 Local governance and institutions                                                   2.6%                       2.2%
 Transport                                                                          23.6%                      21.7%
 Agricultural development                                                           24.5%                      13.0%
 Natural resource management                                                         9.6%                       6.5%
 Public financial management                                                         3.1%                       0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                                             9.2%                      15.2%
 Health                                                                              7.4%                       8.7%
 Rural development                                                                   5.2%                      10.9%
 Global integration                                                                  0.9%                       2.2%
 Food security                                                                       7.0%                       4.3%
 Environmental sustainability                                                        3.1%                       6.5%
 Regulatory framework                                                                0.9%                       4.3%
 Basic infrastructure                                                                7.9%                      10.9%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                               0.0%                       0.0%


How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at … in CAR? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                               95
The World Bank                                                            Central African Republic                                                         Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research … in CAR? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between locations




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between locations




E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                     96
The World Bank                                                       Central African Republic                              Country Survey 2012




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)

  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                              Bangui             Other Areas
  Improve the quality of its experts as related to CAR’s specific
                                                                                    30.4%                 17.0%
  challenges
  Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                           28.3%                 23.4%
  Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                     17.5%                 17.0%
  Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                  17.5%                  8.5%
  Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                            11.2%                 19.1%
  Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on CAR's
                                                                                    4.9%                  2.1%
  economy
  Offer more innovative financial products                                          10.3%                 10.6%
  Offer more innovative knowledge services                                          4.5%                   2.1%
  Work faster                                                                       28.3%                 40.4%
  Increase the level of World Bank staffing in CAR's office                         7.2%                   8.5%
  Improve its coordination with other donors                                        9.4%                  14.9%
  Focus more on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries                   27.4%                 31.9%
  Other                                                                             1.3%                   2.1%




G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)

  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                              Bangui             Other Areas
  Local newspapers                                                                  54.6%                57.4%
  International newspapers                                                           8.7%                12.8%
  Local radio                                                                       42.8%                46.8%
  International radio                                                               27.1%                19.1%
  Local television                                                                  16.2%                21.3%
  International television                                                          11.8%                 4.3%
  Periodicals                                                                        4.8%                 6.4%
  Internet                                                                          22.3%                12.8%
  Blogs                                                                              0.4%                 2.1%
  Mobile phones                                                                      0.9%                 4.3%
  Instant messaging                                                                  0.9%                 2.1%
  Other                                                                              1.7%                 0.0%


How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)

  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                                              Bangui             Other Areas
  World Bank website                                                                27.5%                20.5%
  Direct contact with World Bank                                                    21.2%                29.5%
  e-Newsletters                                                                     13.5%                 4.5%
  Instant messaging                                                                  6.8%                 6.8%
  World Bank seminars/workshops/ conferences                                        37.8%                43.2%
  World Bank publications and other written materials                               32.0%                38.6%
  Mobile phones                                                                     31.1%                25.0%
  Social media                                                                       5.0%                 6.8%
  Blogs                                                                              0.9%                 4.5%
  Other                                                                              5.4%                 4.5%




                                                                               97
The World Bank                                                      Central African Republic                                   Country Survey 2012




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its
possession that is not a list of exceptions?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 Yes                                                                               49.7%                      36.4%
 No                                                                                50.3%                      63.6%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 Yes                                                                               10.2%                      21.9%
 No                                                                                89.8%                      78.1%

Were you able to obtain this information?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 Yes                                                                               41.9%                      44.4%
 No                                                                                58.1%                      55.6%

Do you have access to the Internet?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 Yes                                                                               51.9%                      56.1%
 No                                                                                48.1%                      43.9%

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 Yes                                                                               28.8%                      21.4%
 No                                                                                71.2%                      78.6%

Which do you primarily use?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Bangui                   Other Areas
 The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/car)                          48.1%                      75.0%
 The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                 51.9%                      25.0%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?

 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                              Bangui                   Other Areas
 Yes                                                                               39.7%                      30.2%
 No                                                                                60.3%                      69.8%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)

 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                                              Bangui                   Other Areas
 Observer                                                                          53.9%                      30.8%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                                       30.3%                      23.1%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                          22.5%                      38.5%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                     38.8%                      46.2%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                      14.0%                      23.1%




                                                                              98
The World Bank                                                             Central African Republic                                       Country Survey 2012




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions by Year 1
                             FY ’09 Response Number = 200  FY ’12 Response Number = 322
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in CAR, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in CAR in terms of…, on a ten point scale?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.




1
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’0 9 and FY ’12 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.



                                                                                      99
The World Bank                                                          Central African Republic                                            Country Survey 2012




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in CAR, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




All significantly different between country surveys, except “Health”.



D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research … in CAR? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.

E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.




                                                                                 100
The World Bank                                                      Central African Republic                                   Country Survey 2012




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in CAR




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)
Significantly different between country surveys



G. Communication and Information Sharing

Do you have access to the Internet:
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                    FY 2009           FY 2012
  Yes                                                                                           47.3%             53.2%
  No                                                                                            52.7%             46.8%

Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                    FY 2009           FY 2012
  Yes                                                                                           27.5%             27.5%
  No                                                                                            72.5%             72.5%

Which do you primarily use?
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                    FY 2009           FY 2012
  The World Bank’ s country website (www.worldbank.org/car)                                     50.0%             50.8%
  The World Bank’ s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                            50.0%             49.2%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




Significantly different between country surveys




H. Background Information

Which best represents your geographic location?
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                    FY 2009           FY 2012
  Bangui                                                                                        76.7%             83.4%
  Other Cities                                                                                   5.6%              1.7%
  Rural Areas                                                                                   17.8%             14.8%




                                                                              101
The World Bank                                                                                   Central African Republic                                                                  Country Survey 2012




Appendix E: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank
                                                  H3. Currently, do you
                                                                                H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                               professionally collaborate/
                                               work with the World Bank?             Observer               Use WB reports/data        Engage in WB activities       Collaborate         Use WB website

Indicator Question                              No Mean         Yes Mean     No Mean       Yes Mean        No Mean          Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the
World Bank's effectiveness in CAR, on a ten-      4.75            6.13        5.66              4.89          5.31            5.22       5.10          5.84       5.27         5.31     5.33         5.04
point scale.
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank's financial instruments meet the             5.09            6.40        6.06              5.19          5.61            5.65       5.66          5.52       5.44         5.87     5.56         6.04
needs of CAR, on a ten-point scale?
To what extent do you believe the World
Bank meets CAR's needs for knowledge              5.43            6.08        5.70              5.46          5.64            5.41       5.41          6.04       5.34         5.90     5.69         4.74
services, on a ten-point scale?
Overall the World Bank currently plays a
                                                  5.47            6.27        6.41              5.70          6.11            5.87       5.87          6.55       6.10         5.96     6.04         6.08
relevant role in development in CAR
The World Bank's work is aligned with
what I consider the development priorities        5.47            6.45        6.23              5.83          5.95            6.24       5.89          6.43       5.95         6.15     6.06         5.79
for this country
Responsiveness                                    5.01            6.61        5.82              5.46          5.75            5.43       5.52          6.05       5.79         5.44     5.65         5.63
Openness (sharing data and other
                                                  5.24            6.92        6.42              5.76          6.17            5.87       5.93          6.62       6.10         6.06     6.04         6.33
information)
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                  5.98            6.89        6.46              6.27          6.38            6.34       6.23          6.80       6.49         6.19     6.37         6.35
Government
Collaboration with the Government                 6.39            7.65        7.42              6.84          7.33            6.62       7.01          7.48       6.99         7.31     7.16         6.88
Collaboration with other donors                   6.47            7.92        7.51              7.04          7.44            6.89       7.18          7.59       7.18         7.41     7.34         6.90
To what degree does the World Bank's
work help achieve sustainable
                                                  5.26            6.41        6.23              5.41          5.93            5.58       5.65          6.35       5.56         6.21     5.83         5.75
development results in CAR, on a ten point
scale?
Are adaptable to CAR's development
                                                  5.73            6.60        6.40              6.00          6.24            6.09       6.20          6.21       6.20         6.19     6.17         6.38
challenges
Overall, how significant a contribution do
you believe the World Bank's knowledge
                                                  6.31            6.95        6.76              6.33          6.52            6.62       6.41          7.00       6.40         6.73     6.61         6.16
and research make to development results
in your country, on a ten point scale?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank's                       5.82            6.20        6.00              5.82          5.86            6.04       5.83          6.14       5.99         5.79     5.92         5.85
knowledge/research, on a ten point scale?
Where country systems are adequate, the
World Bank makes appropriate use of               6.45            7.51        6.79              7.20          7.08            6.78       7.10          6.67       7.05         6.91     6.97         7.18
them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.




                                                                                                          102
The World Bank                                Central African Republic                         Country Survey 2012



Appendix E: CAR FY 2012 Questionnaire




                    World Bank Client Survey FY12 – Central African Republic (CAR)


The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Central African Republic (CAR) or who observe activities related to social and economic
development. The following survey is meant to give the World Bank’s team that works in CAR, more in-depth
insight into how the Bank’s work is perceived. This is one tool the World Bank uses to assess the views of its
critical stakeholders. With this understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies,
outreach and programs that support development in CAR. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm
to oversee the logistics of this effort in CAR. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be
candid. To complete the survey, please circle the number that most accurately reflects your answer. If you
prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO
NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED
IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING CAR

 A1. In general would you say that CAR is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                       103
The World Bank                                       Central African Republic                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING CAR (CONT...)
 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in CAR.
 Please identify which of these you consider the 1st,              FIRST priority     SECOND priority      THIRD priority
 2nd, and 3d most important development priority                 (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)
 1    Rural development                                                                                     
 2    Education                                                                                             
 3    Social protection                                                                                     
 4    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                      
 5    Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                                 
 6    Poverty reduction                                                                                     
 7    Public sector reform                                                                                  
 8    Regional integration                                                                                  
 9    Gender                                                                                                
 10   Domestic private sector development                                                                   
 11   Foreign direct investment                                                                             
 12   Water and sanitation                                                                                  
 13   Energy                                                                                                
 14   Regional conflict and tensions                                                                        
 15   Monitoring and evaluation                                                                             
      Public financial management (e.g., public
 16                                                                                                         
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 17   Job creation/employment                                                                               
 18   Governance                                                                                            
 19   Financial markets                                                                                     
 20   Urban development                                                                                     
 21   Environmental sustainability                                                                          
 22   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                                
 23   Health                                                                                                
 24   Global integration                                                                                    
 25   Food security                                                                                         
 26   Social cohesion                                                                                       
 27   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                         
 28   Agricultural development                                                                              
 29   Trade and exports                                                                                     
 30   Crime and violence                                                                                    
 31   Economic growth                                                                                       
 32   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                               
 33   Regulatory framework                                                                                  
 34   Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                                 
 35   Basic infrastructure                                                                                  
 36   Local governance and institutions                                                                     
 37   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                                  
 38   Anti corruption                                                                                       
 39   Disaster management                                                                                   
 40   Global information and communications technology                                                      




                                                              104
The World Bank                                        Central African Republic       Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING CAR (CONT...)

 A 3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most
 to reducing poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Water and sanitation
 2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 3    Economic growth
 4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5    Regional conflict and tensions
 6    Disaster management
 7    Regional integration
 8    Gender
 9    Rural development
 10   Urban development
 11   Education
 12   Regulatory framework
 13   Local governance and institutions
 14   Basic infrastructure
 15   Social protection
 16   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 17   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 18   Crime and violence
 19   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 20   Security/stabilization/reconstruction
 21   Global information and communications technology
 22   Public sector reform
 23   Domestic private sector development
 24   Foreign direct investment
 25   Global integration
 26   Energy
 27   Food security
 28   Monitoring and evaluation
 29   Governance
 30   Social cohesion
 31   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 32   Environmental sustainability
 33   Health
 34   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 35   Agricultural development
 36   Job creation/employment
 37   Financial markets
 38   Trade and exports
 39   Anti corruption



                                                               105
The World Bank                                        Central African Republic       Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING CAR (CONT…)

 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating
 economic growth in CAR? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy
 2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 3    Social protection
 4    Global integration
 5    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Anti corruption
 7    Disaster management
 8    Regional conflict and tensions
 9    Rural development
 10   Foreign direct investment
 11   Urban development
 12   Water and sanitation
 13   Education
 14   Global information and communications technology
 15   Regulatory framework
 16   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 17   Trade and exports
 18   Social cohesion
 19   Public sector reform
 20   Regional integration
 21   Domestic private sector development
 22   Job creation/employment
 23   Agricultural development
 24   Food security
 25   Governance
 26   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 27   Security/stabilization/reconstruction
 28   Monitoring and evaluation
 29   Gender
 30   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 31   Environmental sustainability
 32   Health
 33   Basic infrastructure
 34   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 35   Local governance and institutions
 36   Crime and violence
 37   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 38   Financial markets




                                                               106
The World Bank                                           Central African Republic                                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in CAR, on a ten point
 scale?
         1              2        3       4       5          6          7            8           9                10

 Not familiar at all                                                                                    Extremely familiar




 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in CAR, on
 a ten point scale?
          1             2    3       4       5       6       7         8       9                10                     

 Not effective at all                                                                       Very effective       Don't know




 To what extent do you believe …
                                                                 To no                                                 To a very
                                                                 degree                                               significant      Don't
                                                                 at all                                                  degree        know
        The World Bank's financial instruments meet
 B3                                                                1       2       3    4   5       6   7    8     9        10          
        the needs of CAR, on a ten point scale?
        The World Bank meets CAR’s needs for
 B4     knowledge services (e.g., research, analysis,              1       2       3    4   5       6   7    8     9        10          
        technical assistance), on a ten point scale?




                                                                  107
The World Bank                                      Central African Republic           Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B5. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development
 results in CAR, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of
 its attention and resources in CAR? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Rural development
 2    Education
 3    Governance
 4    Security/stabilization/reconstruction
 5    Social protection
 6    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 7    Poverty reduction
 8    Public sector reform
 9    Regional integration
 10   Gender
 11   Crime and violence
 12   Domestic private sector development
 13   Foreign direct investment
 14   Water and sanitation
 15   Energy
 16   Monitoring and evaluation
 17   Social cohesion
 18   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 19   Job creation/employment
 20   Financial markets
 21   Urban development
 22   Environmental sustainability
 23   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 24   Regional conflict and tensions
 25   Health
 26   Global integration
 27   Food security
 28   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 29   Agricultural development
 30   Trade and exports
 31   Economic growth
 32   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 33   Local governance and institutions
 34   Regulatory framework
 35   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 36   Basic infrastructure
 37   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 38   Anti corruption
 39   Disaster management
 40   Global information and communications technology




                                                             108
The World Bank                                        Central African Republic                                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B6. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in CAR?
                                                                                 Greatest Value   Second Greatest Value
                                                                            (Choose only ONE)     (Choose only ONE)
 1    Financial resources                                                                                
 2    Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                         
 3    Technical assistance                                                                               
 4    Policy advice                                                                                      
 5    Donor coordination                                                                                 
 6    Data                                                                                               
 7    Training/capacity building                                                                         
 8    Studies/analyses                                                                                   
 9    Convening/facilitating                                                                             
      Linkage to non-Bank expertise (e.g., South-South
 10                                                                                                      
      knowledge sharing)
 11   Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)                                                       
 12   Other (please specify):______________________________                                              



 B7. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES
 in its work in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 4    Staff too inaccessible
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not client focused
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12   Not aligned with country priorities
 13   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 14   Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 15   Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries
 16   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________




                                                               109
The World Bank                                       Central African Republic                                     Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing
 poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    Co-financing arrangements (i.e., with other donors)
 8    Sector-wide approaches
 9    Emergency Recovery lending
 10   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 11   Don’t know



 B9. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to
 reduce poverty in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 6    Trust Fund management
  7   Co-financing arrangements (i.e., with other donors)
  8   Sector-wide approaches
  9   Emergency Recovery lending
 10   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 11   Don’t know


To what extent do you believe …
                                                            To no                                    To a very
                                                            degree                                  significant    Don't
                                                            at all                                     degree      know
       The World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the
B10    global development agenda, on a ten point              1      2     3    4   5   6   7   8   9     10         
       scale?
       The World Bank DOES seek to influence the
B11    global development agenda, on a ten point              1      2     3    4   5   6   7   8   9     10         
       scale?




                                                              110
The World Bank                                      Central African Republic                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B12. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
 interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate
 with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1     NGOs
 2     Local Government
 3     Beneficiaries
 4     Private sector
 5     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 6     Donor community
 7     Foundations
 8     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 9     Parliament
 10    Media
 11    Faith based organizations
 12    UN and regional peace keeping forces
 13    Emerging donors
 14    UN agencies
 15    Regional organizations (e.g., AU, SEMAC)
 16    Other (please specify): __________________________



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in
 CAR, on a ten point scale?
                                                                 Strongly                                  Strongly   Don't
                                                                 disagree                                     agree   know
        Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
 B13                                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        role in development in CAR
        The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
 B14                                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        consider the development priorities for this country
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies
 B15                                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        that are realistic for CAR
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
 B16                                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        CAR with respect




                                                               111
The World Bank                                          Central African Republic                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in CAR in terms of ..., on a
 ten point scale?
                                                                     To no                                  To a very
                                                                                                                         Don't
                                                                     degree at                             significant
                                                                                                                         know
                                                                     all                                      degree
 B17     Follow up and follow through                                    1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B18     Responsiveness                                                  1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B19                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B20                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         circumstances)
 B21     Being inclusive                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B22     Openness (sharing data and other information)                   1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B23     Staff accessibility                                             1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B24     Straightforwardness and honesty                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B25                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Government
 B26     Collaboration with the Government                               1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B27     Collaboration with other donors                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       




 B28. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which
 TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1     The World Bank works too slowly
 2     The Government works inefficiently
 3     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4     Poor donor coordination
 5     The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 6     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 7     Political pressures and obstacles
 8     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 9     Ongoing conflict and instability
 10    Inadequate funding
 11    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                   112
The World Bank                             Central African Republic                                     Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C1. To what degree does the World Bank’s work, help achieve sustainable development
 results in CAR, on a ten point scale?
        1          2   3   4     5     6          7         8         9          10                
 To no degree at                                                                   To a very
                                                                                               Don't know
 all                                                                      significant degree




                                                      113
The World Bank                                      Central African Republic                                      Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS (CONT...)
 How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in CAR, on a ten point scale?
                                                                 Not effective                                   Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                      effective   know
 C2     Anti corruption                                            1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C3     Global information and communications technology           1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C4     Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)           1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C5     Crime and violence                                         1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C6     Regional conflict and tensions                             1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C7     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                    1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C8     Urban development                                          1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C9     Environmental sustainability                               1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C10    Regulatory framework                                       1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C11    Basic infrastructure                                       1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C12    Communicable/non-communicable disease                      1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C13    Poverty reduction                                          1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C14    Gender                                                     1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C15    Domestic private sector development                        1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C16    Foreign direct investment                                  1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C17    Local governance and institutions                          1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C18    Water and sanitation                                       1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C19    Trade and exports                                          1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C20    Economic growth                                            1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C21    Energy                                                     1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C22    Disaster management                                        1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C23    Monitoring and evaluation                                  1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Public financial management (e.g., public
 C24                                                               1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 C25    Job creation/employment                                    1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C26    Social cohesion                                            1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C27    Financial markets                                          1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C28    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                     1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C29    Health                                                     1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C30    Rural development                                          1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C31    Global integration                                         1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C32    Governance                                                 1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C33    Food security                                              1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C34    Education                                                  1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C35    Security/stabilization/reconstruction                      1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C36    Social protection                                          1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C37    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)              1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C38    Public sector reform                                       1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C39    Regional integration                                       1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C40    Agricultural development                                   1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C41    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)       1     2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                             114
The World Bank                                      Central African Republic         Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE
 D1. When thinking about the development challenges in CAR, where do you believe it
 would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts
 in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Public sector reform
 2    Gender
 3    Social cohesion
 4    Education
 5    Domestic private sector development
 6    Foreign direct investment
 7    Water and sanitation
 8    Trade and exports
 9    Economic growth
 10   Energy
 11   Regional conflict and tensions
 12   Disaster management
 13   Monitoring and evaluation
 14   Governance
 15   Social protection
 16   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 17   Poverty reduction
 18   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 19   Security/stabilization/reconstruction
 20   Anti corruption
 21   Financial markets
 22   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 23   Urban development
 24   Crime and violence
 25   Regional integration
 26   Global information and communications technology
 27   Local governance and institutions
 28   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 29   Agricultural development
 30   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 31   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 32   Job creation/employment
 33   Health
 34   Rural development
 35   Global integration
 36   Food security
 37   Environmental sustainability
 38   Regulatory framework
 39   Basic infrastructure
 40   Communicable/non-communicable disease




                                                             115
The World Bank                                        Central African Republic                                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 How effective do you believe the World Bank's knowledge and research are at … in CAR?
                                                          Not
                                                                                                                       Very    Don't
                                                          effective
                                                                                                                   effective   know
                                                          at all
 D2    Raising your awareness of the particular topic      1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D3    Stimulating public debate/dialogue                  1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D4    Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills              1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D5    Contributing to good policy making                  1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       Providing support for program
 D6                                                        1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       implementation



 To what extent do you believe that the World Bank's knowledge and research … in CAR?
                                                          To no                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                               Don't
                                                          degree at                                             significant
                                                                                                                               know
                                                          all                                                      degree
 D7      Are timely                                        1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
 D8                                                        1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         involvement during preparation
 D9      Are relevant to CAR's development priorities      1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D10     Provide feasible recommendations                  1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D11                                                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         understand)
         A source of relevant information on global
 D12                                                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         good practices
 D13     Are adequately disseminated                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D14     Are appropriately translated                      1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Are adaptable to CAR's development
 D15                                                       1        2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         challenges



 D16. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's
 knowledge and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point
 scale?
           1              2    3     4      5         6        7         8       9         10                   

 Not significant at all                                                              Very significant       Don't know




                                                                   116
The World Bank                                  Central African Republic                                        Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 D17. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's
 knowledge/ research, on a ten point scale?
         1              2       3   4       5       6   7         8        9         10                
 Very low                                                                             Very high
                                                                                                   Don't know
 technical quality                                                             technical quality




 D18. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank
 expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing, etc.), on a ten point scale?
           1                2   3   4   5       6       7         8        9          10               

 Not effective at all                                                            Very effective    Don't know




                                                            117
The World Bank                                       Central African Republic                                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale?
                                                          Strongly                                                 Strongly   Don't
                                                          disagree                                                    agree   know
  E1    The World Bank disburses funds promptly            1      2       3     4   5     6     7        8     9        10      
        The World Bank effectively monitors and
  E2    evaluates the projects and programs it             1      2       3     4   5     6     7        8     9        10      
        supports
        The World Bank's approvals and reviews are
  E3                                                       1      2       3     4   5     6     7        8     9        10      
        done in a timely fashion
        The World Bank's safeguard policy
  E4                                                       1      2       3     4   5     6     7        8     9        10      
        requirements are reasonable
        The World Bank imposes reasonable
  E5                                                       1      2       3     4   5     6     7        8     9        10      
        conditions on its lending
        Working with the World Bank increases CAR's
  E6                                                       1      2       3     4   5     6     7        8     9        10      
        institutional capacity
        The World Bank ensures consistency and
  E7                                                       1      2       3     4   5     6     7        8     9        10      
        continuity through staff changes
        The World Bank's teams and visits are well
  E8                                                       1      2       3     4   5     6     7        8     9        10      
        coordinated
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
        financial management, etc.) are adequate,
  E9                                                       1      2       3     4   5     6     7        8     9        10      
        the World Bank makes appropriate use of
        them
        The World Bank provides effective
 E10    implementation support (i.e., supervision of       1      2       3     4   5     6     7        8     9        10      
        projects)



 E11. To what extent do you believe the World Bank is adequately staffed in CAR, on a
 ten point scale?
        1           2      3      4      5       6          7         8         9          10                      
 To no degree at                                                                             To a very
                                                                                                             Don't know
 all                                                                                significant degree




                                                                118
The World Bank                                         Central African Republic                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN CAR

 F1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play in CAR’s
 development over the medium term in the near future, on a ten point scale?
        1            2       3       4         5   6         7         8          9         10               
 Not a significant                                                                    Very significant
                                                                                                         Don't know
 role at all                                                                                      role




 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value
 in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Improve the quality of its experts as related to CAR’s specific challenges
 2    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3    Focus primarily on advocacy issues
      Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, and other
 4
      terms)
 5    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 6    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on CAR’s economy
 7    Offer more innovative financial products
 8    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9    Work faster
 10   Increase the level of World Bank staffing in CAR’s office
 11   Improve its coordination with other donors
 12   Focus more on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries
 13   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                                 119
The World Bank                                       Central African Republic                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social
 development issues in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Blogs
 10   Mobile phones
 11   Instant messaging
 12   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2     Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-Newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank publications and other written materials
 7    Mobile phones
 8    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 9    Blogs
 10   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________



       Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will
 G3                                                                                               Yes        No
       now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 G4                                                                                               Yes        No
       (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                  Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                        Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?                                           Yes        No




                                                              120
The World Bank                                        Central African Republic                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING (CONT...)

 G8. Which do you primarily use?
 1     The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/car)
 2     The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                                       Strongly                              Strongly   Don't
                                                                       disagree                                 agree   know
         I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the
 G9                                                                     1        2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         organization's Open Data policy
         I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only
 G10                                                                    1        2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used a World Bank website)
         I find the information on the World Bank’s websites
 G11     useful. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank             1        2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         website)
         When I need information from the World Bank I know
 G12     how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them,       1        2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         etc.)
         The World Bank is responsive to my information
 G13                                                                    1        2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries




                                                               121
The World Bank                                     Central African Republic                              Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position? (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Office of the President
 2    Office of the Prime Minister
 3    Office of Minister
 4    Office of Parliamentarian
 5    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 6    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 7    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 8    Local Government Office or Staff
 9    Bilateral Agency
 10   Multilateral Agency
 11   Private Sector Organization
 12   Private Foundation
 13   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 14   Local NGO
 15   International NGO
 16   Community Based Organization
 17   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 18   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 19   Trade Union
 20   Faith-Based Group
 21   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 22   Judiciary Branch
 23   Other (please specify): ________________________




                                                            122
The World Bank                                        Central African Republic        Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only ONE response)
 1    Agricultural development
 2    Anti corruption
 3    Basic infrastructure
 4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5    Communicable/non-communicable disease
 6    Crime and violence
 7    Disaster management
 8    Domestic private sector development
 9    Economic growth
 10   Education
 11   Energy
 12   Environmental sustainability
 13   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 14   Financial markets
 15   Food security
 16   Foreign direct investment
 17   Gender
 18   Global information and communications technology
 19   Global integration
 20   Governance
 21   Health
 22   Job creation/employment
 23   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 24   Local governance and institutions
 25   Monitoring and evaluation
 26   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 27   Poverty reduction
 28   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 29   Public sector reform
 30   Regional conflict and tensions
 31   Regional integration
 32   Regulatory framework
 33   Rural development
 34   Security/stabilization/reconstruction
 35   Social cohesion
 36   Social protection
 37   Trade and exports
 38   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 39   Urban development
 40   Water and sanitation
 41   Other (please specify): _____________________________________________



                                                               123
The World Bank                                        Central African Republic       Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your
 country?
 1    Yes
 2    No



 H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in
 CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.



 H5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Bangui
 2    Other cities
 3    Rural areas




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               124
