                           88150




China Country Opinion
    Survey Report

 (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                         China                                      Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. The General Environment in China ............................................10
          V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank in China .................14
         VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank .....................................22
        VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in China ..............................38
       VIII. Communication and Outreach ..................................................41
         IX. Appendices ................................................................................48




                                                          2
The World Bank                                China                              Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in China
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in China regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in China;
            Their perceived overall value of the World Bank in China;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank as related to programs, poverty reduction,
               personal relationships, effectiveness, knowledge base, collaboration, and its
               day-to-day operation; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s communication and outreach in China.

       Use data to help inform the China country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
December 2011 thru March 2012, 518 stakeholders of the World Bank in China were invited to
provide their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country
survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among employees of a ministry or
ministerial department of central government; local government officials or staff; project
management offices at the central and local level; the central bank; financial sector/banks;
NGOs; regulatory agencies; state-owned enterprises; bilateral or multilateral agencies; private
sector organizations; consultants/contractors working on World Bank supported
projects/programs; the media; and academia, research institutes or think tanks. A total of 207
stakeholders participated in the country survey (40%).

Respondents received the questionnaire in the mail and returned the completed questionnaire
similarly. Respondents were asked to indicate: their overall attitudes toward the Bank; the
importance of specific areas of the Bank’s work and the Bank’s effectiveness in thos e areas; and
their level of agreement with a series of statements about the way the World Bank does business.
Respondents were also asked about general issues facing China, the Bank’s future role in China,
and the Bank’s communication and outreach efforts in China.




                                                3
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)
The questionnaire was broken into eight sections:
    1. Background Information: The first section asked respondents for their current position;
       specialization; familiarity, exposure to, and involvement with the Bank; and geographic
       location.
    2. General Issues facing China: Respondents were asked to indicate what they thought were
       the most important development priorities, which areas would contribute most to poverty
       reduction and economic growth in China, as well as rating their perspective on the future
       of the next generation in China.
    3. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate the Bank’s
       overall effectiveness in China, the extent to which the Bank’s financial ins truments meet
       China’s needs, the extent to which the Bank meets China’s need for knowledge services,
       and their agreement with various statements regarding the Bank’s programs, poverty
       mission, relationships, and collaborations in China. Respondents were also asked to
       indicate the areas on which it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its
       resources and research, what the Bank’s level of involvement should be, and what they
       felt were the Bank’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses in its work.
    4. The Work of the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of importance
       and the Bank’s level of effectiveness across fifteen areas in which the Bank was
       involved, such as helping to reduce poverty and encouraging greater transparency in
       governance.
    5. The Way the World Bank does Business: Respondents were asked to rate the Bank’s
       level of effectiveness in the way it does business, including the Bank’s knowledge,
       personal relationships, collaborations, and poverty mission.
    6. Project/Program Related Issues: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement
       with a series of statements regarding the Bank’s programs, day-to-day operations, and
       collaborations in China.
    7. The Future of the World Bank in China: Respondents were asked to rate how significant
       a role the Bank should play in China’s development and to indicate what the Bank could
       do to make itself of greater value and what the greatest obstacle was to the Bank playing
       a significant role in China.
    8. Communication and Outreach: Respondents were asked to indicate where they get
       information about development issues and the Bank’s development activities in China, as
       well as how they prefer to receive information from the Bank. Respondents were also
       asked to indicate their usage of the Bank ’s website and PICs, and to evaluate these
       communication and outreach efforts.

    In addition, where possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country
    survey were compared to responses from the 227 respondents (43% response rate) who
    completed the country survey in FY 2006. Notations and/or charts are included when these
    comparisons were possible.




                                                4
The World Bank                                China                              Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position

       The largest number of respondents was from local government. Because of the small
        number of respondents from central project management offices, bilateral or multilateral
        agencies, state-owned enterprises, the central bank, private sector, and regulatory
        agencies, these respondents were included in the “Other” category for all further
        analyses. Note there were no respondents who were consultants/contractors working on
        World Bank supported projects/programs.




                                                5
The World Bank                   China        Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                  6
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       Over half of all respondents indicated that they were located in Beijing. Because of the
        small number of respondents from other locations, these respondents were grouped into
        an “Other Areas” category for all further analyses.




                                                7
The World Bank                                China                              Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Involvement with the World Bank

       More than three-quarters of all respondents indicated that they have been involved with
        or a close observer of World Bank activities for more than three years.




Exposure to the World Bank

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they had the most interaction with the World Bank
        in China.




                                                8
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank

   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 7.0 on a
    10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar. This was
    statistically similar to the FY ’06 survey, in which familiarity with the Bank received a mean
    rating of 6.9 across all respondents.
         Respondents from the media, local project management offices, local government,
          and the financial sector indicated significantly higher levels of familiarity with the
          Bank compared to employees of ministries and respondents from academia, NGOs,
          and other organizations.
         Respondents from other areas indicated significantly higher levels of familiarity with
          the Bank compared to respondents from Beijing.




                                                 9
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in China

Optimism

       When asked about perceptions of the future for the next generation in China, across all
        respondents, the overall mean rating was 7.4 on a 10-point scale of 1 being extremely
        pessimistic and 10 being extremely optimistic. This was statistically similar to the FY
        ’06 survey, in which optimism for the next generation received a mean rating of 7.5
        across all respondents.
             Respondents from other areas had significantly higher ratings of optimism
              compared to respondents from Beijing.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings of
              optimism for the next generation in China.




                                                10
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in China (continued)

Development Priority

       Respondents indicated that government effectiveness was the most important
        development priority in China. Inequality, social stability, quality of growth, and
        economic growth were also considered top priorities. In the FY ’06 country survey,
        respondents indicated education as the single most important development priority (23%)
        and the greatest challenge facing China (32%).
                Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations considered
                 government effectiveness, inequality, quality of growth, and economic growth to
                 be the most important development priorities in China.




                                                 11
The World Bank                                China                             Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in China (continued)

Poverty Reduction

       Respondents indicated that strengthening social protection and reducing inequality would
        contribute most to poverty reduction in China. Increasing access to quality education,
        sustaining economic growth, increasing employment, and improving agriculture
        development were also considered key contributors to poverty reduction.




                                               12
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in China (continued)

Economic Growth

       Respondents indicated that enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/
        investment would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in China.
        Strengthening public institutions, reducing corruption, and improving access to and/or
        quality of education were also identified as key to economic growth.
            Respondents across most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
             indicated that enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/ investment
             would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in China, except
             respondents from academia who were more likely to say that strengthening public
             institutions would contribute most to economic growth.




                                                13
The World Bank                                China                             Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank
Focusing Bank Resources
    Respondents indicated that it would be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its
       resources on poverty reduction and environmental improvement.
            Respondents across most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated it would be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources
              on poverty reduction and environmental improvement, except respondents from
              academia who were more likely to indicate government effectiveness.




                                               14
The World Bank                                China                              Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Focusing Bank Research
       Respondents across most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations indicated that
        it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on environmental
        sustainability and social protection, except respondents from academia who indicated that
        education, governance, and public sector performance would be most valuable.




                                               15
The World Bank                                China                              Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Level of Bank Involvement

   Nearly two-thirds of all respondents indicated that the Bank should be more involved in
    China’s development strategies; 28% indicated that the Bank is currently involved at an
    optimum level.
             A plurality of respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic
              locations indicated that the Bank should be more involved in China’s
              development strategies.




                                               16
The World Bank                                  China                               Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest values to China were its new concepts and
        innovation and its transfer of international best practices. The Bank’s pilot innovations
        that can be scaled up if successful and its ability to build institutional capacity were also
        highly valued.
             In the FY ’06 country survey, respondents indicated that the Bank’s knowledge
                (55%), financial resources (47%), and its transfer of new project concepts (37%)
                were its greatest values.




                                                 17
The World Bank                                China                              Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weakness in its work in China was that its
        processes are too slow and complex.

             In the FY ’06 country survey, respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest
              weaknesses were being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
              (56%) and failing to adapt global knowledge to local conditions (50%).

             Respondents across most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated that the Bank’s greatest weakness was that its processes are too slow
              and complex, except respondents from NGOs who were more likely to indicate
              that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses are not enough public disclosure of its work
              and failing to adapt global knowledge to local conditions.




                                                18
The World Bank                                 China                               Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance
   Respondents indicated that it was most important for the Bank to help strengthen
    environment and natural resources management and to help reduce poverty, receiving mean
    ratings of 8.4 and 8.2, respectively, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all and 10 being
    very important.




                                                 19
The World Bank                                 China                               Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance (continued)

   There were three instances in which there were significant differences between stakeholder
    groups across these fifteen areas.
         Respondents from the media, academia, and other organizations had the highest
          ratings for the importance of “Helping to strengthen the private sector” whereas
          respondents from local government, local project management offices, and the
          financial sector had significantly lower ratings of importance.
         Respondents from the media, academia, and other organizations had the highest
          ratings for the importance of “Helping to strengthen the financial system” whereas
          respondents from local government and local project management offices had
          significantly lower ratings of importance.
         Respondents from the media had the highest ratings for the importance of “Helping to
          strengthen infrastructure development” whereas respondents from the financial sector
          and NGOs had significantly lower ratings of importance.


   Respondent from Beijing had higher ratings of importance across many areas compared to
    respondent from other areas, significantly so for “Helping to strengthen the private sector”
    and “Helping to strengthen the financial system”.




                                                20
The World Bank                                  China                               Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance (continued)
       Respondents in this year’s survey had statistically similar importance ratings for all areas
        compared to respondents from the FY ’06 country survey.




                                                 21
The World Bank                                 China                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank

The Bank’s Overall Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, the Bank’s overall effectiveness in China received a mean rating
        of 7.8 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10 being very effective.
        This was statistically similar the mean overall effectiveness received in the FY ’06
        country survey, 7.6.
             Respondents from the media and local project management offices had
              significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s overall effectiveness in China
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from other areas had significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
              overall effectiveness in China compared to respondents from Beijing.




                                                 22
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Meeting China’s Financial Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank ’s financial instruments meet China’s
        needs received a mean rating of 6.8 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at all
        and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from local project management offices and the media had the
              highest ratings for the Bank ’s financial instruments meeting China’s needs
              whereas employees of ministries had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from other areas had significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
              financial instruments meeting China’s needs compared to respondents from
              Beijing.




                                                23
The World Bank                                  China                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Meeting China’s Knowledge Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank meets China’s needs for knowledge
        services received a mean rating of 6.8 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at all
        and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the media had the
              highest ratings for the Bank meeting China’s needs for knowledge services
              whereas employees of ministries had the lowest ratings.
             Respondents from Beijing and other areas had statistically similar ratings for the
              Bank meeting China’s needs for knowledge services.




                                                 24
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)
Specific Areas of Effectiveness

       Respondents saw the Bank as most effective in helping to strengthen infrastructure
        development, receiving a mean rating of 7.5, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale
        with 1 being not effective at all and 10 being very effective.




                                                25
The World Bank                                  China                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

   There were three instances in which there were significant stakeholder differences in their
    ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness across these fifteen areas.
             Respondents from the media had the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness
              at “Helping to strengthen the private sector” whereas respondents from local
              government had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from the media had the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness
              at “Helping to strengthen infrastructure development” whereas respondents from
              the financial sector had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from local project management offices and the media had the
              highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at “Helping to strengthen environment
              and natural resources manag ement” whereas respondents from NGOs had
              significantly lower ratings.

   There was just one instance in which there were significant differences between geographic
    locations in their ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness across these fifteen areas . Respondents
    from Beijing had significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at “Helping to
    strengthen the private sector” compared to respondents from other areas.




                                                 26
The World Bank                                 China                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       Effectiveness ratings in this year’s survey were higher than in the FY ’06 country survey,
        significantly so for “Helping to strengthen the financial system”, “Ensuring that attention
        is paid to gender disparities”, “Helping to strengthen environment and natural resource
        management”, and “Helping to strengthen the social protection sector”.




                                                 27
The World Bank                                 China                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in
China, bivariate correlational analyses were conducted on respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness in China with respondents’ ratings of the fifteen specific areas of
effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness
increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one specific
area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness.

   Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined
    to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness, suggesting
    that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of pe rceptions of the Bank’s
    overall effectiveness. The areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at helping to bring about economic growth;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at helping to strengthen the education sector; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at helping to strengthen environment and natural
              resources management.




                                                 28
The World Bank                                 China                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Importance versus Effectiveness – Sector Analysis

By plotting respondents’ ratings of importance versus effectiveness, one can assess where
respondents perceived the Bank to be performing well on priority issues in China, as well as
areas in which respondents perceived the Bank to not be performing so well on priority issues,
areas in which respondents perceived the Bank was performing well, but on lower priority issues,
and areas in which respondents perceived the Bank to not be performing so well on lower
priority issues.

   Bank relatively good and issue is a priority: Areas in this quadrant are those that
    respondents indicated a high level of importance and gave the Bank a relatively high rating
    of effectiveness (although it should be noted that ratings of effectiveness were more than a
    point lower than ratings of importance). It is important that the Bank continue to do well in
    these areas (in order of mean importance):
             Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources management;
             Helping to reduce poverty;
             Helping to strengthen agricultural development; and
             Helping to strengthen the health sector (although this is on the borderline of the
                Bank being not so good).




                                                29
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Importance versus Effectiveness – Sector Analysis (continued)

       Bank not so good on priority issues: Areas in this quadrant were those for which
        respondents indicated a high level of importance, but gave the Bank a relatively low
        rating of effectiveness. These areas were (in order of mean importance):
             Encouraging greater transparency in governance;
             Helping to strengthen the education sector;
             Helping to strengthen the social protection sector; and
             Reducing economic and social inequality.

       Bank not so good, but issue not perceived to be a priority : Areas in this quadrant were
        those for which respondents gave the Bank a relatively low rating of effectiveness and a
        moderate level of importance. These areas were (in order of mean importance):
             Helping China adapt to/avert risk of climate change (although this is on the
                borderline of the Bank being good);
             Ensuring that attention is paid to gender disparities;
             Helping to empower communities to participate in their own development;
             Helping to strengthen the financial system; and
             Helping to strengthen the private sector.

       Bank good, but issue not perceived to be a priority: Areas in this quadrant were those
        for which respondents indicated a moderate level of importance, but gave the Bank a
        relatively high rating of effectiveness. There were two areas in this quadrant:
             Helping to strengthen the infrastructure development and
             Helping to bring about strong economic growth.




                                                30
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)
Respondents were asked a variety of questions regarding the Bank’s programs, poverty mission,
personal relationships, collaborations/partnerships, knowledge, and day-to-day operations.
   Respondents from this year’s country survey had significantly higher ratings compared to
    respondents from the FY ’06 country survey across several areas. Those areas which had
    significant differences between the two country surveys were:
     “The Banks work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for this country”;
     “The Bank’s work reflects its own mission of poverty reduction”;
     “In general, the strategies that the Bank supports are sustainable over time”;
     “The Bank’s work promotes the empowerment of poor people to participate in
        development”;
     “Sharing knowledge about international best practices”;
     “Ability to adapt its knowledge to your country’s needs”;
     “Ensuring its staff is accessible”;
     “Promoting the inclusion of local communities in the development of strategies ”;
     “Promoting the inclusion of civil society in the development of strategies ”;
     “Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction”;
     “The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level”;
     “The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials ”; and
     “The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity”.
   There were significant stakeholder differences in their ratings of the Bank across nine of these
    areas. For the most part, respondents from local government, local project management offices,
    and the media tended to give the highest ratings for the Bank whereas respondents from the
    financial sector, academia, and other organizations tended to give significantly lower ratings for
    the Bank. Those areas for which there were significant stakeholder group differences were:
     “The Banks work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for this country”;
     “The Bank’s work reflects its own mission of poverty reduction”;
     “In general, the strategies that the Bank supports are sustainable over time”;
     “Promoting the inclusion of civil society in the development of strategies ”;
     “Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction”;
     “The Bank disburses funds promptly”;
     “The Bank works efficiently”;
     “The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity”; and
     “The Bank safeguards against corruption in projects/programs that it funds with its
        procurement rules”.
   Respondents from other areas had significantly higher ratings compared to respondents from
    Beijing for:
     “Overall, I like to work/interact with Bank staff”;
     “The Bank’s work promotes the empowerment of poor people to participate in
       development”; and
     “The Bank disburses funds promptly”.
   Ratings for all stakeholder groups, geographic locations, and across country surveys can be
    found in the Appendix.


                                                31
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Bank Programs in China

       In terms of the Bank’s programs in China, the Bank safeguarding against corruption in
        projects/programs that it funds with its procurement rules received the highest mean level
        of agreement, 8.3, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly
        disagree and 10 being strongly agree.




                                                32
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Poverty Mission

       In terms of the Bank’s poverty mission in China, the Bank’s work reflecting its own
        mission of poverty reduction received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.8,
        across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10
        being strongly agree.

       The Bank’s effectiveness at giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction received a
        mean rating of 8.0 across all respondents on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all
        effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                33
The World Bank                                  China                                Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Personal Relationships

       In terms of the Bank’s personal relationships in China, overall, respondents liking to
        work/interact with Bank staff received the highest mean level of agreement, 8.3, across
        all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly
        agree.

       In terms of maintaining relationships with clients and stakeholders in China, the Bank
        ensuring its staff is accessible received a mean rating of 7.7, across all respondents, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                  34
The World Bank                                 China                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Collaboration/Partnerships

       In terms of the Bank’s collaborations in China, the Bank and partners in government
        collaborating well together on Bank-supported programs and projects in China received
        the highest mean level of agreement, 7.9, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.

       The Bank’s effectiveness at promoting the inclusion of local communities in strategy
        development received the highest mean rating of 7.5 on a 10-point scale with 1 being not
        at all effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                35
The World Bank                                  China                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Knowledge

       In terms of the Bank’s effectiveness at being a knowledge base in China, the Bank’s
        sharing knowledge about international best practices received the highest mean rating,
        8.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10
        being very effective.




                                                 36
The World Bank                                 China                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Day-to-Day Operations

       In terms of the Bank’s day-to-day operations in China, the Bank effectively monitoring
        and evaluating the projects and programs it supports received the highest mean level of
        agreement, 7.8, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree
        and 10 being strongly agree.




                                                37
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in China

Role Significance

       The Bank was expected to play a significant role in China’s development in the next five
        years, receiving a mean rating of 8.2 across all respondents on a 10-point scale with 1
        being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role. Respondents in the FY ’06
        country survey gave this question a mean rating of 4.5 on a 6-point scale with 1 being not
        significant at all and 6 being a very significant role.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the media gave the
              highest ratings for the Bank’s role significance whereas employees of ministries
              gave the lowest ratings.
             Respondents from Beijing and other areas had statistically similar ratings for the
              role significance the Bank will play in China in the next five years.




                                                38
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in China (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should improve the quality of its experts as
        related to China’s specific challenges and offer more innovative knowledge services to
        make itself of greater value in China. A smaller number of respondents indicated that the
        Bank should focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues to make itself of greater
        value in China.
             Respondents in the FY ’06 country survey indicated that the Bank should reduce
              the complexity of obtaining Bank financing (23%) and improve the quality of its
              experts as related to China’s specific challenges (21%) to make itself of greater
              value in China.




                                                39
The World Bank                                China                              Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in China (continued)

Obstacles to the Bank’s Role

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the number and complexity of procedures
        involved in obtaining World Bank financing is the greatest obstacle to the Bank playing a
        significant role in China’s development . Respondents also indicated that the quality of
        Bank experts related to China’s specific challenges was an obstacle to a more significant
        role for the Bank in China.
             Similarly, respondents in the FY ’06 country survey indicated that the number and
              complexity of procedures involved in obtaining World Bank financing (43%) and
              the quality of Bank experts related to China’s specific challenges (25%) were the
              greatest obstacles to the Bank playing a significant role in China’s development.




                                                40
The World Bank                                 China                               Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach

Information Sources

       Over three-quarters of all respondents indicated that they got most of their information
        about economic and social development issues in China from the Internet. Local
        newspapers and local television were also popular information sources.




                                                41
The World Bank                                China                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       Respondents were most likely to utilize World Bank conferences, seminars, and
        workshops, as well as direct contact with World Bank staff, the World Bank website, and
        the Internet for information about the Bank’s development activities in China. World
        Bank publications and materials were also popular information sources.
             Respondents in the FY ’06 country survey indicated that they were most likely to
              get their information about the World Bank from websites (74%).




                                               42
The World Bank                               China                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank,
        respondents indicated that they preferred workshops or conferences or the World Bank
        website. Face-to-face meetings or discussions and e-newsletters were also popular
        preferred information sources.




                                               43
The World Bank                                  China                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Internet Access

       All but one respondent indicated that they had access to the Internet.

Website Usage

       The majority of respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website, statistically
        similar to respondents in the FY ’06 country survey.
            Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
                statistically similar rates of usage for the World Bank’s website.




       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, the majority indicated that they used
        the World Bank’s country website. This is statistically similar to the website usage
        reported by respondents in the FY ’06 country survey.
             Respondents from the financial sector, academia, and other organizations were
               significantly more likely to utilize the World Bank’s main website compared to
               respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from Beijing were significantly more likely to utilize the World
               Bank’s main website compared to respondents from other areas.




                                                 44
The World Bank                                 China                               Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Website Evaluation

   Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, agreement that
    respondents find the Bank’s websites useful and that they find the Bank websites easy to
    navigate both received a mean rating of 7.7, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
    1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             In FY ’06, nearly all respondents agreed or strongly agreed that they find the
              Bank websites easy to navigate (95%) and that they find the information on the
              Bank’s websites useful (94%).
             Respondents from local government and local project management offices had
              significantly lower levels of agreement that they find the Bank websites easy to
              navigate compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups. Respondents
              across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of agreement that they
              find the information on the Bank’s websites useful.
             Respondents from Beijing had significantly higher levels of agreement that they
              find the Bank websites easy to navigate compared to respondents from other
              areas. Respondents from Beijing and other areas had statistically similar levels of
              agreement that they find the information on the Bank’s websites useful.




                                                45
The World Bank                                 China                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Public Information Centers (PICs)

       Over a third of all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s PICs in China;
        however, 20% of all respondents were unaware of the Bank’s PICs.
            Respondents from local government, local project management offices, the
               financial sector, and the media were significantly more likely to have used the
               Bank’s PICs compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            Respondents from other areas were significantly more likely to have used the
               Bank’s PICs compared to respondents from Beijing.




       Among those respondents who used them, agreement that the Bank’s PICs were a
        valuable source of information related to development in China received a mean rating of
        7.7 across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10
        being strongly agree.
             In FY ’06, nearly all respondents agreed or strongly agreed that the World Bank’s
                PIC is a valuable source of information related to development in China (89%).
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
                statistically similar levels of agreement regarding the value of the Bank’s PICs.




                                                46
The World Bank                                China                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Communication and Outreach Efforts

       In terms of the Bank’s communication and outreach efforts in China, respondents had the
        highest level of agreement that “The Bank is appropriately responsive to my information
        requests and inquiries”, receiving a mean rating of 8.2, across all respondents, on a 10-
        point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             In FY ’06, the vast majority of respondents agreed or strongly agreed that when
              they need information from the Bank they know how to find it (88%) and that the
              Bank is appropriately responsive to their information requests and inquiries
              (87%).
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement that “The Bank is appropriately
              responsive to my information requests and inquiries” and “When I need
              information from the Wo rld Bank I know how to find it”.




                                                47
The World Bank                                   China                                Country Survey 2012




IX. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 49


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 59


          C. Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location .................... 73


          D. Responses to All Questions by Year .............................................. 82


          E. World Bank Client Survey 2012 – China Questionnaire ............... 86




                                               CHINA




                                                  48
The World Bank                                         China                                   Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents
                                          Total Response Number = 207
A. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
Local Government                                                                           22.2%
Employee of a Ministry                                                                     18.8%
Project Management Office (Local)                                                          14.5%
Academia                                                                                   9.7%
NGO                                                                                        8.2%
Financial Sector                                                                           5.8%
Media                                                                                      4.8%
Project Management Office (Central)                                                        4.3%
Bilateral or Multilateral Agency                                                           3.4%
State-Owned Enterprise                                                                     2.4%
Central Bank                                                                               1.9%
Private Sector                                                                             1.4%
Other                                                                                      1.4%
Regulatory Agency                                                                          1.0%

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                      Percentage of Respondents
Economic Management                                                                        23.4%
Social Services                                                                            19.4%
Finance, Banking, Insurance                                                                13.9%
Infrastructure                                                                             13.9%
Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry                                                        8.5%
Other                                                                                      8.0%
Environment, Natural Resource Management                                                   7.0%
Communications, Information Services                                                       3.0%
Commerce, Trade and Manufacturing                                                          1.5%
Law, Justice                                                                               1.5%

Familiarity with the World Bank                                                           N       Mean       SD
3. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in China on a scale of
                                                                                         201      6.96     2.10
   1-10, 1 meaning “not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “extremely familiar” ?

4. How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the
   World Bank's activities?                                                      Percentage of Respondents
Less than one year                                                                         3.9%
One to three years                                                                         18.4%
More than three years                                                                      77.7%

5. Which best represents your geographic location?                               Percentage of Respondents
Beijing                                                                                    56.3%
Tianjin, Shanghai, Guangdong, Fujian, Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Shangdong,
                                                                                          15.0%
Hebei
Henan, Hunan, Hubei, Anhui, Jiangxi, Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang                        12.6%
Chongqing, Xinjiang, Xizang, Qinghai, Gansu, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia,
                                                                                          16.0%
Shaanxi, Shanxi, Sichuan...




                                                        49
The World Bank                                         China                                   Country Survey 2012


A. Background Information (continued)

6. When thinking about your exposure to the World Bank Group in
   China, would you say that you have the most interaction with and/or
   exposure to…?                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
The World Bank (IBRD)                                                                      91.8%
The IFC                                                                                    2.6%
Both                                                                                       5.6%

B. General Issues facing China

Optimism                                                                                  N      Mean        SD
1. On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning "extremely pessimistic", 10 meaning "extremely
   optimistic", please indicate your perspective on the future of the next generation    198      7.42     1.88
   in China.

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
2. Please identify which one of these you consider the first (second)          Most       2nd Most
   most important development priority.                                      Important   Important   Combined
Government effectiveness/governance                                            21.2%       15.3%       36.5%
Inequality                                                                     11.8%        9.9%       21.7%
Social stability                                                               7.9%         7.9%       15.8%
Quality of Growth                                                              11.4%        4.5%       15.8%
Economic growth                                                                11.8%        4.0%       15.8%
Corruption                                                                     6.9%         4.5%       11.4%
Completing the transition to a market economy                                  6.9%         3.5%       10.4%
Social protection                                                              3.4%         6.4%       9.9%
Innovation                                                                     2.0%         7.4%       9.4%
Effectiveness of law and justice system                                        1.5%         7.4%       8.9%
Environmental improvement and natural resource management                      1.5%         5.0%       6.4%
Access to quality education                                                    1.5%         3.0%       4.4%
Improving the investment climate                                               1.0%         3.0%       4.0%
Private sector growth/investment                                               1.0%         2.5%       3.5%
Employment/ income generating opportunities                                    1.5%         2.0%       3.5%
Poverty                                                                        0.5%         2.0%       2.5%
Increase domestic consumption                                                  0.0%         2.5%       2.5%
Urban development                                                              0.5%         1.5%       2.0%
Conservation and management of water resources                                 0.5%         1.5%       2.0%
Energy efficiency                                                              1.0%         1.0%       2.0%
Other                                                                          2.0%         0.0%       2.0%
Rural and agricultural development                                             0.0%         1.5%       1.5%
Access to quality health services                                              1.0%         0.5%       1.5%
Fiscal system reform                                                           1.5%         0.0%       1.5%
Financial sector reform                                                        1.5%         0.0%       1.5%
Regulatory framework                                                           0.0%         1.0%       1.0%
Climate change                                                                 0.0%         1.0%       1.0%
Basic infrastructure                                                           0.5%         0.5%       1.0%
SOE reform                                                                     0.0%         0.5%       0.5%
Communicable and non-communicable diseases                                     0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
Trade and exports                                                              0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
Food security                                                                  0.0%         0.0%       0.0%


                                                        50
The World Bank                                         China                                     Country Survey 2012


B. General Issues facing China (continued)

3. Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would                Percentage of Respondents
   contribute most to reducing poverty in China? (Choose only TWO)                   (Responses Combined)
Strengthening social protection                                                              36.7%
Reducing inequality                                                                          30.9%
Increasing access to quality education                                                       22.2%
Sustaining economic growth                                                                   20.9%
Increasing income generating activities/ employment                                          18.4%
Improving agriculture development                                                            16.9%
Strengthening public institutions                                                            12.6%
Improving infrastructure development                                                         12.6%
Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                               10.6%
Reducing corruption                                                                          7.2%
Protecting the environment and natural resources                                             3.4%
Ensuring social stability                                                                    2.9%
Ensuring food security                                                                       1.9%
Other                                                                                        1.0%
Increasing access to quality health services                                                 0.5%

4. Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to                   Percentage of Respondents
    sustaining high economic growth in China? (Choose only TWO)                      (Responses Combined)
Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                               57.1%
Strengthening public institutions                                                            30.2%
Reducing corruption                                                                          27.3%
Improving access to and/or quality of education                                              23.9%
Infrastructure development                                                                   16.6%
Increasing agricultural productivity                                                         15.1%
Strengthening the regulatory framework for doing business                                    15.1%
Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment                            4.4%
Improving trade and exports                                                                  2.9%
Other                                                                                        2.0%
Improving access to and/or quality of health care                                            1.5%


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Overall Attitudes                                                                          N       Mean       SD
1.   Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in China, on
                                                                                           200      7.80     1.57
     a scale of 1-10, 1 being “Not effective at all”, 10 being “Very effective”.
2.   To what extent do the World Bank’s financial instruments meet the needs of
     China, on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “to no degree at all”, 10 meaning “to a very     178      6.80     1.98
     significant degree”?
3.   To what extent does the World Bank meet China’s needs for knowledge services,
     on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “to no degree at all”, 10 meaning “to a very            188      6.84     1.96
     significant degree”?




                                                         51
The World Bank                                       China                              Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
4. Based on your observations of the World Bank in China, where would it
    be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in its   Percentage of Respondents
    support of country priorities? (Choose no more than THREE)                (Responses Combined)
Poverty reduction                                                                     40.3%
Environmental improvement and natural resource management                             31.1%
MSE development and access to finance                                                 17.5%
Government effectiveness/governance                                                   17.0%
Basic infrastructure                                                                  15.5%
Equal access to and/or quality education                                              15.0%
Renewable energy and improving energy efficiency                                      14.1%
Economic growth                                                                       13.6%
Social protection                                                                     12.6%
Opportunity for private sector growth/Investment                                      11.7%
Employment/income generating opportunities                                            10.2%
Climate change                                                                        9.7%
Technical and vocational education                                                    9.2%
Urban development                                                                     9.2%
Conservation and management of water resources                                        8.7%
Effectiveness of law and justice system                                               7.8%
Regulatory framework                                                                  7.8%
Agriculture development and food security                                             7.3%
Financial sector reform                                                               6.8%
Fiscal system reform                                                                  6.3%
Equal access to and/or health services                                                4.9%
Highway and waterway transport systems                                                2.9%
Conservation of cultural heritage                                                     2.9%
Communicable and non-communicable diseases                                            1.9%
Post-disaster recovery and reconstruction                                             1.5%
Other                                                                                 1.5%
Modern and integrated railway                                                         0.5%

5. In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World
   Bank in China's development strategies?                                  Percentage of Respondents
The Bank should be more involved                                                      63.8%
The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                                    27.6%
The Bank should be less involved                                                      3.1%
The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                                                 0.5%
Don't know                                                                            5.1%




                                                       52
The World Bank                                          China                                  Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                             Percentage of Respondents
6. In broad terms of economic and social development, what is
                                                                                       nd
   the “greatest value” brought by the World Bank to China?             Greatest      2 Greatest
   What is the “second greatest” value?                                  Value          Value       Combined
New concepts and innovation                                              22.2%          20.8%         43.0%
Transfer of international best practices                                 22.7%          19.3%         42.0%
Pilot innovation that can be scaled up if successful                     17.2%          14.9%         32.1%
Ability to build institutional capacity                                  13.8%          16.4%         30.2%
Financial resources                                                       6.9%          14.4%         21.3%
Policy and economic advice                                               12.3%           8.4%         20.7%
Convener/facilitator                                                      2.5%           2.0%          4.4%
Technical advice                                                          1.5%           2.5%          4.0%
Ability to mobilize resources                                             0.5%           2.0%          2.5%
Other                                                                     0.5%           0.5%          1.0%

7. Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest                   Percentage of Respondents
   weaknesses in its work in China? (Choose no more than TWO)                        (Combined Responses)
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                    54.6%
Fails to adapt global knowledge to local conditions                                          26.9%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                        20.1%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                     17.0%
Too influenced by the US                                                                     16.0%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                     10.3%
Inadequately aligned with country priorities                                                 4.6%
Is disrespectful to local sensitivities                                                      4.1%
Other                                                                                        3.1%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                       0.5%
Is arrogant in its approach                                                                  0.5%




                                                          53
The World Bank                                         China                                    Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

8. Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most
   valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the next few         Percentage of Respondents
   years in China? (Choose no more than TWO)                                        (Responses Combined)
Environmental sustainability/natural resources management                                   32.4%
Social protection                                                                           19.8%
Education                                                                                   13.0%
Rural development                                                                           13.0%
Poverty                                                                                     12.1%
Governance                                                                                  11.6%
Enhanced business environment for private sector development                                11.6%
Improving equality of opportunity                                                           10.1%
Anti-corruption                                                                             9.7%
Public sector performance                                                                   9.2%
Climate change                                                                              7.2%
Urban/metropolitan development                                                              6.8%
Energy                                                                                      6.3%
Agricultural development                                                                    4.8%
Labor markets/job creation                                                                  4.8%
Financial markets                                                                           4.8%
Water and sanitation                                                                        3.4%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                   3.4%
Transport                                                                                   2.9%
Public expenditure                                                                          2.9%
Food security                                                                               2.9%
Health                                                                                      2.4%
Other                                                                                       1.4%

                                                                                           Level of Agreement
On a scale of 1-10, with 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly
agree, please respond to the following statements about the World Bank in China.           N      Mean       SD
9.   Overall the Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in China             200      7.62     1.99
10. The Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for this
                                                                                          200      7.61     1.70
    country
11. The Bank’s work reflects its own mission of poverty reduction                         205      7.83     1.85
12. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in China with respect                  197      7.95     1.67
13. The World Bank is responsive                                                          192      7.92     1.59
14. Overall, I like to work/interact with Bank staff                                      196      8.30     1.68
15. In general, the strategies that the Bank supports are sustainable over time           198      8.08     1.64
16. The Bank’s work promotes the empowerment of poor people to participate in
                                                                                          195      7.47     1.94
    development
17. The Bank gives appropriate priority to growth issues                                  189      7.62     1.61




                                                         54
The World Bank                                           China                                       Country Survey 2012


D. The Work of the World Bank
How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in                 Importance                      Effectiveness
that particular area of work in China? How effective do
you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a
positive impact on that area of development in China?
(Asked on a 10-point importance/effectiveness scale,
1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)                                 N      Mean        SD           N       Mean      SD
1.   Helping to reduce poverty                                     200     8.20       1.84         193      7.22     1.78
2.   Helping to bring about economic growth                        199     7.60       1.93         192      6.96     1.66
3.   Encouraging greater transparency in governance                193     7.91       1.95         183      6.51     1.83
4.   Helping to strengthen the private sector                      185     7.22       2.15         171      6.13     1.80
5.   Helping to strengthen the financial system                    183     7.54       1.92         169      6.43     1.69
6.   Reducing economic and social inequality                       197     7.83       2.00         185      6.17     1.75
7.   Helping to strengthen the education sector                    192     7.90       1.71         177      6.63     1.73
8.   Helping to strengthen the health sector                       192     7.91       1.68         176      6.72     1.70
9.   Ensuring that attention is paid to gender disparities         193     7.59       1.99         179      6.55     1.72
10. Helping to strengthen agricultural development                 192     7.95       1.67         179      7.04     1.66
11. Helping to strengthen infrastructure development               194     7.66       1.98         183      7.48     1.73
12. Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources
                                                                   198     8.43       1.41         184      7.16     1.78
    management
13. Helping to strengthen the social protection sector             187     7.86       1.87         172      6.65     1.62
14. Helping to empower communities to participate in their
                                                                   186     7.56       1.90         171      6.40     1.79
    own development
15. Helping China adapt to/avert risk of climate change            187     7.71       1.90         173      6.71     1.73




E. The Way the World Bank does Business

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular            Level of Effectiveness
attribute/activity listed below using a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”,
10 meaning “Very effective”.                                                                  N          Mean       SD
1. Technical competence                                                                      188         7.62      1.62
2.   Producing knowledge and research that are useful                                        200          7.77     1.59
3.   Sharing knowledge about international best practices                                    202          8.10     1.25
4.   Adapting its knowledge to your country’s needs                                          196          7.19     1.58
5.   Helping to facilitate south-south learning and cooperation                              166          7.19     1.75
6.   Ensuring its staff is accessible                                                        188          7.72     1.81
7.   Providing sound policy and economic advice                                              193          7.79     1.50
8.   Promoting the inclusion of local communities in the development of strategies           183          7.50     1.57
9.   Promoting the inclusion of civil society in the development of strategies               173          7.21     1.77
10. Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction                                         189          7.97     1.50




                                                             55
The World Bank                                          China                                      Country Survey 2012


F. Project/Program Related Issues

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale,              Level of Agreement
1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.                        N        Mean        SD
1.   The Bank is flexible in terms of adjusting to changing circumstances                  189      6.68        2.03
2.   The Bank disburses funds promptly                                                     179      7.42        2.01
3.   The Bank works efficiently                                                            189      6.88        2.10
4.   The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                           191      7.76        1.67
     supports
5.   The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level                               162      7.17        1.73
6.   The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials                              181      7.38        1.79
7.   The Bank and partners in government collaborate well together on Bank
                                                                                           186      7.91        1.60
     supported programs and projects in China
8.   The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity                                   186      7.80        1.44
9.   The Bank safeguards against corruption in projects/programs that it funds with
                                                                                           183      8.31        1.50
     its procurement rules
10. The Bank’s procurement requirements are reasonable                                     177      7.81        1.69



G. The Future Role of the World Bank in China

The Bank’s Role                                                                                N     Mean        SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank should play in China’s development in
the next five years? (1 meaning that the Bank should not play a significant role at all,    200          8.22    1.80
10 meaning that the Bank should play a very significant role)?

2. Which one of the following should the Bank do to make itself of greater
    value in China? (Choose only ONE)                                              Percentage of Respondents
Improve the quality of its experts as related to China’s specific challenges                 37.9%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                     29.6%
Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                                17.2%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                     9.4%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                             4.9%
Other                                                                                        1.0%
Greater collaboration within the World Bank Group                                            0.0%

3. Which one of the following do you consider the greatest obstacle to
   the Bank playing a significant role in China's development over the
   medium term? (Please mark only one response)                                    Percentage of Respondents
The number and complexity of the procedures involved in obtaining World
                                                                                                 50.5%
Bank financing
The quality of World Bank experts as related to China's specific challenges                      23.7%
The World Bank's financing is not competitive enough                                             16.7%
The World Bank's office in China is too small                                                    6.6%
Other                                                                                            2.5%
The World Bank's office in China is too big                                                      0.0%




                                                           56
The World Bank                                     China                           Country Survey 2012


H. Communication and Outreach

1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social   Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in China? (Choose no more than TWO)                   (Combined Responses)
Internet                                                                           78.7%
Local newspapers                                                                   44.9%
Local television                                                                   35.7%
Periodicals                                                                        11.7%
International newspapers                                                            4.8%
Local radio                                                                         3.9%
Other                                                                               3.9%
International television                                                            1.4%
International radio                                                                 0.5%


2. Where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s      Percentage of Respondents
    development activities in China? (Choose no more than TWO)             (Combined Responses)
World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                                        42.2%
Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff                                   37.7%
World Bank website                                                                 35.8%
Internet                                                                           33.8%
World Bank publications, materials                                                 21.1%
Local newspapers                                                                    6.4%
Local television                                                                    4.9%
Other                                                                               2.0%
Periodicals                                                                         2.0%
Local radio                                                                         1.5%
World Bank Public Information Center (PIC)                                          1.5%
Blogs                                                                               1.0%
International newspapers                                                            0.0%
International radio                                                                 0.0%
International television                                                            0.0%

3. How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank?      Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                (Combined Responses)
Workshops/conferences                                                              52.4%
World Bank website                                                                 49.0%
Face to face meetings/discussions                                                  38.8%
e-Newsletters                                                                      21.4%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                          11.2%
Mobile phones                                                                       2.9%
Blogs                                                                               2.4%
Other                                                                               0.5%

4. Do you have access to the Internet?                                   Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                98.7%
No                                                                                  1.3%

5. I use/have used the World Bank website:                               Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                92.3%
No                                                                                  7.7%



                                                    57
The World Bank                                       China                                Country Survey 2012


H. Communication and Outreach (continued)

6. I primarily use:                                                             Percentage of Respondents
The World Bank’s main website                                                             66.3%
The World Bank’s country website                                                          33.7%

 7. I use/have used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in
    China:                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                       60.0%
No                                                                                        17.8%
I don't know what PIC is                                                                  22.2%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale,       Level of Agreement
1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”                 N       Mean      SD
8. The World Bank's PIC is a valuable source of information related to
                                                                                   83      7.73      1.79
    development in China
9. I find the Bank websites easy to navigate                                      143      7.65      1.65
10. I find the information on the Bank's websites useful                          140      7.71      1.61
11. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it             171      8.00      1.85
12. The Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries               130      8.15      1.85




                                                       58
The World Bank                                            China   Country Survey 2012

Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

A. Background Information




B. General Issues facing China




                                                           59
The World Bank                                                                                           China                                                                      Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing China (continued)

Please identify which one of these you consider the first most important development priority.
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Employee of a Ministry     Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media   Academia    Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                         21.1%                     11.4%                  13.3%                   25.0%         29.4%   30.0%    26.3%      30.3%
 Communicable and non-communicable diseases                                   0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Economic growth                                                              5.3%                     22.7%                  13.3%                   0.0%           0.0%    0.0%    10.5%      18.2%
 Corruption                                                                  10.5%                      4.5%                  0.0%                    8.3%           0.0%   10.0%    15.8%       9.1%
 SOE reform                                                                   0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Completing the transition to a market economy                                7.9%                      9.1%                  6.7%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%    15.8%       3.0%
 Improving the investment climate                                             0.0%                      0.0%                  6.7%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Social stability                                                             5.3%                     11.4%                  13.3%                   16.7%         17.6%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Inequality                                                                  10.5%                     11.4%                  10.0%                   0.0%          29.4%   10.0%     5.3%      15.2%
 Access to quality education                                                  2.6%                      0.0%                  6.7%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Access to quality health services                                            0.0%                      4.5%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Urban development                                                            0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Innovation                                                                   0.0%                      4.5%                  0.0%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%     5.3%       0.0%
 Poverty                                                                      0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Effectiveness of law and justice system                                      0.0%                      2.3%                  0.0%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%     5.3%       0.0%
 Quality of Growth                                                           13.2%                      9.1%                  13.3%                   9.1%           0.0%   30.0%    15.8%       9.1%
 Basic infrastructure                                                         0.0%                      0.0%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Fiscal system reform                                                         5.3%                      2.3%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Environmental improvement and natural resource management                    0.0%                      0.0%                  6.7%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Energy efficiency                                                            0.0%                      0.0%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Increase domestic consumption                                                0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Employment/ income generating opportunities                                  2.6%                      2.3%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Private sector growth/investment                                             0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       6.1%
 Rural and agricultural development                                           0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                         0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                            0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Climate change                                                               0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Food security                                                                0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Financial sector reform                                                      0.0%                      2.3%                  3.3%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Social protection                                                           10.5%                      2.3%                  0.0%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Conservation and management of water resources                               0.0%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Other                                                                        5.3%                      0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%   20.0%     0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                          60
The World Bank                                                                                       China                                                                      Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing China (continued)

Then identify which one you consider the second most important development priority.
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media   Academia    Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                       26.3%                    9.1%                  16.7%                   16.7%         11.8%    0.0%    15.8%      15.6%
 Communicable and non-communicable diseases                                 0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Economic growth                                                            0.0%                   11.4%                  6.7%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Corruption                                                                 0.0%                    6.8%                  3.3%                    0.0%          23.5%    0.0%     5.3%       0.0%
 SOE reform                                                                 0.0%                    2.3%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Completing the transition to a market economy                              2.6%                    4.5%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%   10.0%     5.3%       3.1%
 Improving the investment climate                                           2.6%                    2.3%                  6.7%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       6.3%
 Social stability                                                          13.2%                    6.8%                  6.7%                    16.7%          0.0%    0.0%     5.3%       9.4%
 Inequality                                                                 7.9%                    6.8%                  0.0%                    8.3%          17.6%   20.0%    26.3%       9.4%
 Access to quality education                                                2.6%                    2.3%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%   20.0%     5.3%       0.0%
 Access to quality health services                                          0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.1%
 Urban development                                                          2.6%                    2.3%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Innovation                                                                13.2%                   11.4%                  6.7%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     0.0%       6.3%
 Poverty                                                                    5.3%                    2.3%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Effectiveness of law and justice system                                    5.3%                    9.1%                  0.0%                    25.0%          5.9%   10.0%     5.3%       9.4%
 Quality of Growth                                                          7.9%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    8.3%           0.0%   10.0%    10.5%       6.3%
 Basic infrastructure                                                       0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%   10.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Fiscal system reform                                                       0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Environmental improvement and natural resource management                  2.6%                    2.3%                  20.0%                   0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     5.3%       0.0%
 Energy efficiency                                                          0.0%                    4.5%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Increase domestic consumption                                              0.0%                    6.8%                  0.0%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.1%
 Employment/ income generating opportunities                                2.6%                    4.5%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Private sector growth/investment                                           2.6%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%     5.3%       6.3%
 Rural and agricultural development                                         0.0%                    0.0%                  6.7%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.1%
 Regulatory framework                                                       0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     5.3%       0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                          0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Climate change                                                             0.0%                    2.3%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.1%
 Food security                                                              0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Financial sector reform                                                    0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Social protection                                                          2.6%                    2.3%                  10.0%                   0.0%          23.5%   20.0%     0.0%       6.3%
 Conservation and management of water resources                             0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     5.3%       6.3%
 Other                                                                      0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%

Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in China? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media   Academia    Other
 Improving agriculture development                                         23.1%                   10.9%                  23.3%                   0.0%          11.8%   80.0%    15.0%       3.0%
 Reducing corruption                                                       12.8%                    4.3%                  3.3%                    8.3%          11.8%   10.0%     0.0%       9.1%
 Strengthening public institutions                                          5.1%                    8.7%                  0.0%                    16.7%          5.9%   10.0%    40.0%      24.2%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment            17.9%                   10.9%                  3.3%                    25.0%          5.9%    0.0%    10.0%       9.1%
 Improving infrastructure development                                      15.4%                    8.7%                  23.3%                   16.7%          0.0%   30.0%     5.0%       9.1%
 Increasing access to quality education                                    30.8%                   30.4%                  16.7%                   25.0%          0.0%   10.0%    30.0%      15.2%
 Reducing inequality                                                       23.1%                   23.9%                  33.3%                   33.3%         47.1%   10.0%    20.0%      51.5%
 Sustaining economic growth                                                12.8%                   26.1%                  24.1%                   16.7%         23.5%   10.0%    15.0%      27.3%
 Increasing access to quality health services                               0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Protecting the environment and natural resources                           0.0%                    6.5%                  3.3%                    8.3%           5.9%    0.0%     5.0%       0.0%
 Increasing income generating activities/ employment                       17.9%                   30.4%                  16.7%                   25.0%         17.6%    0.0%    20.0%       6.1%
 Ensuring food security                                                     0.0%                    2.2%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%   20.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Ensuring social stability                                                  7.7%                    4.3%                  0.0%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Strengthening social protection                                           30.8%                   32.6%                  43.3%                   25.0%         64.7%   20.0%    40.0%      36.4%
 Other                                                                      2.6%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%


                                                                                                      61
The World Bank                                                                                        China                                                                      Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing China (continued)

Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in China? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media   Academia    Other
 Increasing agricultural productivity                                       10.3%                    9.1%                  36.7%                   8.3%          29.4%   20.0%     5.0%       9.1%
 Reducing corruption                                                        28.2%                   36.4%                  33.3%                   25.0%         35.3%   30.0%    10.0%      15.2%
 Strengthening public institutions                                          25.6%                   31.8%                  13.3%                   41.7%         17.6%   10.0%    60.0%      39.4%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment             64.1%                   52.3%                  50.0%                   83.3%         64.7%   70.0%    35.0%      57.6%
 Infrastructure development                                                 12.8%                   15.9%                  26.7%                   8.3%          17.6%   40.0%     5.0%      15.2%
 Improving access to and/or quality of education                            25.6%                   22.7%                  10.0%                   16.7%         23.5%    0.0%    45.0%      33.3%
 Improving access to and/or quality of health care                           0.0%                    4.5%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Strengthening the regulatory framework for doing business                  23.1%                   15.9%                  10.0%                   8.3%           0.0%   20.0%    20.0%      15.2%
 Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment           2.6%                    6.8%                  10.0%                   0.0%           0.0%   10.0%     5.0%       0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                 2.6%                    2.3%                  0.0%                    8.3%           5.9%    0.0%     5.0%       3.0%
 Other                                                                       2.6%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     5.0%       6.1%



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




                                                                                                       62
The World Bank                                                                                           China                                                                        Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Based on your observations of the World Bank in China, where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in its support of country priorities?
(Choose no more than THREE) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Employee of a Ministry   Local Government      Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media   Academia    Other
 Poverty reduction                                                            53.8%                   19.6%                     53.3%                   50.0%         29.4%   70.0%    26.3%      42.4%
 Economic growth                                                              10.3%                   17.4%                     26.7%                   0.0%           5.9%   10.0%    10.5%      12.1%
 Climate change                                                                2.6%                   13.0%                     13.3%                   25.0%          0.0%   20.0%     5.3%       9.1%
 MSE development and access to finance                                        17.9%                   10.9%                     3.3%                    50.0%         17.6%   60.0%    15.8%      15.2%
 Equal access to and/or quality education                                     23.1%                   13.0%                     3.3%                    0.0%          17.6%   30.0%    26.3%      12.1%
 Renewable energy and improving energy efficiency                             12.8%                   15.2%                     20.0%                   8.3%          11.8%    0.0%     5.3%      21.2%
 Conservation and management of water resources                               15.4%                    8.7%                     10.0%                   0.0%           5.9%   10.0%    10.5%       3.0%
 Effectiveness of law and justice system                                      12.8%                    2.2%                     0.0%                    8.3%          23.5%    0.0%    10.5%       9.1%
 Opportunity for private sector growth/Investment                             15.4%                   17.4%                     3.3%                    0.0%          11.8%   10.0%    10.5%      12.1%
 Post-disaster recovery and reconstruction                                     0.0%                    4.3%                     0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Equal access to and/or health services                                        5.1%                    4.3%                     6.7%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%    10.5%       6.1%
 Employment/income generating opportunities                                   17.9%                   13.0%                     3.3%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%    15.8%       9.1%
 Environmental improvement and natural resource management                    17.9%                   34.8%                     63.3%                   33.3%         35.3%   20.0%    21.1%      18.2%
 Basic infrastructure                                                         12.8%                   28.3%                     16.7%                   0.0%          11.8%    0.0%     5.3%      18.2%
 Regulatory framework                                                          5.1%                    2.2%                     3.3%                    25.0%          5.9%   20.0%     5.3%      15.2%
 Communicable and non-communicable diseases                                    0.0%                    2.2%                     0.0%                    8.3%          11.8%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Government effectiveness/governance                                          20.5%                   13.0%                     10.0%                   16.7%         17.6%   10.0%    36.8%      15.2%
 Social protection                                                            17.9%                   13.0%                     0.0%                    8.3%           5.9%    0.0%    26.3%      18.2%
 Fiscal system reform                                                         10.3%                    6.5%                     0.0%                    0.0%          11.8%    0.0%    21.1%       0.0%
 Technical and vocational education                                            7.7%                   17.4%                     3.3%                    8.3%           5.9%   10.0%    10.5%       6.1%
 Highway and waterway transport systems                                        5.1%                    4.3%                     3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Conservation of cultural heritage                                             0.0%                    0.0%                     3.3%                    0.0%          11.8%    0.0%     0.0%       9.1%
 Agriculture development and food security                                     0.0%                    6.5%                     20.0%                   8.3%           5.9%    0.0%     5.3%       9.1%
 Financial sector reform                                                       7.7%                    2.2%                     0.0%                    33.3%          0.0%   10.0%    10.5%       9.1%
 Urban development                                                             0.0%                   21.7%                     10.0%                   16.7%          5.9%    0.0%     0.0%       9.1%
 Modern and integrated railway                                                 0.0%                    0.0%                     0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Other                                                                         2.6%                    0.0%                     0.0%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%

In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in China's development strategies?
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Employee of a Ministry   Local Government      Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media   Academia    Other
 The Bank should be more involved                                             51.4%                   63.6%                     69.0%                   90.0%         47.1%   66.7%    77.8%      65.6%
 The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                           40.5%                   27.3%                     24.1%                   10.0%         35.3%   33.3%    16.7%      21.9%
 The Bank should be less involved                                              5.4%                    4.5%                     0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       6.3%
 The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                                         0.0%                    0.0%                     3.4%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Don't know                                                                    2.7%                    4.5%                     3.4%                    0.0%          17.6%    0.0%     5.6%       6.3%

In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest value ” brought by the World Bank to China?
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Employee of a Ministry   Local Government      Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media   Academia    Other
 Pilot innovation that can be scaled up if successful                         12.8%                   13.3%                     23.3%                   41.7%         18.8%    0.0%    21.1%      15.6%
 Policy and economic advice                                                   10.3%                    8.9%                     10.0%                   33.3%         12.5%   30.0%    21.1%       3.1%
 Convener/facilitator                                                          0.0%                    2.2%                     0.0%                    8.3%           6.3%    0.0%     0.0%       6.3%
 Transfer of international best practices                                     25.6%                   31.1%                     16.7%                   0.0%           0.0%   30.0%    15.8%      34.4%
 Technical advice                                                              5.1%                    0.0%                     0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.1%
 New concepts and innovation                                                  17.9%                   20.0%                     33.3%                   0.0%          50.0%   10.0%    31.6%      12.5%
 Ability to build institutional capacity                                      23.1%                   13.3%                     10.0%                   8.3%          12.5%    0.0%    10.5%      15.6%
 Financial resources                                                           2.6%                   11.1%                     6.7%                    0.0%           0.0%   30.0%     0.0%       9.4%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                 0.0%                    0.0%                     0.0%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Other                                                                         2.6%                    0.0%                     0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                          63
The World Bank                                                                                            China                                                                          Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
What is the “second greatest” value?
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media      Academia     Other
 Pilot innovation that can be scaled up if successful                           15.4%                   13.6%                  16.7%                   16.7%         37.5%   10.0%        5.3%        9.4%
 Policy and economic advice                                                     10.3%                   11.4%                  3.3%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%       10.5%       12.5%
 Convener/facilitator                                                            0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%        0.0%        9.4%
 Transfer of international best practices                                       20.5%                   18.2%                  10.0%                   25.0%         31.3%   40.0%       26.3%        9.4%
 Technical advice                                                                2.6%                    0.0%                  6.7%                    0.0%           0.0%   10.0%        0.0%        3.1%
 New concepts and innovation                                                    15.4%                   22.7%                  23.3%                   25.0%          6.3%   10.0%       31.6%       25.0%
 Ability to build institutional capacity                                        20.5%                   15.9%                  13.8%                   16.7%         12.5%   10.0%       15.8%       18.8%
 Financial resources                                                            12.8%                   18.2%                  23.3%                   0.0%          12.5%   20.0%       10.5%        9.4%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                   5.1%                    0.0%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%        0.0%        3.1%
 Other                                                                           2.6%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%        0.0%        0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in China? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media      Academia     Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities          16.7%                   22.7%                  24.1%                   18.2%         17.6%   11.1%       31.6%       13.8%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                       11.1%                   11.4%                  17.2%                   18.2%          0.0%    0.0%       10.5%        6.9%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                          2.8%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
 Is disrespectful to local sensitivities                                         5.6%                    4.5%                  0.0%                    9.1%           5.9%    0.0%        0.0%        6.9%
 Too influenced by the US                                                       13.9%                   15.9%                  27.6%                   0.0%          17.6%   11.1%       21.1%       10.3%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                       16.7%                   11.4%                  10.3%                   0.0%          35.3%   44.4%       15.8%       20.7%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                      52.8%                   68.2%                  58.6%                   72.7%         23.5%   44.4%       52.6%       48.3%
 Inadequately aligned with country priorities                                    5.6%                    0.0%                  3.4%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%       15.8%        6.9%
 Fails to adapt global knowledge to local conditions                            27.8%                   27.9%                  20.7%                   45.5%         35.3%   33.3%       15.8%       24.1%
 Is arrogant in its approach                                                     0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%        0.0%        3.4%
 Other                                                                           2.8%                    2.3%                  0.0%                    9.1%           5.9%    0.0%        0.0%        6.9%

Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the nex t few years in China? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media      Academia     Other
 Education                                                                       5.1%                   17.4%                  10.0%                   8.3%           5.9%   20.0%       30.0%       12.1%
 Health                                                                          2.6%                    6.5%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
 Social protection                                                              17.9%                   28.3%                  6.7%                    33.3%         23.5%   40.0%        5.0%       18.2%
 Transport                                                                       7.7%                    2.2%                  6.7%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%        0.0%        0.0%
 Poverty                                                                        15.4%                   10.9%                  16.7%                   0.0%           5.9%   30.0%       10.0%        9.1%
 Governance                                                                      2.6%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    33.3%         11.8%   20.0%       30.0%       27.3%
 Anti-corruption                                                                10.3%                    6.5%                  10.0%                   16.7%         17.6%   20.0%        5.0%        6.1%
 Enhanced business environment for private sector development                   15.4%                   10.9%                  6.7%                    16.7%          5.9%   10.0%       25.0%        6.1%
 Energy                                                                          5.1%                    4.3%                  10.0%                   0.0%           0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       18.2%
 Agricultural development                                                        2.6%                    0.0%                  13.3%                   0.0%           0.0%   10.0%       10.0%        6.1%
 Water and sanitation                                                            2.6%                    0.0%                  10.0%                   0.0%           5.9%    0.0%        0.0%        6.1%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                       5.1%                    2.2%                  3.3%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%        5.0%        3.0%
 Public expenditure                                                              5.1%                    2.2%                  0.0%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%        5.0%        3.0%
 Public sector performance                                                      10.3%                    4.3%                  6.7%                    0.0%          11.8%    0.0%       30.0%        9.1%
 Labor markets/job creation                                                     10.3%                    8.7%                  3.3%                    0.0%           0.0%   10.0%        0.0%        0.0%
 Financial markets                                                              10.3%                    2.2%                  0.0%                    25.0%          0.0%    0.0%        5.0%        3.0%
 Urban/metropolitan development                                                  2.6%                   10.9%                  10.0%                   16.7%         11.8%    0.0%        0.0%        3.0%
 Environmental sustainability/natural resources management                      17.9%                   41.3%                  60.0%                   25.0%         47.1%   10.0%        5.0%       30.3%
 Improving equality of opportunity                                              17.9%                   10.9%                  0.0%                    8.3%          23.5%    0.0%       10.0%        6.1%
 Rural development                                                              15.4%                   10.9%                  16.7%                   8.3%          11.8%    0.0%       15.0%       15.2%
 Food security                                                                   0.0%                    4.3%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%   20.0%        0.0%        6.1%
 Climate change                                                                  2.6%                   15.2%                  3.3%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%        5.0%       12.1%
 Other                                                                           7.7%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%        0.0%        0.0%



                                                                                                           64
The World Bank                                                                                         China                                                    Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following statements about the World Bank in China.




                                                                                                        65
The World Bank                                                                                             China                                                             Country Survey 2012

D. The Work of the World Bank

How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in China? (Asked on a 10-point importance scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




                                                                                                            66
The World Bank                                                                                             China                                                                                  Country Survey 2012

D. The Work of the World Bank (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of development in China? (Asked on a 10-point effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




                                                                                                           67
The World Bank                                                                                               China                                                                                     Country Survey 2012

E. The Way the World Bank does Business

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below using a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”.




                                                                                                             68
The World Bank                                                                                       China                                        Country Survey 2012

F. Project/Program Related Issues
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.




                                                                                                      69
The World Bank                                                                                                   China                                                                      Country Survey 2012

G. The Future Role of the World Bank in China




(Asked on a 10-pt. scale, 1 meaning that the Bank should not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should play a very significant role)

Which one of the following should the Bank do to make itself of greater value in China? (Choose only ONE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media   Academia    Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to China’s specific challenges          53.8%                   24.4%                  41.4%                   41.7%         11.8%   60.0%    25.0%      48.4%
 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                         10.3%                   11.1%                  10.3%                   33.3%         29.4%   20.0%    30.0%      19.4%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                       0.0%                    8.9%                  3.4%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%      16.1%
 Greater collaboration within the World Bank Group                                      0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Offer more innovative financial products                                               0.0%                   20.0%                  10.3%                   8.3%          11.8%   10.0%     5.0%       6.5%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                              35.9%                   33.3%                  34.5%                   16.7%         41.2%   10.0%    40.0%       9.7%
 Other                                                                                  0.0%                    2.2%                  0.0%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     0.0%       0.0%

Which one of the following do you consider the greatest obstacle to the Bank playing a significant role in China's developmen t over the medium term? (Please mark only one response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media   Academia    Other
 The World Bank's financing is not competitive enough                                   7.9%                   25.0%                  3.6%                    16.7%         23.5%   20.0%    15.8%      23.3%
 The quality of World Bank experts as related to China's specific challenges           31.6%                    6.8%                  7.1%                    33.3%         35.3%   40.0%    47.4%      23.3%
 The number and complexity of the procedures involved in obtaining World
                                                                                        55.3%                 61.4%                   85.7%                  41.7%          23.5%   20.0%    26.3%      40.0%
 Bank financing
 The World Bank's office in China is too small                                          5.3%                  6.8%                    0.0%                    0.0%          17.6%   20.0%     5.3%      6.7%
 The World Bank's office in China is too big                                            0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                                                  0.0%                  0.0%                    3.6%                    8.3%           0.0%    0.0%     5.3%      6.7%




H. Communication and Outreach
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in China? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO    Media   Academia    Other
 Local newspapers                                                                      43.6%                   63.0%                  56.7%                   50.0%         29.4%   20.0%    35.0%      30.3%
 International newspapers                                                               0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    8.3%           5.9%   30.0%     0.0%      15.2%
 Local radio                                                                            2.6%                    4.3%                  3.3%                    0.0%           5.9%    0.0%     5.0%       6.1%
 International radio                                                                    0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Local television                                                                      30.8%                   43.5%                  43.3%                   41.7%         47.1%   10.0%    20.0%      33.3%
 International television                                                               2.6%                    2.2%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     5.0%       0.0%
 Periodicals                                                                           10.3%                   13.0%                  3.4%                    0.0%           5.9%   20.0%    25.0%      15.2%
 Internet                                                                              79.5%                   63.0%                  80.0%                   91.7%         82.4%   90.0%    90.0%      81.8%
 Other                                                                                 12.8%                    2.2%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%   10.0%     0.0%       3.0%




                                                                                                                  70
The World Bank                                                                                         China                                                                        Country Survey 2012

H. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development activities in China? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO     Media    Academia    Other
 Local newspapers                                                             2.6%                   15.2%                  3.4%                    18.2%          5.9%     0.0%      0.0%       3.1%
 International newspapers                                                     0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Local radio                                                                  2.6%                    4.3%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 International radio                                                          0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Local television                                                             5.1%                    6.5%                  3.4%                    18.2%         11.8%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 International television                                                     0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Periodicals                                                                  2.6%                    4.3%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%    10.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Blogs                                                                        0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%     0.0%      5.0%       3.1%
 Internet                                                                    25.6%                   26.1%                  37.9%                   63.6%         64.7%    40.0%     20.0%      31.3%
 World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                                 46.2%                   47.8%                  37.9%                   9.1%          29.4%    60.0%     55.0%      37.5%
 World Bank publications, materials                                          23.1%                   17.4%                  10.3%                   27.3%         41.2%    20.0%     20.0%      21.9%
 World Bank website                                                          33.3%                   32.6%                  51.7%                   18.2%         29.4%    20.0%     45.0%      37.5%
 World Bank Public Information Center (PIC)                                   2.6%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           5.9%     0.0%      0.0%       3.1%
 Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff                            30.8%                   32.6%                  44.8%                   45.5%         11.8%    50.0%     40.0%      53.1%
 Other                                                                        7.7%                    2.2%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%

How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO     Media    Academia    Other
 World Bank website                                                          46.2%                   52.2%                  72.4%                   33.3%         35.3%    20.0%     75.0%      33.3%
 Face to face meetings/discussions                                           46.2%                   28.3%                  37.9%                   66.7%         29.4%    40.0%     20.0%      51.5%
 e-Newsletters                                                               25.6%                   15.2%                  10.3%                   8.3%          29.4%    40.0%     35.0%      21.2%
 Workshops/conferences                                                       48.7%                   63.0%                  48.3%                   66.7%         41.2%    40.0%     45.0%      54.5%
 Mobile phones                                                                5.1%                    2.2%                  0.0%                    8.3%           5.9%    10.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                    5.1%                   10.9%                  17.2%                   0.0%          17.6%    40.0%      0.0%      12.1%
 Blogs                                                                        2.6%                    6.5%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%     0.0%      5.0%       0.0%
 Other                                                                        0.0%                    2.2%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%

Do you have access to the Internet:
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO     Media    Academia    Other
 Yes                                                                         97.4%                   100.0%                100.0%                  100.0%         100.0%   100.0%    100.0%    100.0%
 No                                                                           2.6%                    0.0%                  0.0%                    0.0%           0.0%     0.0%      0.0%      0.0%

I use/have used the World Bank website:
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO     Media    Academia    Other
 Yes                                                                         74.4%                   71.7%                  89.7%                   66.7%         70.6%    100.0%    85.0%      90.9%
 No                                                                          25.6%                   28.3%                  10.3%                   33.3%         29.4%     0.0%     15.0%       9.1%

I primarily use:
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO     Media    Academia    Other
 The World Bank’s country website                                            65.7%                   72.2%                  69.6%                   25.0%         91.7%    70.0%     33.3%      37.9%
 The World Bank’s main website                                               34.3%                   27.8%                  30.4%                   75.0%          8.3%    30.0%     66.7%      62.1%

I use/have used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in China:
 Percentage of Respondents                                            Employee of a Ministry   Local Government   Project Mgmt. Office-Local   Financial Sector    NGO     Media    Academia    Other
 Yes                                                                         12.8%                   47.4%                  51.9%                   41.7%         35.3%    90.0%     25.0%      31.3%
 No                                                                          30.8%                   15.8%                  11.1%                   16.7%         35.3%     0.0%     20.0%      18.8%
 I don’t know what PIC is                                                    56.4%                   36.8%                  37.0%                   41.7%         29.4%    10.0%     55.0%      50.0%




                                                                                                        71
The World Bank                                                                                        China                                         Country Survey 2012

H. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.




                                                                                                      72
The World Bank                                                    China                                        Country Survey 2012



Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location

A. Background Information




B. General Issues facing China




Please identify which one of these you consider the first most important development priority.
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Beijing       Other Areas
 Government effectiveness/governance                                               24.6%           17.0%
 Communicable and non-communicable diseases                                         0.0%            0.0%
 Economic growth                                                                   10.5%           13.6%
 Corruption                                                                         8.8%            3.4%
 SOE reform                                                                         0.0%            0.0%
 Completing the transition to a market economy                                      5.3%            9.1%
 Improving the investment climate                                                   0.9%            1.1%
 Social stability                                                                   5.3%           11.4%
 Inequality                                                                        12.3%           11.4%
 Access to quality education                                                        0.9%            2.3%
 Access to quality health services                                                  0.0%            2.3%
 Urban development                                                                  0.9%            0.0%
 Innovation                                                                         1.8%            2.3%
 Poverty                                                                            0.9%            0.0%
 Effectiveness of law and justice system                                            1.8%            1.1%
 Quality of Growth                                                                  9.7%           13.6%
 Basic infrastructure                                                               0.0%            1.1%
 Fiscal system reform                                                               1.8%            1.1%
 Environmental improvement and natural resource management                          0.0%            3.4%
 Energy efficiency                                                                  0.9%            1.1%
 Increase domestic consumption                                                      0.0%            0.0%
 Employment/ income generating opportunities                                        1.8%            1.1%
 Private sector growth/investment                                                   1.8%            0.0%
 Rural and agricultural development                                                 0.0%            0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                                               0.0%            0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                                  0.0%            0.0%
 Climate change                                                                     0.0%            0.0%
 Food security                                                                      0.0%            0.0%
 Financial sector reform                                                            0.9%            2.3%
 Social protection                                                                  5.3%            1.1%
 Conservation and management of water resources                                     0.9%            0.0%
 Other                                                                              3.5%            0.0%




                                                                    73
The World Bank                                                       China                                        Country Survey 2012



B. General Issues facing China (continued)

Then identify which one you consider the second most important development priority.
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Beijing             Other Areas
 Government effectiveness/governance                                            18.6%                 11.4%
 Communicable and non-communicable diseases                                      0.0%                  0.0%
 Economic growth                                                                 0.9%                  8.0%
 Corruption                                                                      2.7%                  6.8%
 SOE reform                                                                      0.0%                  1.1%
 Completing the transition to a market economy                                   3.5%                  3.4%
 Improving the investment climate                                                2.7%                  3.4%
 Social stability                                                                7.1%                  9.1%
 Inequality                                                                     13.3%                  5.7%
 Access to quality education                                                     4.4%                  1.1%
 Access to quality health services                                               0.9%                  0.0%
 Urban development                                                               0.9%                  2.3%
 Innovation                                                                      6.2%                  9.1%
 Poverty                                                                         1.8%                  2.3%
 Effectiveness of law and justice system                                         8.0%                  5.7%
 Quality of Growth                                                               8.0%                  0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                            0.9%                  0.0%
 Fiscal system reform                                                            0.0%                  0.0%
 Environmental improvement and natural resource management                       0.9%                 10.2%
 Energy efficiency                                                               0.0%                  2.3%
 Increase domestic consumption                                                   0.9%                  4.5%
 Employment/ income generating opportunities                                     0.9%                  3.4%
 Private sector growth/investment                                                3.5%                  1.1%
 Rural and agricultural development                                              0.9%                  2.3%
 Regulatory framework                                                            0.9%                  1.1%
 Trade and exports                                                               0.0%                  0.0%
 Climate change                                                                  0.9%                  1.1%
 Food security                                                                   0.0%                  0.0%
 Financial sector reform                                                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Social protection                                                               8.0%                  4.5%
 Conservation and management of water resources                                  2.7%                  0.0%
 Other                                                                           0.0%                  0.0%

Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in China?
(Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Beijing             Other Areas
 Improving agriculture development                                              19.0%                 14.4%
 Reducing corruption                                                             8.6%                  4.4%
 Strengthening public institutions                                              15.5%                  8.9%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                 12.9%                  6.7%
 Improving infrastructure development                                           12.1%                 13.3%
 Increasing access to quality education                                         20.7%                 24.4%
 Reducing inequality                                                            31.9%                 30.0%
 Sustaining economic growth                                                     21.6%                 20.2%
 Increasing access to quality health services                                    0.9%                  0.0%
 Protecting the environment and natural resources                                1.7%                  5.6%
 Increasing income generating activities/ employment                            12.9%                 25.6%
 Ensuring food security                                                          1.7%                  2.2%
 Ensuring social stability                                                       2.6%                  3.3%
 Strengthening social protection                                                35.3%                 38.9%
 Other                                                                           1.7%                  0.0%

Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in China?
(Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Beijing             Other Areas
 Increasing agricultural productivity                                           12.1%                 19.3%
 Reducing corruption                                                            22.4%                 33.0%
 Strengthening public institutions                                              33.6%                 26.1%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                 59.5%                 53.4%
 Infrastructure development                                                     14.7%                 19.3%
 Improving access to and/or quality of education                                28.4%                 18.2%
 Improving access to and/or quality of health care                               0.9%                  2.3%
 Strengthening the regulatory framework for doing business                      17.2%                 12.5%
 Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment               1.7%                  8.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                     2.6%                  3.4%
 Other                                                                           3.4%                  0.0%




                                                                      74
The World Bank                                                    China                                               Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




Based on your observations of the World Bank in China, where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its
resources in its support of country priorities? (Choose no more than THREE) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Beijing               Other Areas
 Poverty reduction                                                                44.0%                   34.8%
 Economic growth                                                                  10.3%                   18.0%
 Climate change                                                                    8.6%                   11.2%
 MSE development and access to finance                                            20.7%                   12.4%
 Equal access to and/or quality education                                         16.4%                   13.5%
 Renewable energy and improving energy efficiency                                 12.1%                   16.9%
 Conservation and management of water resources                                    8.6%                    9.0%
 Effectiveness of law and justice system                                          12.1%                    2.2%
 Opportunity for private sector growth/Investment                                 12.9%                   10.1%
 Post-disaster recovery and reconstruction                                         0.9%                    2.2%
 Equal access to and/or health services                                            4.3%                    5.6%
 Employment/income generating opportunities                                       11.2%                    9.0%
 Environmental improvement and natural resource management                        21.6%                   42.7%
 Basic infrastructure                                                             11.2%                   21.3%
 Regulatory framework                                                             11.2%                    3.4%
 Communicable and non-communicable diseases                                        1.7%                    2.2%
 Government effectiveness/governance                                              19.8%                   13.5%
 Social protection                                                                17.2%                    6.7%
 Fiscal system reform                                                              8.6%                    3.4%
 Technical and vocational education                                                7.8%                   11.2%
 Highway and waterway transport systems                                            2.6%                    3.4%
 Conservation of cultural heritage                                                 3.4%                    2.2%
 Agriculture development and food security                                         5.2%                   10.1%
 Financial sector reform                                                           9.5%                    3.4%
 Urban development                                                                 4.3%                   15.7%
 Modern and integrated railway                                                     0.9%                    0.0%
 Other                                                                             2.6%                    0.0%

In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in China's development strategies?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Beijing               Other Areas
 The Bank should be more involved                                                 59.6%                   68.6%
 The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                               29.4%                   25.6%
 The Bank should be less involved                                                  4.6%                    1.2%
 The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                                             0.0%                    1.2%
 Don't know                                                                        6.4%                    3.5%

In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest value ” brought by the World Bank to China?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Beijing               Other Areas
 Pilot innovation that can be scaled up if successful                             14.0%                   20.5%
 Policy and economic advice                                                       15.8%                    8.0%
 Convener/facilitator                                                              1.8%                    3.4%
 Transfer of international best practices                                         23.7%                   21.6%
 Technical advice                                                                  2.6%                    0.0%
 New concepts and innovation                                                      19.3%                   26.1%
 Ability to build institutional capacity                                          15.8%                   11.4%
 Financial resources                                                               6.1%                    8.0%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                     0.0%                    1.1%
 Other                                                                             0.9%                    0.0%




                                                                    75
The World Bank                                                           China                                         Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
What is the “second greatest” value?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Beijing               Other Areas
 Pilot innovation that can be scaled up if successful                              14.0%                   16.1%
 Policy and economic advice                                                         9.6%                    5.7%
 Convener/facilitator                                                               3.5%                    0.0%
 Transfer of international best practices                                          22.8%                   14.9%
 Technical advice                                                                   2.6%                    2.3%
 New concepts and innovation                                                       18.4%                   24.1%
 Ability to build institutional capacity                                           17.5%                   15.1%
 Financial resources                                                                9.6%                   20.7%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                      2.6%                    1.1%
 Other                                                                              0.9%                    0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in China? (Choose no more than TWO)
(Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Beijing               Other Areas
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities             15.9%                   25.6%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                           8.4%                   12.8%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                             0.9%                    0.0%
 Is disrespectful to local sensitivities                                            5.6%                    2.3%
 Too influenced by the US                                                          11.2%                   22.1%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                          22.4%                   10.5%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                         51.4%                   59.3%
 Inadequately aligned with country priorities                                       7.5%                    1.2%
 Fails to adapt global knowledge to local conditions                               26.2%                   28.2%
 Is arrogant in its approach                                                        0.9%                    0.0%
 Other                                                                              3.7%                    1.2%

Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the
next few years in China? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Beijing               Other Areas
 Education                                                                         10.3%                   16.7%
 Health                                                                             0.9%                    4.4%
 Social protection                                                                 19.8%                   20.0%
 Transport                                                                          2.6%                    3.3%
 Poverty                                                                           12.9%                   11.1%
 Governance                                                                        15.5%                    6.7%
 Anti-corruption                                                                    9.5%                    8.9%
 Enhanced business environment for private sector development                      12.9%                    8.9%
 Energy                                                                             6.9%                    5.6%
 Agricultural development                                                           5.2%                    4.4%
 Water and sanitation                                                               1.7%                    5.6%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                          4.3%                    2.2%
 Public expenditure                                                                 4.3%                    1.1%
 Public sector performance                                                         10.3%                    7.8%
 Labor markets/job creation                                                         4.3%                    5.6%
 Financial markets                                                                  6.9%                    2.2%
 Urban/metropolitan development                                                     6.0%                    7.8%
 Environmental sustainability/natural resources management                         22.4%                   45.6%
 Improving equality of opportunity                                                 12.9%                    6.7%
 Rural development                                                                 13.8%                   12.2%
 Food security                                                                      3.4%                    2.2%
 Climate change                                                                     5.2%                   10.0%
 Other                                                                              2.6%                    0.0%




                                                                          76
The World Bank                                                     China                                            Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following statements about the
World Bank in China.




D. The Work of the World Bank

How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in China?
(Asked on a 10-point importance scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




                                                                     77
The World Bank                                                        China                                                Country Survey 2012



D. The Work of the World Bank (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of development in China?
(Asked on a 10-point effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




E. The Way the World Bank does Business
Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below using a 1-10 scale,
1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”.




                                                                        78
The World Bank                                                                  China                                       Country Survey 2012



F. Project/Program Related Issues
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”,
10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.




G. The Future Role of the World Bank in China




(Asked on a 10-pt. scale, 1 meaning that the Bank should not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should
play a very significant role)

Which one of the following should the Bank do to make itself of greater value in China? (Choose only ONE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                              Beijing               Other Areas
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to China’s specific challenges           43.4%                   31.5%
 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                          19.5%                   14.6%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                        4.4%                    5.6%
 Greater collaboration within the World Bank Group                                       0.0%                    0.0%
 Offer more innovative financial products                                                3.5%                   15.7%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                               29.2%                   30.3%
 Other                                                                                   0.0%                    2.2%

Which one of the following do you consider the greatest obstacle to the Bank playing a significant role in China's
development over the medium term? (Please mark only one response)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                              Beijing               Other Areas
 The World Bank's financing is not competitive enough                                   20.7%                   11.6%
 The quality of World Bank experts as related to China's specific challenges            32.4%                   12.8%
 The number and complexity of the procedures involved in obtaining World Bank
                                                                                        36.9%                    67.4%
 financing
 The World Bank's office in China is too small                                           7.2%                     5.8%
 The World Bank's office in China is too big                                             0.0%                     0.0%
 Other                                                                                   2.7%                     2.3%




                                                                                 79
The World Bank                                                     China                                          Country Survey 2012



H. Communication and Outreach
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in China?
(Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Beijing            Other Areas
 Local newspapers                                                                35.3%                56.7%
 International newspapers                                                         7.8%                 1.1%
 Local radio                                                                      3.4%                 4.4%
 International radio                                                              0.9%                 0.0%
 Local television                                                                32.8%                40.0%
 International television                                                         1.7%                 1.1%
 Periodicals                                                                     13.8%                 9.0%
 Internet                                                                        81.0%                75.6%
 Other                                                                            6.0%                 1.1%

Where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development activities in China?
(Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Beijing            Other Areas
 Local newspapers                                                                 4.4%                 7.9%
 International newspapers                                                         0.0%                 0.0%
 Local radio                                                                      2.6%                 0.0%
 International radio                                                              0.0%                 0.0%
 Local television                                                                 3.5%                 6.7%
 International television                                                         0.0%                 0.0%
 Periodicals                                                                      1.8%                 2.2%
 Blogs                                                                            1.8%                 0.0%
 Internet                                                                        31.6%                36.0%
 World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                                     43.0%                41.6%
 World Bank publications, materials                                              24.6%                16.9%
 World Bank website                                                              32.5%                40.4%
 World Bank Public Information Center (PIC)                                       0.9%                 2.2%
 Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff                                38.6%                37.1%
 Other                                                                            2.6%                 1.1%

How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Beijing            Other Areas
 World Bank website                                                              38.8%                62.9%
 Face to face meetings/discussions                                               39.7%                37.1%
 e-Newsletters                                                                   27.6%                13.5%
 Workshops/conferences                                                           48.3%                57.3%
 Mobile phones                                                                    4.3%                 1.1%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                       13.8%                 7.9%
 Blogs                                                                            1.7%                 3.4%
 Other                                                                            0.0%                 1.1%

Do you have access to the Internet:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Beijing            Other Areas
 Yes                                                                             99.1%                100.0%
 No                                                                               0.9%                 0.0%

I use/have used the World Bank website:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Beijing            Other Areas
 Yes                                                                             79.3%                82.0%
 No                                                                              20.7%                18.0%

I primarily use:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Beijing            Other Areas
 The World Bank’s country website                                                53.6%                69.0%
 The World Bank’s main website                                                   46.4%                31.0%

I use/have used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in China:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Beijing            Other Areas
 Yes                                                                             28.9%                48.8%
 No                                                                              22.8%                16.3%
 I don’t know what PIC is                                                        48.2%                35.0%




                                                                    80
The World Bank                                                   China                                             Country Survey 2012



H. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”,
10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.




                                                                   81
The World Bank                                                                  China                                       Country Survey 2012



Appendix D: Responses to All Questions by Year1
                             FY ’06 Response Number = 227  FY ’12 Response Number = 207

A. Background Information
Which of the following describes your current position?
    Percentage of Respondents                                                                FY 2006     FY 2012
    Local Government                                                                          16.9%       22.2%
    Employee of a Ministry                                                                    36.0%       18.8%
    Project Management Office (Local)                                                          8.4%       14.5%
    Academia                                                                                  12.4%        9.7%
    NGO                                                                                        5.3%        8.2%
    Financial Sector                                                                             -         5.8%
    Media                                                                                      3.1%        4.8%
    Project Management Office (Central)                                                          -         4.3%
    Bilateral or Multilateral Agency                                                           3.6%        3.4%
    State-Owned Enterprise                                                                       -         2.4%
    Central Bank                                                                                 -         1.9%
    Private Sector                                                                             6.7%        1.4%
    Other                                                                                      7.6%        1.4%
    Regulatory Agency                                                                            -         1.0%

Please identify the primary specialization of your work.
    Percentage of Respondents                                                                FY 2006     FY 2012
    Economic Management                                                                       17.4%       23.4%
    Social Services                                                                           14.3%       19.4%
    Finance, Banking, Insurance                                                               18.3%       13.9%
    Infrastructure                                                                            10.3%       13.9%
    Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry                                                        8.9%        8.5%
    Other                                                                                     17.9%        8.0%
    Environment, Natural Resource Management                                                   4.9%        7.0%
    Communications, Information Services                                                       2.2%        3.0%
    Commerce, Trade and Manufacturing                                                          5.8%        1.5%
    Law, Justice                                                                               0.0%        1.5%




How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the World Bank's activities?
    Percentage of Respondents                                                                FY 2006     FY 2012
    Less than one year                                                                         6.7%        3.9%
    One to three years                                                                        28.9%       18.4%
    More than three years                                                                     64.4%       77.7%

Which best represents your geographic location?
    Percentage of Respondents                                                                FY 2006     FY 2012
    Beijing                                                                                   56.9%       56.3%
    Tianjin, Shanghai, Guangdong, Fujian, Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Shangdong, Hebei                 13.8%       15.0%
    Henan, Hunan, Hubei, Anhui, Jiangxi, Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang                         7.6%       12.6%
    Chongqing, Xinjiang, Xizang, Qinghai, Gansu, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia, Shaanxi, Shanxi,
                                                                                             21.8%       16.0%
    Sichuan...

When thinking about your exposure to the World Bank Group in China, would you say that you have the most
interaction with and/or exposure to...
    Percentage of Respondents                                                                FY 2006     FY 2012
    The World Bank (IBRD)                                                                     84.8%       91.8%
    The IFC                                                                                   15.2%        2.6%
    Both                                                                                        -          5.6%



1
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’0 6 and FY ’12 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.



                                                                                  82
The World Bank                                                       China                                            Country Survey 2012



B. General Issues facing China




C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following
statements about the World Bank in China.




D. The Work of the World Bank: Importance
How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in China?
(Asked on a 10-point* importance scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




* Responses from the FY ’06 survey were converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison.




                                                                      83
The World Bank                                                        China                                          Country Survey 2012



D. The Work of the World Bank: Effectiveness
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of development in China?
(Asked on a 10-point* effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




* Responses from the FY ’06 survey were converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison.


E. The Way the World Bank does Business
Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below.
(Asked on a 10-point* effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




* Responses from the FY ’06 survey were converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison.


F. Project/Program Related Issues
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you
“Strongly Agree”.




                                                                        84
The World Bank                                                                China                                             Country Survey 2012



G. The Future Role of the World Bank in China
Which one of the following should the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in China?
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                        FY 2006           FY 2012
  Improve the quality of its experts as related to China’s specific challenges                      20.5%             37.9%
  Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                                        -              17.2%
  Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                  11.2%             4.9%
  Offer more innovative financial products                                                           2.2%             9.4%
  Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                           9.8%             29.6%
  Other*                                                                                            56.3%             1.0%
*Includes response options not included in FY 12 survey, including “Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing”,
“Be more strategic in its focus”, and “Play a greater role in helping China integrate more globally and regionally”.

Which one of the following do you consider the greatest obstacle to the Bank playing a significant role in
China's development over the medium term?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                     FY 2006             FY 2012
 The World Bank’ s financing is not competitive enough                                          19.6%               16.7%
 The quality of World Bank experts as related to China's specific challenges                    25.1%               23.7%
 The number and complexity of the procedures involved in obtaining World Bank
                                                                                                42.5%               50.5%
 financing
 The World Bank’ s office in China is too small                                                  7.3%                6.6%
 Other                                                                                           5.5%                2.5%




H. Communication and Outreach
I use/have used the World Bank website:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                     FY 2006             FY 2012
 Yes                                                                                            78.9%               80.1%
 No                                                                                             21.1%               19.9%

I primarily use:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                     FY 2006             FY 2012
 The World Bank’s country website                                                               68.9%               60.1%
 The World Bank’s main website                                                                  31.1%               39.9%




                                                                                85
The World Bank                                           China                                    Country Survey 2012


Appendix E: China Questionnaire



                                  World Bank Client Survey FY12 – CHINA

The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in China or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey is meant to give the Bank’s team that works in China, more in-depth insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the Bank uses to assess the views of its critical stakeholders. With this understanding,
the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies, outreach and programs that support development
in China. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm to oversee the logistics of this effort in China. This
ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the survey, please circle the
number that most accurately reflects your answer. If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank.

PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO
NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED
IN ANALYSIS.

SECTION A: BACKGROUND INFORMATION


 A1. Which of the following best describes your current position? (Please mark only one
 response)
 1    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department of Central government
 2    Local Government Official or Staff
 3    Project Management Office (central level)
 4    Project Management Office (local level)
 5    Central Bank
 6    Financial sector/bank
 7    NGO
 8    Regulatory Agency
 9    State owned enterprise
 10   Bilateral or Multilateral Agency
 11   Private Sector Organization
 12   Consultant/Contracter working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 13   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web etc.)
 14   Academia/Research Institute/Think tank
 15   Other (please specify): ________________________




                                                          86
The World Bank                                                      China                                   Country Survey 2012




 A2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only one
 response)
 1        Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry
 2        Commerce, Trade and Manufacturing
 3        Communications, Information Services
 4        Economic Management
 5        Environment, Natural Resource Management
 6        Finance, Banking, Insurance
 7        Infrastructure (e.g., Transport, Water, Energy)
 8        Law, Justice
 9        Social Services (e.g., Education, Health)
 10       Other (please specify): ________________________




 A3. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in China on a scale of 1-10, 1
 meaning “not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “extremely familiar?"

                     1                   2    3     4       5   6     7     8   9             10
             Not familiar at all                                                       Extremely familiar




 A4. How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the World Bank’s
 activities?
     1      Less than one year
     2      One to three years
     3      More than three years


 A5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1       Beijing
 2       Tianjin, Shanghai, Guangdong, Fujian, Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Shangdong, Hebei
 3       Henan, Hunan, Hubei, Anhui, Jiangxi, Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang
         Chongqing, Xinjiang, Xizang, Qinghai, Gansu, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia, Shaanxi, Shanxi, Sichuan,
 4
         Yunnan, Guizhou, Guangxi




                                                                     87
The World Bank                                            China                               Country Survey 2012


 A6. When thinking about your exposure to the World Bank Group in China, would you say
 that you have the most interaction with and/or exposure to....(Please mark only ONE
 response)
  1    The World Bank (IBRD)
  2    The IFC
  3    Both




SECTION B: GENERAL ISSUES FACING CHINA


 B1. On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “extremely pessimistic”, 10 meaning “extremely
 optimistic”, please indicate your perspective on the future of the next generation
 in China
           1              2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9           10                11
  Extremely Pessimistic                                   Extremely Optimistic   Don't Know




                                                            88
The World Bank                                         China                               Country Survey 2012


 B2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in China.
                                                                  Most       Second Most
 Please identify which one of these you consider the first
                                                                Important     Important
 Most Important Development Priority. Then identify which      Development   Development
 one you consider the Second Most Important Development          priority      priority
 Priority.                                                      (Choose       (Choose
                                                               only ONE)     only ONE)
 1    Government effectiveness/governance                                      
 2    Communicable and non-communicable diseases                               
 3    Economic growth                                                          
 4    Corruption                                                               
 5    SOE reform                                                               
 6    Completing the transition to a market economy                            
 7    Improving the investment climate                                         
 8    Social stability                                                         
 9    Inequality                                                               
 10   Access to quality education                                              
 11   Access to quality health services                                        
 12   Urban development                                                        
 13   Innovation                                                               
 14   Poverty                                                                  
 15   Effectiveness of law and justice system                                  
 16   Quality of Growth                                                        
 17   Basic infrastructure                                                     
 18   Fiscal system reform                                                     

 19
      Environmental improvement and natural resource                           
      management
 20   Energy efficiency                                                        
 21   Increase domestic consumption                                            
 22   Employment/ income generating opportunities                              
 23   Private sector growth/investment                                         
 24   Rural and agricultural development                                       
 25   Regulatory framework                                                     
 26   Trade and exports                                                        
 27   Climate change                                                           
 28   Food security                                                            
 29   Financial sector reform                                                  
 30   Social protection                                                        
 31   Conservation and management of water resources                           
 32   Other (please specify): ___________________                              




                                                        89
The World Bank                                              China                        Country Survey 2012


 B3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to
 reducing poverty in China? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Improving agriculture development
 2    Reducing corruption
 3    Strengthening public institutions
 4    Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment
 5    Improving infrastructure development
 6    Increasing access to quality education
 7    Reducing inequality
 8    Sustaining economic growth
 9    Increasing access to quality health services
 10   Protecting the environment and natural resources
 11   Increasing income generating activities/ employment
 12   Ensuring food security
 13   Ensuring social stability
 14   Strengthening social protection
 15   Other (please specify): _______________________


 B4. Sustainable equitable economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which
 TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to sustaining high economic
 growth in China? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Increasing agricultural productivity
 2    Reducing corruption
 3    Strengthening public institutions
 4    Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment
 5    Infrastructure development
 6    Improving access to and/or quality of education
 7    Improving access to and/or quality of health care
 8    Strengthening the regulatory framework for doing business
 9    Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment
 10   Improving trade and exports
 11   Other (please specify): _______________________




                                                             90
The World Bank                                                                              China                                Country Survey 2012


SECTION C: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK


 C1. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in
 China, on a scale of 1-10, 1 being "Not effective at all", 10 being "Very
 effective."
           1              2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9               10                   
   Not effective at all                                                                      Very effective        Don't Know




 C2. To what extent do the World Bank's financial instruments meet the needs of
 China's, on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning "to no degree at all", 10 meaning "to a
 very Significant degree."
            1                 2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9             10                  
    to no degree at all                                                                    to a very Significant    Don't Know
                                                                                                  degree




 C3. To what extent does the World Bank meet China’s needs for knowledge
 services (e.g., research, analysis, technical assistance), on a scale of 1-10,                                            1
 meaning "to no degree at all", 10 meaning "to a very Significant degree."
           1              2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9                10                  
   to no degree at all                                                                    to a very Significant    Don't Know
                                                                                                 degree




                                                                                             91
The World Bank                                           China                                          Country Survey 2012


 C4. Based on your observations of the World Bank in China...
 1. Where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in its support
 of country priorities? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                    Where would it be most productive for
                                                                   the Bank to focus most of its resources?
                                                                    (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Poverty reduction                                                              
 2    Economic growth                                                                
 3    Climate change                                                                 

 4
      MSE (Micro and Small enterprise) development and access to                     
      finance
 5    Access to quality education                                                    
 6    Renewable energy and improving energy efficiency                               
 7    Conservation and management of water resources                                 
 8    Effectiveness of law and justice system                                        
 9    Opportunity for private sector growth/Investment                               
 10   Post-disaster recovery and reconstruction                                      
 11   Access to quality health services                                              
 12   Employment/income generating opportunities                                     
 13   Environmental improvement and natural resource management                      
 14   Basic infrastructure                                                           
 15   Regulatory framework                                                           
 16   Communicable and non-communicable diseases                                     
 17   Government effectiveness/governance                                            
 18   Social protection                                                              
 19   Fiscal system reform                                                           
 20   Technical and vocational education                                             
 21   Highway and waterway transport systems                                         
 22   Conservation of cultural heritage                                              
 23   Agriculture development and food security                                      
 24   Financial sector reform                                                        
 25   Urban development                                                              
 26   Modern and integrated railway                                                  
      Other (please specify):
 27                                                                                  
      ___________________________________




                                                          92
The World Bank                                                China                                        Country Survey 2012


 C5. In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in China’s
 development strategies?
 1    The Bank should be more involved
 2    The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level
 3    The Bank should be less involved
 4    The Bank shouldn’t be involved at all
 5    Don’t know



 C6. In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest” value brought by
 the World Bank to China? What is the “second greatest” value?
                                                                               Greatest Value   Second Greatest
                                                                               (Choose only      Value (Choose
                                                                                  ONE)            only ONE)
 1     Pilot innovation that can be scaled up if successful                                         
 2     Policy and economic advice                                                                   
 3     Convener/facilitator                                                                         
       Transfer of international best practices (eg. From OECD and/or
 4                                                                                                  
       other middle income countries)
 5     Technical advice                                                                             
 6     New concepts and innovation                                                                  
 7     Ability to build institutional capacity                                                      
 8     Financial resources                                                                          
       Ability to mobilize resources (from private sector, government,
 9                                                                                                  
       etc.)
 10    Other (please specify): ___________________                                                  



 C7. Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in
 China? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2     Not exploring alternative policy options
 3     Staff too inaccessible
 4     Is disrespectful to local sensitivities
 5     Too influenced by the US
 6     Not enough public disclosure of its work
 7     World Bank procedures complex and processes too slow and bureaucratic
 8     Inadequately aligned with country priorities
 9     Fails to adapt global knowledge to local conditions
 10    Is arrogant in its approach
 11    Other (please specify): __________________________




                                                               93
The World Bank                                          China                            Country Survey 2012


 C8. The World Bank wants to ensure that the knowledge and studies it produces are
 relevant. Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable
 for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the next few years in China? (Choose
 no more than TWO)
 1    Education
 2    Health
 3    Social protection
 4    Transport
 5    Poverty
 6    Governance
 7    Anti-corruption
 8    Enhanced business environment for private sector development
 9    Energy
 10   Agricultural development
 11   Water and sanitation
 12   Monitoring and evaluation
 13   Public expenditure
 14   Public sector performance
 15   Labor markets/job creation
 16   Financial markets
 17   Urban/metropolitan development
 18   Environmental sustainability/ natural resources management
 19   Improving equality of opportunity
 20   Rural development
 21   Food security
 22   Climate change
 23   Other (please specify): ____________________________________




                                                         94
The World Bank                                                China                                          Country Survey 2012


 On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to
 the following statements about the World Bank in China.
                                                                      Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                      Disagree                             Agree    Know
        Overall the Bank currently plays a relevant role in
 C9.                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
        development in China
        The Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the
 C10.                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
        development priorities for this country
        The Bank’s work reflects its own mission of poverty
 C11.                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
        reduction
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in China
 C12.                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
        with respect
 C13.   The World Bank is responsive                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
 C14.   Overall, I like to work/interact with Bank staff              1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
        In general, the strategies that the Bank supports are
 C15.                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
        sustainable
        The Bank's work promotes the empowerment of people
 C16.                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
        to participate in development
 C17.   The Bank gives appropriate priority to growth issues          1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     




                                                               95
The World Bank                                                China                                                       Country Survey 2012


SECTION D: THE WORK OF THE WORLD BANK


 For each item in the following section, please provide two responses: first, importance, meaning, in your
 opinion, how important it is for the Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in China. Second,
 effectiveness, meaning, how effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact
 on that area of development in China.
                                                 Level of Importance                                      Level of Effectiveness
                                     Not                                                      Not




                                                                                      Know




                                                                                                                                              Know
                                                                                      Don't




                                                                                                                                              Don't
                                     important                                Very            effective                               Very
                                     at all                               important           at all                              effective
 D1.    Helping to reduce poverty    1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        Helping to bring about
 D2.                                 1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        economic growth
        Encouraging greater
 D3.                                 1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        transparency in governance
        Helping to strengthen the
 D4.                                 1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        private sector
        Helping to strengthen the
 D5.                                 1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        financial system
        Reducing economic and
 D6.                                 1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        social inequality
        Helping to strengthen the
 D7.                                 1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        education sector
        Helping to strengthen the
 D8.                                 1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        health sector
        Ensuring that attention is
 D9.                                 1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        paid to gender disparities
        Helping to strengthen
 D10.                                1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        agricultural development
        Helping to strengthen
 D11.                                1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        infrastructure development
        Helping to strengthen
 D12.   environment and natural      1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        resources management
        Helping to strengthen the
 D13.                                1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        social protection sector
        Helping to empower
 D14.   communities to participate   1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        in their own development
        Helping China adapt
 D15.   to/avert risk of climate     1   2   3    4   5   6     7     8     9   10       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
        change




                                                               96
The World Bank                                               China                                                  Country Survey 2012


SECTION E: THE WAY THE WORLD BANK DOES BUSINESS


 Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/ activity listed below
 using a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”.
                                                                        Not
                                                                        effective                                           Very     Don't
                                                                        at all                                          effective    Know
 E1.    Technical competence                                            1 2 3           4       5   6   7       8       9     10      
        Producing knowledge and research (studies, analyses) that are
 E2.                                                                    1   2   3       4       5   6   7       8       9       10    
        useful
 E3.    Sharing knowledge about international best practices            1   2   3       4       5   6   7       8       9       10    
 E4.    Adapting its knowledge to your country’s needs                  1   2   3       4       5   6   7       8       9       10    
 E5.    Helping to facilitate south-south learning and cooperation      1   2   3       4       5   6   7       8       9       10    
 E6.    Ensuring its staff is accessible                                1   2   3       4       5   6   7       8       9       10    
 E7.    Providing sound policy and economic advice                      1   2   3       4       5   6   7       8       9       10    

 E8.    Promoting the inclusion of local communities (beneficiaries)    1   2   3       4       5   6   7       8       9       10    
        in the development of strategies
        Promoting the inclusion of civil society (NGOs, religious                                                                     
 E9.                                                                    1   2   3       4       5   6   7       8       9       10
        groups, interest groups) in the development of strategies
 E10.   Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction                1   2   3       4       5   6   7       8       9       10    



SECTION F: PROJECT/PROGRAM RELATED ISSUES


 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly
 Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.
                                                                            Strongly                                     Strongly    Don't
                                                                            Disagree                                        Agree    Know
        The Bank is flexible in terms of adjusting to changing
 F1.                                                                        1       2       3   4   5   6   7       8       9   10    
        circumstances
 F2.    The Bank disburses funds promptly                                   1       2       3   4   5   6   7       8       9   10    
 F3.    The Bank works efficiently                                          1       2       3   4   5   6   7       8       9   10    

 F4.    The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and        1       2       3   4   5   6   7       8       9   10    
        programs it supports
 F5.    The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level             1       2       3   4   5   6   7       8       9   10    
 F6.    The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials            1       2       3   4   5   6   7       8       9   10    

 F7.    The Bank and partners in government collaborate well together on    1       2       3   4   5   6   7       8       9   10    
        Bank supported programs and projects in China
 F8.    The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity                 1       2       3   4   5   6   7       8       9   10    
        The Bank safeguards against corruption in projects/programs that                                                              
 F9.                                                                        1       2       3   4   5   6   7       8       9   10
        it funds with its procurement rules
 F10. The Bank’s procurement requirements are reasonable                    1       2       3   4   5   6   7       8       9   10    




                                                                 97
The World Bank                                                   China                                   Country Survey 2012


SECTION G: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN CHINA


 G1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank should play in China’s
 development in the next five years? (1 meaning that the Bank should not play a
 significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should play a very significant role)

              1                  2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9            10                 
 Not a significant role at all                                   Very significant role   Don't Know




 G2. Which one of the following should the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in
 China? (Choose only ONE)
 1   Improve the quality of its experts as related to China’s specific challenges
 2   Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues
 3
     Improve the competitiveness of its financing (e.g., cost, timeliness and other terms) compared to
     markets
 4   Greater collaboration within the World Bank Group (IBRD and IFC)
 5   Offer more innovative financial products
 6   Offer more innovative knowledge services
 7   Other (please specify): ___________________________________



 G3. Which one of the following do you consider the greatest obstacle to the Bank playing a
 significant role in China's development in the next five years? (Please mark only one
 response)
     The World Bank's financing is not competitive enough (eg., cost, timeliness and other terms) when
 1
     compared to markets and/or other international financial institutions
 2   The quality of World Bank experts as related to China's specific challenges
 3   The number and complexity of the procedures involved in obtaining World Bank financing
 4   The World Bank's office in China is too small
 5   The World Bank's office in China is too big
 6   Others (please specify): _________________________________




                                                                  98
The World Bank                                            China                          Country Survey 2012


SECTION H: COMMUNICATION AND OUTREACH

 H1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development
 issues in China? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Other (please specify): _________________________


 H2. Where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development activities in
 China? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Local newspapers
 2     International newspapers
 3     Local radio
 4     International radio
 5     Local television
 6     International television
 7     Periodicals
 8     Blogs
 9     Internet
 10    World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops
 11    World Bank publications, materials
 12    World Bank website
 13    World Bank Public Information Center (PIC)
 14    Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff
 15    Other (please specify): _________________________



 H3. How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more
 than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2    Face to face meetings/discussions
 3    e-newsletters
 4    Workshops/conferences
 5    Mobile phones
 6    Social media (facebook, twitter, youtube)
 7    Blogs
 8    Others (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                           99
The World Bank                                              China                                             Country Survey 2012


 H4. Do you have access to the internet?
   1    Yes
   2    No



 H5. I use/have used the World Bank
 website:
   1    Yes
   2    No



 H6. I primarily use:
    1    The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/china)
    2    The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 H7. I use/have used the World Bank’s Public Information
 Centers (PICs) in China:
   1    Yes
   2    No
   3    I don’t know what PIC is



 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly
 Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.
                                                                               Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                               Disagree                              Agree   Know

 H8.     The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of information related      1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
         to development in China. (Only answer if you have used the PIC)

 H9.     I find the Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only answer if you have   1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
         used a Bank website)

 H10. I find the information on the Bank’s websites useful. (Only answer       1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
      if you have used a Bank website)

 H11. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find           1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     
      it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them, etc.)
 H12. The Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries          1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10     




                                                             100
