                            88160




Ethiopia Country Opinion
     Survey Report

  (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                        Ethiopia                                    Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. The General Environment in Ethiopia ........................................10
          V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank in Ethiopia .............18
         VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank .....................................28
        VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Ethiopia ..........................42
       VIII. Communication and Outreach ..................................................45
         IX. Appendices ................................................................................53




                                                          2
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in Ethiopia
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Ethiopia regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Ethiopia;
            Their perceived overall value of the World Bank in Ethiopia;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank as related to programs, poverty reduction,
               personal relationships, effectiveness, knowledge base, collaboration, and its
               day-to-day operation; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s communication and outreach in Ethiopia.

       Use data to help inform the Ethiopia country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In December 2011, 620 stakeholders of the World Bank in Ethiopia were invited to provide their
opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country survey.
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime Minister;
the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial
department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World Bank
supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs); local government officials or
staff; bilateral or multilateral agencies; private sector organizations; NGOs (including CBOs);
the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; academia, research institutes or
think tanks; and the judiciary. A total of 326 stakeholders participated in the country survey
(53%).

Respondents received the questionnaire either in person or in the mail and returned the
completed questionnaire similarly. Respondents were asked to indicate: their overall attitudes
toward the Bank; the importance of specific areas of the Bank’s work and the Bank’s
effectiveness in those areas; and their level of agreement with a series of statements about the
way the World Bank does business. Respondents were also asked about general issues facing
Ethiopia, the Bank’s future role in Ethiopia, and the Bank’s communication and outreach efforts
in Ethiopia.




                                                 3
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)
The questionnaire was broken into eight sections:
    1. Background Information: The first section asked respondents for their current position;
       specialization; familiarity, exposure to, and involvement with the Bank; geographic
       location; and age.
    2. General Issues facing Ethiopia: Respondents were asked to indicate what they thought
       were the most important development priorities, which areas would contribute most to
       poverty reduction and economic growth in Ethiopia, whether Ethiopia is headed in the
       right direction, and whether the economy and standard living has improved in the past
       five years, as well as rating the extent to which Ethiopia was headed in the right direction
       in terms of specific development areas.
    3. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to
       which the Bank meets Ethiopia’s need for knowledge services, the extent to which the
       Bank encourages the government to see through reforms, and their agreement with
       various statements regarding the Bank’s programs, poverty mission, relationships, and
       collaborations in Ethiopia. Respondents were also asked to indicate the areas on which it
       would be most productive for the Bank to focus its resources and research, what the
       Bank’s level of involvement should be, what they felt were the Bank’s greatest values
       and greatest weaknesses in its work, and with which groups the Bank should work more.
    4. The Work of the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of importance
       and the Bank’s level of effectiveness across twenty-two areas in which the Bank was
       involved, such as helping to reduce poverty and encouraging greater transparency in
       governance.
    5. The Way the World Bank does Business: Respondents were asked to rate the Bank’s
       level of effectiveness in the way it does business, including the Bank’s knowledge,
       personal relationships, collaborations, and poverty mission.
    6. Project/Program Related Issues: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement
       with a series of statements regarding the Bank’s programs, day-to-day operations, and
       collaborations in Ethiopia.
    7. The Future of the World Bank in Ethiopia: Respondents were asked to rate how
       significant a role t he Bank should play in Ethiopia’s development and to indicate what
       the Bank could to make itself of greater value and to what reasons respondents attributed
       failed or slow reform efforts.
    8. Communication and Outreach: Respondents were asked to indicate where they get
       information about development issues and the Bank’s development activities in Ethiopia,
       as well as how they prefer to receive information from the Bank. Respondents were also
       asked to indicate their usage of the Bank’s website , PICs, and Development Information
       Corners, and to evaluate these communication and outreach efforts.

    In addition, where possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country
    survey were compared to responses from the 279 respondents (46% response rate) who
    completed the country survey in FY 2006. Notations and/or charts are included when these
    comparisons were possible.


                                                 4
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position

       The majority of respondents were from NGOs, local government, and private sector.
        Because of the small number of consultants/contractors working on World Bank
        supported projects/programs and Project Management Units (PMUs), responses from
        these stakeholder groups were combined into one group. Because there were just four
        respondents from trade unions and just one respondent from the judiciary, these
        respondents were included in the “Other” category for all further analyses. Note there
        were no respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister.




                                                 5
The World Bank                   Ethiopia     Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                    6
The World Bank                                 Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they were located in Addis Ababa. Because of the
        small number of respondents from Amhara, Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples’
        Regional State, Tigray, Oromia, and other locations, statistical comparisons of
        geographic locations were not possible.




Age

       Over half of all respondents indicated that they were at least 46 years of age.




                                                  7
The World Bank                                 Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Involvement with the World Bank

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that they have been involved with or a close
        observer of World Bank activities for more than three years.




Exposure to the World Bank

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they were either very familiar or fairly familiar with
        the World Bank in Ethiopia.




                                                  8
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank

   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 6.6 on a
    10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar. This was
    significantly higher than the FY ’06 survey, in which familiarity with the Bank received a
    mean rating of 5.9 across all respondents.
         Respondents from the office of a Minister and consultants/contractors working on
          World Bank supported projects/PMUs indicated significantly higher levels of
          familiarity with the Bank compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                9
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Ethiopia

Headed in the Right Direction

       When asked whether Ethiopia was headed in the right or wrong direction, 70% of
        respondents indicated that Ethiopia was headed in the right direction. This was
        significantly higher than in the FY ’06 survey, in which 55% of respondents indicated
        that Ethiopia was headed in the right direction.
             The majority of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that Ethiopia
              was headed in the right direction, except respondents from the media who were
              more likely to say that Ethiopia was headed in the wrong direction.




                                               10
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Ethiopia (continued)

Headed in the Right Direction (continued)

       When asked the extent to which Ethiopia was headed in the right direction in terms of a
        variety of development areas, respondents had the highest levels of agreement that
        Ethiopia was headed in the right direction in terms of ensuring that all children have
        access to education, receiving a mean rating of 3.1 on a 4-point scale, with 1 being
        “Strongly disagree” and 4 being “Strongly agree”.
             Respondents from this year’s survey had significantly higher levels of agreement
                that Ethiopia was headed in the right direction across all of these development
                areas compared to respondents from the FY ’06 country survey, significantly so
                for all areas but “Ensuring that all children have access to education”.
             There were significant stakeholder group differences in levels of agreement across
                all of these development areas. Employees of a ministry and respondents from the
                office of a Minister and local government had the highest levels of agreement that
                Ethiopia was headed in the right direction across these areas whereas respondents
                from the media had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                11
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Ethiopia (continued)
Standard of Living: Past Five Years
       When asked about the change in their standard of living over the past five years, nearly
        two-thirds of all respondents indicated that their standard of living had improved.
            The majority of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that their
               standard of living had improved over the past five years, except respondents from
               private sector, the media, academia, and other organizations who were more likely
               to be split as to whether their standard of living had improved or worsened.




Standard of Living: Next Five Years
       When asked about the change in their standard of living in the next five years, nearly
        two-thirds of all respondents indicated they expected their standard of living to improve.
            Respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they expected their
               standard of living to improve in the next five years, except respondents from the
               media, academia, and other organizations who were more likely to expect their
               standard of living to worsen.




                                                 12
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Ethiopia (continued)

Standard of Living: Next Five Years (continued)

       When asked about the change in the standard of living in Ethiopia, in general, over the
        next five years, nearly two-thirds of all respondents indicated they expected the standard
        of living in Ethiopia to improve.

             Respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they expected the
              standard of living in Ethiopia to improve over the next five years, except
              respondents from the media, academia, and other organizations who were more
              likely to expect the standard of living to worsen.




                                                 13
The World Bank                              Ethiopia                          Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Ethiopia (continued)
Development Priority
       Respondents indicated that government effectiveness, reducing poverty, and economic
        growth were the most important development priorities in Ethiopia. Agriculture
        development, private sector growth, and increasing employment were also considered top
        priorities. In the FY ’06 country survey, the most important development priority was
        reducing poverty (84%).
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups considered these areas to be the most
                 important development priorities, except respondents from the media who were
                 more likely to indicate that education was the most important priority.




                                              14
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Ethiopia (continued)

Poverty Reduction

       Respondents indicated that economic growth would contribute most to poverty reduction
        in Ethiopia. Agriculture development, government effectiveness, and reducing corruption
        were also considered key contributors to poverty reduction.




                                               15
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Ethiopia (continued)
Economic Growth
       Respondents indicated that increasing agricultural productivity, private sector growth,
        improving trade and exports, and improving education would contribute most to
        generating faster economic growth in Ethiopia. Reducing corruption was also identified
        as key to economic growth.
            Respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that these would contribute
              most to generating faster economic growth in Ethiopia, except respondents from
              academia who were more likely to say that increase foreign direct investment
              would contribute most to economic growth.




                                               16
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Ethiopia (continued)

Government Support of Development Efforts

   Across all respondents, agreement that the government supports and takes responsibility for
    development efforts in Ethiopia received a mean rating of 7.2 on a 10-point scale, with 1
    being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree. This was significantly higher than the
    mean rating received in the FY ’06 country survey (6.5).
         Respondents from the office of a Minister had the highest levels of agreement that the
          government supports and takes responsibility for development efforts in Ethiopia
          whereas respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and other organizations had
          significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                               17
The World Bank                              Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank
Focusing Bank Resources
    Respondents indicated that it would be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its
       resources on food security, economic growth, agriculture development, and reducing
       corruption. Reducing poverty, improving trade and exports, and increasing employment
       were also seen as key. In FY ’06, respondents indicated that the Bank should focus on
       reducing poverty (50%), infrastructure (29%), and education (23%).




                                              18
The World Bank                              Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Focusing Bank Research
    Respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that it would be most valuable for
       the Bank to focus its research efforts on education and poverty except respondents from
       the office of a Minister who indicated urban development and respondents from private
       sector who indicated governance would be most valuable.




                                              19
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Level of Bank Involvement

   Over three-quarters of all respondents indicated that the Bank should be more involved in
    Ethiopia’s development strategies; 8% indicated that the Bank is currently involved at an
    optimum level. In the FY ’06 country survey, 75% of respondents indicated that the Bank
    should be more involved; 12% indicated that the Bank was currently involved at an optimum
    level.
             A majority of respondents across all stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank
              should be more involved in Ethiopia’s development strategies




                                               20
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Collaborating in Ethiopia

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely
        with private sector to ensure better development results in Ethiopia.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank should work
              more closely with private sector except respondents from the office of a Minister,
              the office of a Parliamentarian, and local government who were more likely to
              indicate that the Bank should work more closely with local government.




                                                21
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Nearly three-quarters of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest value to
        Ethiopia was its financial resources. In the FY ’06 country survey, respondents indicated
        that the Bank’s financial resources (72%) and knowledge (41%) were its greatest values.




                                                22
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weakness in its work in Ethiopia was
        being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures. The Bank not providing
        enough public disclosure of its work and its processes being too slow and complex were
        also considered weaknesses. In the FY ’06 country survey, respondents were asked to
        indicate a single greatest weakness in the Bank’s work. These respondents indicated that
        the Bank’s greatest weakness was not pushing Government hard enough on reforms
        needed for poverty reduction (37%).




                                                23
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
How the Bank Should Work in Ethiopia
       Three-quarters of all respondents indicated that “the Bank should work in partnership
        with a broad range of stakeholders to advance the country’s development program” .
            The majority of respondents across all stakeholders groups indicated that the
                Bank should work with a range of stakeholders except respondents from the office
                of a Minister and from the office of a Parliamentarian who indicated that the Bank
                should work primarily with the Ethiopian government.




How the Bank Works in Ethiopia
       Nearly two-thirds of all respondents indicated that “the Bank works primarily with the
        Government of Ethiopia to advance the country’s development program”.
            The majority of respondents across all stakeholders groups indicated that the
               Bank works primarily with the Ethiopian government.




                                                24
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance
   Respondents indicated that it was most important for the Bank to help reduce poverty and
    bring about economic growth, both receiving mean ratings of 8.3 on a 10-point scale with
    1 being not at all and 10 being very important.




                                               25
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance (continued)

   There were five instances in which there were significant differences between stakeholder
    groups across these twenty-two areas. For the most part, consultants/contractors working on
    World Bank supported projects/PMUs and respondents from academia had higher
    importance ratings across these areas whereas respondents from the office of a
    Parliamentarian and other organizations tended to have significantly lower importance
    ratings. Those areas that had significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Helping to strengthen the private sector”;
             “Helping to strengthen the regulatory framework”;
             “Helping to strengthen the judicial system”;
             “Helping to strengthen the health sector”; and
             “Ensuring that attention is paid to the environmental impact of Bank supported
              programs and strategies”.




                                               26
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance (continued)
       Respondents in this year’s survey had lower importance ratings compared to respondents
        from the FY ’06 country survey for all areas, significantly so for all except “Helping to
        strengthen the judicial system” and “Helping to strengthen the social protection sector” .




                                                27
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank

Meeting Ethiopia’s Knowledge Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank meets Ethiopia’s needs for
        knowledge services received a mean rating of 6.9 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of a
              Minister and had the highest ratings for the Bank meeting Ethiopia’s needs for
              knowledge services whereas respondents from other organizations had the lowest
              ratings.




                                                28
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank
Encouraging Government to Support Reforms
       Across all respondents, the extent to which the World Bank encourages the government
        of Ethiopia to support and see through the reform necessary for poverty reduction and
        private sector growth received a mean rating of 6.8 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to
        no degree at all and 10 being to a very high degree.
             Respondents from the office of a Minister and consultants/contractors working on
                World Bank supported projects/PMUs had the highest ratings for the Bank
                encouraging Ethiopia’s government to see through necessary reforms whereas
                respondents from other organizations had significantly lower ratings.




                                               29
The World Bank                                 Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)
Specific Areas of Effectiveness

       Respondents saw the Bank as most effective in helping to reduce poverty, receiving a
        mean rating of 7.4, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not effective
        at all and 10 being very effective.




                                                 30
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

   There were significant stakeholder differences in their ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness
    across all but four of these twenty-two areas. For the most part, consultants/contractors
    working on World Bank supported projects/PMUs and respondents from independent
    government institutions tended to give the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness
    whereas respondents from other organizations tended to give significantly lower ratings for
    the Bank’s effectiveness. Those areas for which there were not significant stakeholder group
    differences were:
             “Helping to strengthen the education sector ”;
             “Helping to strengthen the health sector”;
             “Helping to strengthen infrastructure development”; and
             “Helping to strengthen social protection sector”.




                                                31
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       Effectiveness ratings in this year’s survey were significantly higher than in the FY ’06
        country survey for all areas except “Helping to strengthen infrastructure development” .




                                                32
The World Bank                                 Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Importance versus Effectiveness – Sector Analysis

By plotting respondents’ ratings of importance versus effectiveness, one can assess where
respondents perceived the Bank to be performing well on priority issues in Ethiopia, as well as
areas in which respondents perceived the Bank to not be performing so well on priority issues,
areas in which respondents perceived the Bank was performing well, but on lower priority issues,
and areas in which respondents perceived the Bank to not be performing so well on lower
priority issues.

   Bank relatively good and issue is a priority: Areas in this quadrant are those that
    respondents indicated a high level of importance and gave the Bank a relatively high rating
    of effectiveness (although it should be noted that ratings of effectiveness were nearly a point
    lower than ratings of importance). It is important that the Bank continue to do well in these
    areas (in order of mean importance):
             Helping to reduce poverty;
             Helping to bring about strong economic growth;
             Helping to strengthen the health sector;
             Helping to strengthen the education sector;
             Helping to strengthen agricultural development;
             Helping to strengthen the infrastructure development; and
             Safeguard against corruption in projects/programs that it funds with its
                procurement rules (although this is on the borderline of the Bank being not so
                good).




                                                 33
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Importance versus Effectiveness – Sector Analysis (continued)

       Bank not so good on priority issues: Areas in this quadrant were those for which
        respondents indicated a high level of importance, but gave the Bank a relatively low
        rating of effectiveness. These areas were (in order of mean importance):
             Helping to strengthen the financial system;
             Encouraging greater transparency in governance;
             Helping to strengthen the private sector;
             Helping to integrate Ethiopia into the global economy; and
             Helping to strengthen the regulatory framework.

       Bank not so good, but issue not perceived to be a priority : Areas in this quadrant were
        those for which respondents gave the Bank a relatively low rating of effectiveness and a
        moderate level of importance. These areas were (in order of mean importance):
             Helping to strengthen the judicial system;
             Helping to empower communities to participate in their own development;
             Helping Ethiopia adapt to/avert risk of climate change;
             Helping to reduce corruption in the country with its advice and support; and
             Helping to improve the quality of life in urban and rural areas.

       Bank good, but issue not perceived to be a priority : Areas in this quadrant were those
        for which respondents indicated a moderate level of importance, but gave the Bank a
        relatively high rating of effectiveness. These areas were (in order of mean importance):
             Helping to strengthen the public sector;
             Ensuring that attention is paid to the environmental impact of Bank supported
                programs and strategies;
             Helping to strengthen the social protection sector;
             Ensuring that attention is paid to gender disparities; and
             Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources management.




                                                34
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)
Respondents were asked a variety of questions regarding the Bank’s programs, poverty mission,
personal relationships, collaborations/partnerships, knowledge, and day-to-day operations.
   There were significant differences between respondents from the FY ’06 country survey and
    respondents from this year’s country survey across nearly all of these areas. Respondents in
    this year’s country survey had higher ratings for most of these areas compared to respondents
    from the FY ’06 country survey. However, it should be noted that respondents from the FY
    ’06 country survey did have significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at
    “Technical competence” and “Producing knowledge and research that are useful” compared
    to respondents from t his year’s survey. Those areas which did not have significant
    differences between the two country surveys were:
         “Making the results of studies and analyses readily available”;
         “Sharing knowledge about international best practices”;
         “Straightforwardness in its dealings with you”;
         “Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction”;
         “The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it supports ”;
         “The Bank and partners in government collaborate well together on Bank supported
            programs and projects in Ethiopia”; and
         “The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity”.
   There were significant stakeholder differences in their ratings of the Bank across many areas.
    For the most part, consultants/contractors working on World Bank supported projects/PMUs
    and respondents from the office of a Minister and independent government institutions
    tended to give the highest ratings for the Bank whereas respondents from the office of a
    Parliamentarian and other organizations tended to give significantly lower ratings for the
    Bank. Those areas for which there were significant stakeholder group differences were:
         “The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic and sustainable
            for Ethiopia”;
         “The World Bank collaborates well with other donors here”;
         “The World Bank is responsive”;
         “The World Bank’s work promotes country ownership of development strategies ”;
         “The Bank’s work promotes the empowerment of poor people to participate in
            development”;
         “Ability to adapt its knowledge to your country’s needs”;
         “Providing sound policy and economic advice”;
         “Straightforwardness in its dealings with you”;
         “Maintaining consistent messages”;
         “Promoting the inclusion of local communities in the development of strategies”;
         “Promoting the inclusion of civil society in the development of strategies ”;
         “Promoting the inclusion of private sector in the development of strategies ”;
         “Lending in a way that promotes effective development ”;
         “The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it supports ”;
         “The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials ”; and
         “The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity”.
   Ratings for all stakeholder groups and across country surveys can be found in the Appendix.


                                                35
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Bank Programs in Ethiopia

       In terms of the Bank’s programs in Ethiopia, the Bank overall playing a relevant role in
        development in Ethiopia, the Bank giving appropriate priority to growth issues, and the
        Bank’s work being aligned with respondents’ development priorities all received the
        highest mean level of agreement, 7.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1
        being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.

       The Bank’s effectiveness at lending in a way that promotes effective development
        received a mean rating of 7.3 across all respondents on a 10-point scale with 1 being not
        at all effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                36
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Poverty Mission

       In terms of the Bank’s poverty mission in Ethiopia, the Bank being an effective catalyst
        for discussion on critical issues related to poverty and growth received the highest mean
        level of agreement, 7.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly
        disagree and 10 being strongly agree.

       The Bank’s effectiveness at giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction received a
        mean rating of 7.3 across all respondents on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all
        effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                 37
The World Bank                                 Ethiopia                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Personal Relationships

       In terms of the Bank’s personal relationships in Ethiopia, the Bank treating clients and
        stakeholders in Ethiopia with respect received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.1,
        across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being
        strongly agree.

       In terms of maintaining relationships with clients and stakeholders in Ethiopia, the
        Bank’s effectiveness at maintaining consistent messages received the highest mean
        rating, 7.3, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and
        10 being very effective.




                                                  38
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Collaboration/Partnerships

       In terms of the Bank’s collaborations in Ethiopia, the Bank collaborating well with other
        donors received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.2, across all respondents, on a 10-
        point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
       The Bank’s effectiveness at promoting the inclusion of civil society in strategy
        development received the highest mean rating of 7.1 on a 10-point scale with 1 being not
        at all effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                39
The World Bank                                 Ethiopia                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Knowledge

       In terms of the Bank’s effectiveness at being a knowledge base in Ethiopia, the Bank’s
        ability to produce knowledge and research that are useful received the highest mean
        rating, 7.5, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and
        10 being very effective.




                                                  40
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Day-to-Day Operations

       In terms of the Bank’s day-to-day operations in Ethiopia, the Bank effectively monitoring
        and evaluating its projects received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.1, across all
        respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly
        agree.




                                               41
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Ethiopia

Role Significance

       The Bank was expected to play a fairly significant role in Ethiopia’s development over
        the medium term, receiving a mean rating of 7.7 across all respondents on a 10-point
        scale with 1 being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of a
              Minister gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s role significance whereas
              respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian gave the lowest ratings.




                                                42
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Ethiopia (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should improve the competitiveness of its
        financing compared to markets, reduce the complexity of obtaining Bank financing, and
        improve the quality of its experts as related to Ethiopia’s specific challenges to make
        itself of greater value in Ethiopia. Respondents also indicated that the Bank should focus
        primarily on advice and advocacy issues to make itself of greater value.




                                                43
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Ethiopia (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, respondents
        indicated that they most often attribute this to poor donor coordination. Respondents also
        indicated that lack of or inadequate government capacity, or the government working
        inefficiently or too slowly can also lead to Bank assisted reform efforts failing or taking
        place slowly.




                                                 44
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach

Information Sources

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that they got most of their information about
        economic and social development issues in Ethiopia from local newspapers. Local
        television was also a popular information source.




                                                 45
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       Respondents were again most likely to utilize local newspapers for information about the
        Bank’s development activities in Ethiopia. The Internet and local television were also
        popular information sources.




                                               46
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank, over
        half of all respondents indicated that they preferred the World Bank website. Face-to-face
        meetings or discussions and workshops or conferences were also popular preferred
        information sources.




                                                47
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Internet Access

       The vast majority of all respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet (99%).

Website Usage

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website, significantly
        more than respondents in the FY ’06 country survey.
            Respondents from other organizations had significantly lower rates of usage for
               the World Bank ’s website compared to those from other stakeholder groups.




       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, the majority indicated that they used
        the World Bank’s main website. This is statistically similar to the website usage reported
        by respondents in the FY ’06 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of usage
               for the World Bank’s main and country websites.




                                                48
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Website Evaluation

   Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, agreement that
    respondents find the Bank’s websites useful received the highest mean rating, 7.2, across all
    respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents from academia had the highest levels of agreement that they find the
              Bank websites easy to navigate whereas respondents from the office of a
              Parliamentarian had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents across
              all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of agreement that they find
              the information on the Bank’s websites useful.




                                                49
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Public Information Centers (PICs)/Development Information Corners

       Nearly two-thirds of all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s PICs in
        Ethiopia; however, 22% of all respondents were unaware of the Bank’s PICs. This is
        significantly higher than the 18% of respondents in the FY ’06 survey who indicated that
        they used the Bank’s PICs.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of usage
                for the Bank’s PICs.




       Nearly two-thirds of all respondents also indicated that they had used the Bank’s
        Development Information Corners in Ethiopia; again, 22% of all respondents were
        unaware of the Bank’s Development Information Corners.
            Respondents from the office of a Minister and other organizations had
               significantly lower rates of usage for the Bank’s Development Information
               Corners compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                               50
The World Bank                               Ethiopia                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Public Information Centers (PICs)/Development Information Corners (continued)

       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s Development Information Corners and PICs,
        both being a valuable source of information related to development in Ethiopia received
        mean levels of agreement of 7.5 and 7.4, respectively, across all respondents, on a 10-
        point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Consultants/contractors working on World Bank supported projects/PMUs and
                respondents from private sector, NGOs, and academia had the highest levels of
                agreement that the Bank’s Development Information Corners are a valuable
                source of information whereas respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian
                and other organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents
                across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of agreement
                regarding the value of the Bank’s PICs.




                                               51
The World Bank                                Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Communication and Outreach Efforts

       In terms of the Bank’s communication and outreach efforts in Ethiopia, respondents had
        the same level of agreement that “When I need information from the World Bank I know
        how to find it” and that “The Bank is appropriately responsive to my information requests
        and inquiries”, both receiving a mean rating of 7.0, across all respondents, on a 10-point
        scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Consultants/contractors working on World Bank supported projects/PMUs and
              respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies, local government, and NGOs
              had the highest levels of agreement that “The Bank is appropriately responsive to
              my information requests and inquiries” whereas employees of ministries and
              respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and other organizations had
              significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents across all stakeholder
              groups had statistically similar levels of agreement that “When I need information
              from the World Bank I know how to find it”.




                                                52
The World Bank                                  Ethiopia                              Country Survey 2012




IX. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 54


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 66


          C. Responses to All Questions by Year .............................................. 80


          D. World Bank Client Survey 2012 – Ethiopia Questionnaire ........... 86




                                              ETHIOPIA




                                                  53
The World Bank                                        Ethiopia                                    Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents
                                          Total Response Number = 326
A. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                     Percentage of Respondents
NGOs                                                                                          20.1%
Local Government                                                                              16.7%
Private Sector Organization                                                                   15.2%
Employee of a Ministry                                                                        9.0%
Bilateral or Multilateral Agency                                                              8.7%
Media                                                                                         7.4%
Academia                                                                                      5.6%
Independent Government Institution                                                            4.3%
Office of Minister                                                                            3.1%
Consultant on Bank Project                                                                    2.5%
Other                                                                                         2.5%
Project Management Unit                                                                       1.9%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                     1.5%
Trade Union                                                                                   1.2%
Judiciary                                                                                     0.3%

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                         Percentage of Respondents
Health                                                                                        15.8%
Economic Management                                                                           14.5%
Education                                                                                     11.7%
Finance, Banking, Insurance                                                                   9.8%
Communications, Information Services                                                          9.5%
Infrastructure                                                                                8.5%
Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry                                                           6.3%
Commerce, Trade and Manufacturing                                                             6.0%
Environment, Natural Resource Management                                                      5.4%
Legislature, Politics                                                                         4.4%
Other Social Services                                                                         3.5%
Law, Justice                                                                                  3.2%
Other                                                                                         1.6%

Familiarity with the World Bank                                                              N      Mean        SD
3. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Ethiopia on a scale of
                                                                                            319      6.58     1.46
   1-10, 1 meaning “not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “extremely familiar” ?


4. Which of the following best describes your to the World Bank in
   Ethiopia?                                                                        Percentage of Respondents
Very familiar (collaborated, part of my professional duties, etc.)                            46.7%
Fairly familiar (personal interest, follow the press)                                         44.8%
Superficially (occasional press news, informal sources, etc.)                                 8.5%




                                                        54
The World Bank                                           Ethiopia                               Country Survey 2012


A. Background Information (continued)

5. How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the
   World Bank's activities?                                                       Percentage of Respondents
Less than one year                                                                          12.6%
One to three years                                                                          39.9%
More than three years                                                                       47.5%

6. Which best represents your geographic location?                                Percentage of Respondents
Addis Ababa                                                                                 93.8%
Amhara                                                                                      1.9%
Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples’ Regional State                                  1.2%
Tigray                                                                                      1.2%
Oromia                                                                                      0.9%
Other                                                                                       0.9%

7. Which best describes your age?                                                 Percentage of Respondents
18-25                                                                                       1.9%
26-35                                                                                       4.4%
36-45                                                                                       35.6%
46+                                                                                         58.1%



B. General Issues facing Ethiopia

1. In general, would you say that Ethiopia is currently headed...                 Percentage of Respondents
In the right direction                                                                      69.8%
In the wrong direction                                                                      19.8%
Have no real opinion                                                                        6.8%
Don't know                                                                                  3.7%

In general, would you say that Ethiopia is currently headed in the right direction in
     terms of… (Asked on a 4-pt. scale, 1 meaning "Strongly disagree", 4 meaning
     "Strongly agree".)                                                                    N      Mean      SD
2.   sustaining economic recovery and promoting growth                                    325     2.94      .86
3.   improving governance                                                                 325     2.84      .91
4.   delivering better services to the poor                                               305     3.03      .81
5.   reducing corruption                                                                  316     2.83      .85
6.   ensuring that all children have access to education                                  316     3.05      .82
7.   ensuring adequate and productive infrastructure                                      316     3.03      .84
8.   ensuring access to clean water                                                       317     3.03      .80
9.   reducing gender disparities                                                          307     3.03      .80
10. increasing voice and participation of the citizens                                    315     2.69     1.02
11. responsive leadership                                                                 317     2.59     1.00




                                                           55
The World Bank                                       Ethiopia                             Country Survey 2012


B. General Issues facing Ethiopia (continued)

12. In general, over the past five years would you say that your
  economic status/standard of living has...                                 Percentage of Respondents
Improved                                                                              62.8%
Worsened                                                                              28.1%
Stayed the same                                                                       9.1%

13. In general, over the next five years do you expect the standard of
  living in Ethiopia...                                                     Percentage of Respondents
To improve                                                                            61.9%
To worsen                                                                             25.4%
Stay the same                                                                         6.5%
Don't have an opinion                                                                 3.4%
Don't know                                                                            2.8%

14. Over the next five years do you expect your own economic
  status/standard of living to...                                           Percentage of Respondents
Improve                                                                               64.6%
Worsen                                                                                27.6%
Stay the same                                                                         7.8%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
15. Please identify which one of these you consider the first (second)     Most       2nd Most
   most important development priority.                                  Important   Important   Combined
Government effectiveness/Improving governance                              23.7%        3.2%       26.9%
Reducing poverty                                                           9.5%        13.9%       23.4%
Economic growth                                                            19.4%        3.9%       23.3%
Agriculture development                                                    2.8%        13.5%       16.3%
Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment             1.1%        14.2%       15.3%
Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                     1.4%        12.1%       13.5%
Reducing corruption                                                        8.5%         1.8%       10.3%
Increasing access to education                                             8.5%         1.8%       10.3%
Protecting natural resources                                               0.0%         9.6%       9.6%
Improving basic infrastructure                                             2.5%         7.1%       9.6%
Improving environmental quality                                            0.7%         7.1%       7.8%
Increasing access to health services                                       6.0%         1.8%       7.8%
Promote policies to stimulate domestic private investment                  6.7%         1.1%       7.8%
Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                      2.5%         4.3%       6.7%
Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                    5.7%         1.1%       6.7%
Strengthening regulatory framework                                         0.0%         2.5%       2.5%
HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                   0.7%         0.4%       1.1%
Other                                                                      0.4%         0.4%       0.7%
Improving trade and exports                                                0.0%         0.4%       0.4%
Climate change                                                             0.0%         0.4%       0.4%
Food security                                                              0.0%         0.0%       0.0%




                                                        56
The World Bank                                         Ethiopia                                  Country Survey 2012


B. General Issues facing Ethiopia (continued)

16. Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would                Percentage of Respondents
   contribute most to reducing poverty in Ethiopia? (Choose only TWO)                 (Responses Combined)
Economic growth                                                                               29.9%
Agriculture development                                                                       22.1%
Reducing poverty                                                                              16.8%
Government effectiveness                                                                      16.5%
Reducing corruption                                                                           15.3%
Increasing employment                                                                         10.6%
Strengthening regulatory framework                                                            10.3%
Enhancing private sector growth/investment                                                    9.0%
Improving trade and exports                                                                   8.7%
Improving basic infrastructure                                                                8.1%
Increasing access to education                                                                7.2%
Protecting natural resources                                                                  7.2%
Stimulate foreign direct investment                                                           5.9%
Effectiveness of law and justice system                                                       5.6%
Climate change                                                                                3.7%
Stimulate domestic private investment                                                         3.4%
Improving environmental quality                                                               3.4%
Increasing access to health services                                                          3.1%
Food security                                                                                 3.1%
HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                      1.9%
Other                                                                                         0.9%

4. Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to                    Percentage of Respondents
   generating faster economic growth in Ethiopia? (Choose only TWO)                   (Responses Combined)
Increasing agricultural productivity                                                          24.1%
Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                                23.8%
Improving trade and exports                                                                   23.5%
Improving access to and/or quality of education                                               19.8%
Reducing corruption                                                                           16.1%
Promote policies to stimulate domestic private investment                                     14.2%
Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment                             14.2%
Government effectiveness/Increasing governance                                                13.6%
Strengthening the regulatory framework                                                        12.7%
Improving access to and/or quality of health care                                             11.1%
Other                                                                                         0.6%


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Knowledge Services                                                                          N      Mean       SD
To what extent does the World Bank meet Ethiopia’s needs for knowledge services,
on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “to no degree at all”, 10 meaning “to a very significant     314      6.86     1.31
degree”?




                                                         57
The World Bank                                      Ethiopia                                 Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
2. Based on your observations of the World Bank in Ethiopia, where
   would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources       Percentage of Respondents
   in its support of country priorities? (Choose no more than THREE)               (Responses Combined)
Food security                                                                              23.1%
Economic growth                                                                            21.9%
Agriculture development                                                                    19.1%
Reducing corruption                                                                        19.1%
Reducing poverty                                                                           16.9%
Improving trade and exports                                                                16.3%
Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities in private sector                   16.3%
Increasing access to health services                                                       11.9%
Climate change                                                                             11.3%
Protecting natural resources                                                               11.3%
Promoting policies to stimulate domestic private sector growth/investment                  10.6%
Increasing access to education                                                             10.0%
Improving environmental quality                                                            6.3%
Improving basic infrastructure                                                             5.9%
Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                      5.6%
HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                   5.0%
Government effectiveness/governance                                                        4.4%
Promoting policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                                  4.1%
Strengthening regulatory framework                                                         4.1%
Other                                                                                      0.3%

3. In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World
   Bank in Ethiopia's development strategies?                                    Percentage of Respondents
The Bank should be more involved                                                           76.9%
The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                                         8.0%
The Bank should be less involved                                                           10.2%
The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                                                      2.8%
Don't know                                                                                 2.2%

                                                                             Percentage of Respondents
4. In broad terms of economic and social development, what is
                                                                                     nd
   the “greatest value” brought by the World Bank to Ethiopia?        Greatest      2 Greatest
   What is the “second greatest” value?                                Value          Value       Combined
Financial resources                                                    18.4%          51.8%         70.3%
Technical advice                                                       17.4%           9.9%         27.3%
The Bank's knowledge                                                   17.4%           5.8%         23.2%
Lending when others won't                                              18.4%           4.7%         23.2%
Ability to build implementation capacity                                3.8%          15.7%         19.4%
Policy and economic advice                                             11.9%           5.1%         17.1%
Donor coordination and convener                                         9.2%           2.6%         11.8%
Ability to mobilize resources                                           3.4%           4.4%          7.8%
Other                                                                   0.0%           0.0%          0.0%




                                                       58
The World Bank                                          Ethiopia                                  Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

5. Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest                    Percentage of Respondents
   weaknesses in its work in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO)                      (Combined Responses)
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                   39.6%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                      23.8%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                     22.0%
Too influenced by the US                                                                      16.4%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                        16.1%
Does not push Government hard enough on reforms needed for poverty
                                                                                             15.5%
reduction and private sector growth
Not client focused                                                                           13.0%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                        9.6%
Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country                 9.6%
Inadequately aligned with country priorities                                                 5.3%
Is arrogant in its approach                                                                  4.3%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                     4.0%
Other                                                                                        0.6%

Bank Encouragement                                                                          N       Mean       SD
6. To what extent do you believe the Bank encourages the Government of Ethiopia to
support and see through the reform that is necessary for poverty reduction and private
                                                                                            309      6.81     1.42
sector growth, on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning to 'no degree at all', 10 meaning 'to a very
high degree'?"

7. Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most
   valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the next few           Percentage of Respondents
   years in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO)                                       (Responses Combined)
Education                                                                                     22.6%
Poverty                                                                                       20.4%
Health                                                                                        13.8%
Social protection                                                                             13.8%
Governance                                                                                    13.5%
Energy                                                                                        12.6%
Financial markets                                                                             10.7%
Agricultural development                                                                      8.8%
Labor markets/job creation                                                                    8.8%
Transport                                                                                     7.2%
Public sector performance                                                                     7.2%
Environmental sustainability/ natural resources management                                    6.6%
Public expenditure                                                                            6.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                               5.3%
Enhanced business environment for private sector development                                  5.0%
Urban/metropolitan development                                                                5.0%
Food security                                                                                 5.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                          4.7%
Improving equality of opportunity                                                             4.1%
Rural development                                                                             3.1%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                     2.8%
Climate change                                                                                0.9%
Other                                                                                         0.9%



                                                           59
The World Bank                                          Ethiopia                                    Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

8. Which of the following statements best represents how the Bank
   should work in Ethiopia?                                                           Percentage of Respondents
The Bank should work in partnership with a broad range of stakeholders to
                                                                                               75.4%
advance the country's development program
The Bank should work primarily with the Government of Ethiopia to
                                                                                               24.6%
advance the country's development program

9. Which of the following statements best represents how the Bank does
   work in Ethiopia?                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
The Bank works primarily with the Government of Ethiopia to advance the
                                                                                               60.9%
country's development program
The Bank works in partnership with a broad range of stakeholders to
                                                                                               39.1%
advance the country's development program

10. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
   main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
   Bank work with more in your country to ensure better development                   Percentage of Respondents
   results there? (Choose TWO only)                                                     (Combined Responses)
Private sector                                                                                  45.8%
Local Government                                                                                22.7%
Media                                                                                           22.4%
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                            18.4%
Donor community                                                                                 18.1%
NGOs                                                                                            13.7%
Parliament                                                                                      11.2%
Beneficiaries                                                                                   10.3%
Academia and think tanks                                                                        9.3%
Other                                                                                           0.6%

                                                                                               Level of Agreement
On a scale of 1-10, with 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly
agree, please respond to the following statements about the World Bank in Ethiopia.            N      Mean       SD
11. Overall the Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Ethiopia               296      7.15     1.83
12. The Banks work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for this
                                                                                              295      7.09     1.71
    country
13. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic and sustainable
                                                                                              288      7.03     1.67
    for Ethiopia
14. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Ethiopia with respect                   275      7.12     1.67
15. The World Bank collaborates well with other donors here                                   252      7.17     1.57
16. The World Bank is responsive                                                              247      7.01     1.79
17. The Bank is an effective catalyst for discussion on critical issues related to poverty
                                                                                              284      7.10     1.88
    and growth
18. The World Bank’s work promotes country ownership of development strategies                289      7.07     1.74
19. The Bank’s work promotes the empowerment of Ethiopian citizens to participate in
                                                                                              287      7.01     1.91
    development
20. The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                               249      6.99     1.83
21. The Bank gives appropriate priority to growth issues                                      282      7.12     1.69



                                                           60
The World Bank                                         Ethiopia                               Country Survey 2012


D. The Work of the World Bank
How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in                Importance                Effectiveness
that particular area of work in Ethiopia? How effective do
you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a
positive impact on that area of development in Ethiopia?
(Asked on a 10-point importance/effectiveness scale,
1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)                                N      Mean        SD     N       Mean      SD
1.   Helping to reduce poverty                                    295     8.33       1.48   244      7.45     1.80
2.   Helping to bring about economic growth                       277     8.31       1.44   232      7.29     1.60
3.   Encouraging greater transparency in governance               284     7.95       1.62   239      6.90     1.96
4.   Helping to strengthen the private sector                     261     7.89       1.56   219      6.88     1.96
5.   Helping to strengthen the financial system                   269     7.98       1.48   223      7.04     1.88
6.   Helping to strengthen the regulatory framework               281     7.83       1.59   229      6.85     1.92
7.   Helping to strengthen the judicial system                    269     7.72       1.68   228      6.86     1.98
8.   Helping to strengthen the public sector                      262     7.74       1.60   219      7.12     1.63
9. Helping to strengthen the education sector                     265     7.99       1.49   215      7.28     1.55
10. Helping to strengthen the health sector                       267     8.03       1.43   228      7.28     1.58
11. Safeguarding against corruption in projects/programs that
                                                                  270     7.86       1.47   231      7.08     1.76
    it funds with its procurement rules
12. Helping to integrate Ethiopia into the global economy         281     7.86       1.57   229      7.03     1.85
13. Ensuring that attention is paid to the environmental
                                                                  280     7.73       1.65   231      7.10     1.62
    impact of Bank supported programs and strategies
14. Ensuring that attention is paid to gender disparities         266     7.58       1.55   226      7.09     1.70
15. Helping to strengthen agricultural development                266     7.94       1.47   223      7.22     1.60
16. Helping to strengthen infrastructure development              263     7.94       1.64   233      7.28     1.63
17. Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources
                                                                  266     7.57       1.70   226      7.13     1.65
    management
18. Helping to strengthen the social protection sector            254     7.65       1.61   217      7.14     1.74
19. Helping to improve the quality of life in urban areas         271     7.36       1.90   231      6.73     2.10
20. Helping to reduce corruption in the country with its advice
                                                                  271     7.62       1.66   230      6.81     1.93
    and support
21. Helping to empower communities to participate in their
                                                                  258     7.64       1.66   229      6.86     1.99
    own development
22. Helping Ethiopia adapt to/avert risk of climate change        251     7.63       1.62   223      7.03     1.81




                                                            61
The World Bank                                         Ethiopia                                 Country Survey 2012


E. The Way the World Bank does Business

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular        Level of Effectiveness
attribute/activity listed below using a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”,
10 meaning “Very effective”.                                                              N     Mean        SD
1. Technical competence                                                                  287    7.44       1.54
2.   Producing knowledge and research (studies, analysis) that are useful                245     7.54      1.46
3.   Making the results of studies and analyses readily available                        269     7.35      1.51
4.   Sharing knowledge about international best practices                                257     7.33      1.46
5.   Ability to adapt its knowledge to your country's needs                              248     6.98      1.57
6.   Ensuring its staff is accessible                                                    255     6.89      1.88
7.   Providing sound policy and economic advice                                          248     7.10      1.56
8.   Straightforwardness in its dealings with you                                        239     7.07      1.84
9. Maintaining consistent messages                                                       258     7.28      1.71
10. Promoting the inclusion of local communities (beneficiaries) in the development
                                                                                         271     6.98      1.72
    of strategies
11. Promoting the inclusion of civil society (NGOs, religious groups, interest groups)
                                                                                         280     7.09      1.75
    in the development of strategies
12. Promoting the inclusion of local project experts in the development of strategies    272     7.01      1.67
13. Promoting the inclusion of private sector in the development of strategies           275     6.99      1.74
14. Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction                                     258     7.26      1.69
15. Lending in a way that promotes effective development                                 265     7.26      1.67



F. Project/Program Related Issues

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale,            Level of Agreement
1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.                      N      Mean       SD
1.   The Bank is flexible in terms of adjusting to changing circumstances                283     6.82     1.94
2.   The Bank disburses funds promptly                                                   251     6.76     1.96
3.   The Bank works efficiently                                                          265     6.99     1.76
4.   The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                         285     7.09     1.64
     supports
5.   The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level                             265     6.92     1.82
6.   The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials                            253     7.05     1.57
7.   The Bank and partners in government collaborate well together on Bank
                                                                                         278     7.04     1.55
     supported programs and projects in Ethiopia
8.   The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity                                 267     7.08     1.69
9.   The Government supports and takes responsibility for development efforts in
                                                                                         273     7.23     1.74
     Ethiopia
10. The Bank's procurement requirements are reasonable                                   273     6.91     1.78




                                                           62
The World Bank                                         Ethiopia                                 Country Survey 2012


G. The Future Role of the World Bank in Ethiopia

The Bank’s Role                                                                           N       Mean       SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank should play in Ethiopia’s development
over the medium term in the near future? (1 meaning that the Bank should not play a       317      7.72     1.29
significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should play a very significant role)?

2. Which one of the following should the Bank do to make itself of greater
    value in Ethiopia? (Choose only ONE)                                          Percentage of Respondents
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                            23.9%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                     21.8%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Ethiopia’s specific challenges             20.4%
Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                               16.6%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                    11.4%
Other                                                                                       3.1%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                    2.8%

3. When Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which
    of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose only ONE)               Percentage of Respondents
Poor donor coordination                                                                     26.9%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                         20.1%
Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                                   15.8%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                       14.3%
The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                                               10.8%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                           6.8%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                             5.4%


H. Communication and Outreach

1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social              Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO)                           (Combined Responses)
Local newspapers                                                                              43.4%
Local television                                                                              35.1%
Internet                                                                                      19.9%
Periodicals                                                                                   16.8%
Local radio                                                                                   15.2%
International television                                                                       8.9%
International radio                                                                            2.8%
International newspapers                                                                       2.5%
Other                                                                                          0.9%




                                                          63
The World Bank                                      Ethiopia                          Country Survey 2012


H. Communication and Outreach (continued)

2. From where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s    Percentage of Respondents
    development activities in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO)             (Combined Responses)
Local newspapers                                                                      32.1%
Internet                                                                              28.3%
Local television                                                                      24.1%
Local radio                                                                           15.6%
Periodicals                                                                           13.0%
World Bank website                                                                     9.2%
World Bank publications, materials                                                     7.3%
World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                                            6.0%
Blogs                                                                                  5.7%
World Bank Public Information Center (PIC)                                             4.4%
International television                                                               3.8%
International radio                                                                    2.5%
World Bank Development Information Corners                                             2.5%
Direct contact/interaction with Bank staff                                             2.2%
International newspapers                                                               1.9%
Other                                                                                  0.6%

3. How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank?         Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                   (Combined Responses)
World Bank website                                                                    51.1%
Face to face meetings/discussions                                                     34.3%
Workshops/conferences                                                                 26.0%
Social media                                                                          15.6%
e-newsletters                                                                         14.0%
Mobile phones                                                                          9.2%
Blogs                                                                                  3.8%
Other                                                                                  0.0%

4. Do you have access to the Internet?                                      Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                   98.7%
No                                                                                     1.3%

5. I use/have used the World Bank website:                                  Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                   92.3%
No                                                                                     7.7%

6. I primarily use:                                                         Percentage of Respondents
The World Bank’s main website                                                         66.3%
The World Bank’s country website                                                      33.7%

 7. I use/have used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in
    Ethiopia:                                                               Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                   60.0%
No                                                                                    17.8%
I don't know what PIC is                                                              22.2%




                                                       64
The World Bank                                     Ethiopia                               Country Survey 2012


H. Communication and Outreach (continued)

8. I use/have used the World Bank Development Information Corners in
    Ethiopia:                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                       60.0%
No                                                                                        17.8%
I don't know what World Bank Development Information Corner is                            22.2%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale,       Level of Agreement
1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”                 N       Mean      SD
9. The World Bank's PIC is a valuable source of information related to
                                                                                  195      7.40      1.38
    development in Ethiopia
10. The World Bank's Development Information Corner is a valuable source of
                                                                                  193      7.46      1.15
    information related to development in Ethiopia
11. I find the Bank websites easy to navigate                                     276      7.10      1.58
12. I find the information on the Bank's websites useful                          271      7.24      1.46
13. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it             237      6.98      1.92
14. The Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries               236      6.97      2.13




                                                     65
The World Bank                                                                                             Ethiopia                                                                           Country Survey 2012

Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

A. Background Information




B. General Issues facing Ethiopia
In general, would you say that Ethiopia is currently headed...
                                                                   Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                            Independent
                                                                    of           Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                  Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                        Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 In the right direction                                            100.0           80.0          85.7           85.7         77.8          67.9        58.3     73.8    25.0       71.4           77.8      53.8
 In the wrong direction                                              -             20.0           7.1            7.1          7.4          21.4        27.1     15.4    58.3       21.4           22.2      38.5
 Have no real opinion                                                -               -            3.6            7.1          5.6          10.7        10.4      6.2    16.7        7.1             -        -
 Don't know                                                          -               -            3.6             -           9.3            -          4.2      4.6     -            -             -       7.7




(Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning “Strongly disagree”, 4 meaning “Strongly agree”)
                                                                                                            66
The World Bank                                                                                               Ethiopia                                                                            Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing Ethiopia
In general, over the past five years would you say that your economic status/standard of living has...
                                                                     Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of          Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Improved                                                             90.0           80.0          72.4           92.9         78.4          71.4        41.3     66.2     31.8       76.9           38.9      38.5
 Worsened                                                               -              -           17.2            7.1         17.6          25.0        45.7     26.2     50.0       15.4           44.4      46.2
 Stayed the same                                                      10.0           20.0          10.3             -           3.9           3.6        13.0      7.7     18.2        7.7           16.7      15.4

In general, over the next five years do you expect the standard of living in Ethiopia...
                                                                     Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of           Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 To improve                                                          100.0           80.0          72.4           85.7         74.1          70.4        46.9     67.2     25.0       69.2           44.4      30.8
 To worsen                                                             -             20.0          17.2             -          18.5          18.5        26.5     23.4     54.2       15.4           50.0      53.8
 Stay the same                                                         -               -            3.4            7.1          3.7           7.4        14.3      3.1     16.7        7.7            5.6       -
 Don't have an opinion                                                 -               -            6.9            7.1           -             -          6.1      3.1      -          7.7             -       15.4
 Don't know                                                            -               -             -              -           3.7           3.7         6.1      3.1     4.2           -             -        -

Over the next five years do you expect your own economic status/standard of living to...
                                                                     Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of           Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Improve                                                             100.0           80.0          75.0           92.3         75.5          75.0        44.7     69.2     29.2       61.5           50.0      58.3
 Worsen                                                                -               -           21.4            7.7         20.8          14.3        42.6     23.1     58.3       30.8           50.0      16.7
 Stay the same                                                         -             20.0           3.6             -           3.8          10.7        12.8      7.7     12.5        7.7             -       25.0

Please identify which one of these you consider the first most important development priority.
                                                                     Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                          Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Government effectiveness/Improving governance                       12.5%           50.0%         27.3%         60.0%         11.5%        12.5%       23.3%     26.4%   26.1%      16.7%          33.3%     45.5%
 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         1.9%          0.0%        2.3%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Economic growth                                                     37.5%           25.0%         22.7%         10.0%         19.2%        20.8%       27.9%     15.1%   13.0%       8.3%          16.7%     18.2%
 Reducing corruption                                                 12.5%           0.0%          13.6%         20.0%         7.7%         20.8%        4.7%      3.8%    4.3%       8.3%          16.7%      0.0%
 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment             12.5%           0.0%           4.5%          0.0%         9.6%          8.3%        7.0%      5.7%    4.3%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Promote policies to stimulate domestic private investment           0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         17.3%         4.2%        4.7%      5.7%    0.0%      25.0%           0.0%      9.1%
 Increasing access to education                                      0.0%            0.0%           9.1%          0.0%         5.8%          8.3%        0.0%     13.2%   21.7%       8.3%          16.7%      9.1%
 Increasing access to health services                                0.0%            0.0%           4.5%         10.0%         7.7%          4.2%        9.3%      3.8%    4.3%       8.3%           5.6%      0.0%
 Reducing poverty                                                    12.5%           25.0%         13.6%          0.0%         15.4%         0.0%        7.0%     11.3%    4.3%      16.7%           5.6%      9.1%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system               0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          4.2%        0.0%      9.4%    4.3%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                      0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         3.8%          4.2%        2.3%      1.9%    4.3%       8.3%           0.0%      0.0%
 Improving environmental quality                                     0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          4.2%        2.3%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Protecting natural resources                                        0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities              0.0%            0.0%           4.5%          0.0%         0.0%          4.2%        0.0%      3.8%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment      0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        2.3%      0.0%    4.3%       0.0%           0.0%      9.1%
 Agriculture development                                             12.5%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          4.2%        7.0%      0.0%    8.7%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                  0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                         0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Climate change                                                      0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Food security                                                       0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                               0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           5.6%      0.0%




                                                                                                              67
The World Bank                                                                                             Ethiopia                                                                            Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing Ethiopia (continued)

Then identify which one you consider the second most important development priority.
                                                                   Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                     of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                        Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Government effectiveness/Improving governance                     0.0%            0.0%           4.8%          0.0%         2.0%          0.0%        2.3%      3.8%    0.0%       0.0%          16.7%      9.1%
 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    4.3%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Economic growth                                                   37.5%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        4.5%      7.5%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      9.1%
 Reducing corruption                                               0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        2.3%      1.9%    4.3%       0.0%           0.0%     18.2%
 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment           0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        2.3%      0.0%    0.0%       8.3%           5.6%      0.0%
 Promote policies to stimulate domestic private investment         0.0%            25.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        2.3%      0.0%    4.3%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Increasing access to education                                    0.0%            0.0%           4.8%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    8.7%       0.0%           5.6%      9.1%
 Increasing access to health services                              0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         6.0%          0.0%        0.0%      1.9%    0.0%       0.0%           5.6%      0.0%
 Reducing poverty                                                  12.5%           25.0%         14.3%         20.0%         12.0%        16.7%       15.9%     15.1%   13.0%       8.3%          11.1%      9.1%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system             0.0%            0.0%           4.8%         10.0%         4.0%          8.3%        9.1%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%     18.2%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                    25.0%           0.0%           9.5%         20.0%         4.0%          8.3%        6.8%      7.5%    0.0%       0.0%          11.1%      0.0%
 Improving environmental quality                                   0.0%            25.0%          9.5%          0.0%         8.0%          8.3%        2.3%      5.7%   17.4%       8.3%           5.6%      0.0%
 Protecting natural resources                                      0.0%            0.0%          14.3%         10.0%         12.0%         8.3%        4.5%     17.0%    4.3%       8.3%           5.6%      9.1%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities            12.5%           0.0%          19.0%         10.0%         12.0%         8.3%       22.7%      7.5%    8.7%       8.3%          11.1%      9.1%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment    0.0%            25.0%          9.5%         30.0%         16.0%        25.0%       15.9%     11.3%   17.4%      16.7%           5.6%      0.0%
 Agriculture development                                           12.5%           0.0%           9.5%          0.0%         22.0%         8.3%        9.1%     15.1%    8.7%      41.7%          11.1%      9.1%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          4.2%        2.3%      5.7%    8.7%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                       0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         2.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Climate change                                                    0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          4.2%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Food security                                                     0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           5.6%      0.0%

Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                   Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                     of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                        Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Government effectiveness/Increasing governance                    10.0%           40.0%         17.2%         30.8%         5.6%         17.9%       14.6%     20.0%   17.4%       7.1%          33.3%     18.2%
 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         1.9%          3.6%        4.2%      0.0%    4.3%       0.0%           0.0%      9.1%
 Economic growth                                                   70.0%           20.0%         41.4%         23.1%         24.1%        14.3%       29.2%     32.3%   21.7%      28.6%          44.4%     27.3%
 Reducing corruption                                               0.0%            40.0%          6.9%         38.5%         20.4%        10.7%       14.6%     16.9%   13.0%      28.6%           5.6%      0.0%
 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment           0.0%            0.0%           3.4%          7.7%         7.4%         10.7%        6.3%      7.7%    4.3%       7.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Promote policies to stimulate domestic private investment         0.0%            0.0%           3.4%          0.0%         1.9%          3.6%        6.3%      3.1%    8.7%       7.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Increasing access to education                                    20.0%           0.0%          10.3%          7.7%         1.9%         14.3%        2.1%      4.6%    8.7%      14.3%           5.6%     18.2%
 Increasing access to health services                              0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         5.6%          3.6%        6.3%      0.0%    8.7%       7.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Reducing poverty                                                  10.0%           0.0%          24.1%         15.4%         11.1%         7.1%       20.8%     23.1%   17.4%      21.4%           5.6%     27.3%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system             0.0%            0.0%           3.4%          0.0%         9.3%         10.7%        2.1%      9.2%    4.3%       0.0%           5.6%      0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                    10.0%           20.0%          6.9%          0.0%         13.0%         3.6%       10.4%      7.7%    8.7%       7.1%           5.6%      0.0%
 Improving environmental quality                                   10.0%           0.0%           3.4%          0.0%         5.6%          3.6%        6.3%      1.5%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Protecting natural resources                                      0.0%            0.0%           6.9%          7.7%         11.1%         7.1%        4.2%      6.2%   13.0%       7.1%           5.6%      0.0%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities            30.0%           20.0%         10.3%          0.0%         9.3%         17.9%        6.3%      9.2%    4.3%       7.1%          11.1%     27.3%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment    0.0%            20.0%         13.8%          7.7%         5.6%         17.9%       12.5%      4.6%   13.0%       7.1%           5.6%      9.1%
 Agriculture development                                           30.0%           20.0%         20.7%         15.4%         27.8%        21.4%       22.9%     20.0%    8.7%      21.4%          38.9%      9.1%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                0.0%            0.0%           3.4%         15.4%         9.3%          7.1%       14.6%     13.8%   13.0%       7.1%           5.6%     18.2%
 Improving trade and exports                                       0.0%            0.0%           3.4%         15.4%         11.1%        10.7%        8.3%     10.8%    8.7%       7.1%           5.6%      9.1%
 Climate change                                                    0.0%            0.0%           0.0%         15.4%         7.4%          0.0%        2.1%      3.1%    8.7%       7.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Food security                                                     0.0%            20.0%          3.4%          0.0%         3.7%          7.1%        4.2%      1.5%    0.0%       0.0%           5.6%      0.0%
 Other                                                             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           5.6%     18.2%




                                                                                                            68
The World Bank                                                                                                Ethiopia                                                                            Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing Ethiopia (continued)

Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                      Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                        of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Increasing agricultural productivity                                 70.0%           80.0%         24.1%         23.1%         11.1%        21.4%       25.0%     24.6%   17.4%      21.4%          22.2%     38.5%
 Reducing corruption                                                  0.0%            20.0%         10.3%         15.4%         9.3%         25.0%       18.8%     18.5%   21.7%      35.7%          16.7%      0.0%
 Government effectiveness/Increasing governance                       20.0%           20.0%         13.8%         23.1%         13.0%        14.3%        8.3%     12.3%   13.0%       7.1%          11.1%     30.8%
 Promote policies to stimulate domestic private investment            10.0%           0.0%          17.2%          7.7%         16.7%        14.3%       12.5%     18.5%    8.7%       7.1%          16.7%     15.4%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment       20.0%           20.0%         37.9%         23.1%         18.5%        17.9%       22.9%     21.5%   26.1%      21.4%          27.8%     46.2%
 Improving access to and/or quality of education                      30.0%           0.0%          17.2%          7.7%         25.9%        17.9%       22.9%     20.0%   21.7%      14.3%          16.7%     15.4%
 Improving access to and/or quality of health care                    10.0%           0.0%           6.9%         15.4%         16.7%        10.7%       14.6%      7.7%   13.0%      14.3%           0.0%      7.7%
 Strengthening the regulatory framework                               20.0%           0.0%          17.2%         23.1%         13.0%         7.1%       18.8%      7.7%   17.4%       7.1%          11.1%      7.7%
 Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment    0.0%            20.0%         13.8%          7.7%         9.3%         17.9%       12.5%     20.0%    4.3%      14.3%          33.3%     15.4%
 Improving trade and exports                                          10.0%           0.0%          17.2%         15.4%         31.5%        21.4%       29.2%     24.6%   26.1%      28.6%          11.1%      7.7%
 Other                                                                0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           5.6%      7.7%



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “to no degree at all”, 10 meaning “to a very significant degree”)

Based on your observations of the World Bank in Ethiopia, where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in its support of country priorities?
(Choose no more than THREE) (Combined Responses)
                                                                      Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                        of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Improving trade and exports                                          11.1%           25.0%         14.3%         21.4%         11.1%        17.9%       10.4%     24.6%   17.4%      30.8%          11.1%      7.7%
 Reducing poverty                                                     11.1%           75.0%         25.0%         21.4%         14.8%         7.1%       12.5%     16.9%   21.7%      15.4%          16.7%     23.1%
 Economic growth                                                      22.2%           0.0%          21.4%          0.0%         24.1%        14.3%       29.2%     18.5%   26.1%       7.7%          27.8%     46.2%
 Climate change                                                       0.0%            0.0%           3.6%          7.1%         11.1%        21.4%        8.3%     16.9%   13.0%       7.7%           5.6%     15.4%
 Agriculture development                                              11.1%           25.0%         17.9%         14.3%         20.4%        17.9%       18.8%     21.5%    8.7%      30.8%          16.7%     23.1%
 Increasing access to education                                       44.4%           0.0%           7.1%          0.0%         13.0%        10.7%       10.4%      7.7%   17.4%       0.0%          11.1%      0.0%
 Food security                                                        33.3%           25.0%         25.0%         42.9%         22.2%        25.0%       22.9%     23.1%   17.4%      30.8%          11.1%      7.7%
 Promoting policies to stimulate foreign direct investment            0.0%            0.0%          10.7%         14.3%         1.9%          7.1%        2.1%      0.0%   13.0%       0.0%           5.6%      0.0%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                0.0%            0.0%           3.6%          0.0%         5.6%          7.1%        4.2%      6.2%    8.7%       0.0%           0.0%     23.1%
 Promoting policies to stimulate domestic private sector
                                                                      0.0%           0.0%          14.3%            0.0%        9.3%         0.0%        27.1%     7.7%    8.7%       0.0%            11.1%    23.1%
 growth/investment
 Improving environmental quality                                      0.0%          50.0%           0.0%            7.1%       5.6%          7.1%         6.3%      4.6%    0.0%      15.4%           16.7%     7.7%
 Increasing access to health services                                 11.1%         25.0%          10.7%            7.1%       13.0%         3.6%         4.2%     15.4%   21.7%      0.0%            27.8%    15.4%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities in private
                                                                      11.1%          0.0%          14.3%            14.3%      14.8%        25.0%        10.4%     15.4%   26.1%      23.1%           22.2%     7.7%
 sector
 Protecting natural resources                                         22.2%          0.0%          10.7%            14.3%      11.1%        10.7%        14.6%     10.8%    8.7%      15.4%            0.0%     7.7%
 Reducing corruption                                                  0.0%           0.0%          35.7%            14.3%      14.8%        28.6%        20.8%     16.9%   21.7%      23.1%           16.7%     7.7%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                   11.1%          0.0%           3.6%            7.1%       3.7%         7.1%         6.3%       0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             5.6%     7.7%
 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                             0.0%           0.0%           3.6%            7.1%       7.4%         3.6%         6.3%       3.1%    4.3%      15.4%            5.6%     0.0%
 Government effectiveness/governance                                  0.0%           0.0%           3.6%            0.0%       3.7%         0.0%         8.3%       3.1%    0.0%      0.0%             5.6%    30.8%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                       55.6%          0.0%          17.9%            0.0%       3.7%         3.6%         2.1%       3.1%    0.0%      7.7%             0.0%    15.4%
 Other                                                                0.0%           0.0%           0.0%            0.0%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             5.6%     0.0%
                                                                                                               69
The World Bank                                                                                                       Ethiopia                                                                            Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in Ethiopia's development strategies?
                                                                             Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                               of          Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The Bank should be more involved                                             80.0           100.0         75.9           78.6         71.7          64.3        81.6     75.4     75.0       78.6           94.4      84.6
 The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                           10.0             -           13.8             -           5.7          28.6        10.2      3.1     8.3         7.1             -        -
 The Bank should be less involved                                             10.0             -           10.3           14.3         17.0           7.1         8.2     12.3      -          7.1            5.6      7.7
 The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                                          -              -             -              -           5.7            -           -       4.6     8.3         7.1             -        -
 Don't know                                                                     -              -             -             7.1           -             -           -       4.6     8.3           -             -       7.7
In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest value ” brought by the World Bank to Ethiopia?
                                                                             Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                               of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The Bank's knowledge                                                        12.5%           66.7%          7.7%         30.8%         14.6%        14.3%       20.9%     20.0%   13.6%      14.3%          18.8%     20.0%
 Technical advice                                                            12.5%           33.3%         19.2%          7.7%         14.6%        10.7%       23.3%     18.3%    9.1%      21.4%          31.3%     10.0%
 Policy and economic advice                                                  12.5%           0.0%          19.2%          7.7%         22.9%         7.1%        4.7%     11.7%    9.1%      14.3%           6.3%     10.0%
 Lending when others won't                                                   25.0%           0.0%          15.4%         23.1%         22.9%        17.9%       16.3%     16.7%   31.8%       7.1%          12.5%     10.0%
 Donor coordination and convener                                             0.0%            0.0%           7.7%          7.7%         8.3%         10.7%        9.3%     10.0%   13.6%       0.0%          18.8%     10.0%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                               0.0%            0.0%           3.8%          0.0%         2.1%          3.6%        2.3%      3.3%    4.5%      21.4%           0.0%      0.0%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                                    12.5%           0.0%           3.8%          7.7%         2.1%          7.1%        2.3%      3.3%    4.5%       7.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Financial resources                                                         25.0%           0.0%          23.1%         15.4%         12.5%        28.6%       20.9%     16.7%   13.6%      14.3%          12.5%     40.0%
 Other                                                                       0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
What is the “second greatest” value?
                                                                             Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                               of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The Bank's knowledge                                                        12.5%           0.0%           0.0%         14.3%         2.3%          7.4%       10.8%      3.7%    9.1%       7.1%           0.0%     10.0%
 Technical advice                                                            25.0%           0.0%          12.0%          0.0%         4.5%         22.2%        5.4%      5.6%   18.2%      21.4%           0.0%     20.0%
 Policy and economic advice                                                  0.0%            0.0%           4.0%          7.1%         2.3%          0.0%        5.4%      7.4%    9.1%       7.1%           6.7%     10.0%
 Lending when others won't                                                   0.0%            0.0%           4.0%          0.0%         6.8%         11.1%        5.4%      1.9%    0.0%       0.0%           6.7%     20.0%
 Donor coordination and convener                                             25.0%           0.0%           4.0%          0.0%         6.8%          0.0%        0.0%      1.9%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                               0.0%            0.0%           4.0%          0.0%         4.5%          0.0%        8.1%      9.3%    4.5%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                                    12.5%           0.0%           8.0%         14.3%         25.0%        14.8%        8.1%     20.4%    9.1%      14.3%          26.7%     10.0%
 Financial resources                                                         25.0%          100.0%         64.0%         64.3%         47.7%        44.4%       56.8%     50.0%   50.0%      50.0%          60.0%     30.0%
 Other                                                                       0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                             Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                               of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities       20.0%           20.0%         17.2%          7.1%         7.4%          7.1%        8.3%     10.8%   8.7%        7.1%           0.0%     15.4%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                    10.0%           0.0%           3.4%         14.3%         3.7%          0.0%        0.0%      6.2%   0.0%        7.1%           5.6%      7.7%
 Does not push Government hard enough on reforms needed for
                                                                             0.0%          20.0%          10.3%            21.4%       7.4%        17.9%        20.8%     16.9%   17.4%      7.1%            16.7%    38.5%
 poverty reduction and private sector growth
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                 60.0%         60.0%          51.7%            28.6%      46.3%        39.3%        35.4%     33.8%   43.5%      35.7%           16.7%    38.5%
 Not client focused                                                          0.0%          0.0%            6.9%            21.4%      14.8%        7.1%         18.8%     18.5%    8.7%      7.1%            11.1%     7.7%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                      0.0%          20.0%           6.9%            14.3%      14.8%        25.0%        10.4%     20.0%   21.7%      28.6%           27.8%     0.0%
 Is arrogant in its approach                                                 10.0%         40.0%           6.9%            14.3%      1.9%         0.0%         4.2%       1.5%    4.3%      0.0%            11.1%     0.0%
 Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in country    10.0%         20.0%           3.4%            7.1%       1.9%         17.9%        10.4%     10.8%    4.3%      7.1%            11.1%    38.5%
 Too influenced by the US                                                    10.0%         20.0%          10.3%            7.1%       22.2%        17.9%        14.6%     18.5%   17.4%      35.7%           11.1%     0.0%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                    0.0%          0.0%           13.8%            21.4%      38.9%        25.0%        25.0%     23.1%   30.4%      7.1%            16.7%    23.1%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                   50.0%         0.0%           27.6%            21.4%      20.4%        25.0%        22.9%     20.0%    8.7%      21.4%           27.8%    23.1%
 Inadequately aligned with country priorities                                10.0%         0.0%           13.8%            7.1%       0.0%         0.0%         6.3%       1.5%   13.0%      7.1%            11.1%     0.0%
 Other                                                                       0.0%          0.0%            3.4%            0.0%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             5.6%     0.0%

                                                                                                                      70
The World Bank                                                                                                Ethiopia                                                                            Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “to no degree at all”, 10 meaning “to a very high degree”)

Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the nex t few years in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                      Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                        of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Education                                                            11.1%          100.0%         14.3%         35.7%         13.0%        25.0%       18.8%     12.3%   33.3%      50.0%          38.9%     33.3%
 Health                                                               22.2%           25.0%          7.1%         21.4%         5.6%         10.7%       10.4%     18.5%   23.8%       7.1%          22.2%     25.0%
 Social protection                                                    11.1%           25.0%         14.3%         21.4%         20.4%        25.0%        8.3%     10.8%   14.3%       7.1%           5.6%      8.3%
 Transport                                                            11.1%           0.0%           0.0%         14.3%         0.0%          7.1%        6.3%     13.8%   14.3%       7.1%           5.6%      0.0%
 Poverty                                                              11.1%           0.0%          21.4%         28.6%         24.1%        21.4%       18.8%     24.6%    9.5%      14.3%          16.7%     25.0%
 Governance                                                           0.0%            0.0%          14.3%          0.0%         16.7%        10.7%       20.8%     10.8%   14.3%      14.3%          11.1%     16.7%
 Anti-corruption                                                      0.0%            0.0%           7.1%          7.1%         3.7%          0.0%       14.6%      4.6%    4.8%       7.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Enhanced business environment for private sector development         11.1%           0.0%          10.7%          7.1%         3.7%          0.0%        8.3%      0.0%    4.8%       0.0%          16.7%      8.3%
 Energy                                                               22.2%           0.0%           7.1%         21.4%         16.7%        10.7%       10.4%     10.8%    9.5%      28.6%          11.1%      0.0%
 Agricultural development                                             0.0%            25.0%         14.3%          0.0%         9.3%         10.7%        8.3%      6.2%    9.5%      14.3%          11.1%      8.3%
 Water and sanitation                                                 0.0%            0.0%           7.1%          7.1%         7.4%          7.1%        2.1%      4.6%    9.5%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                            11.1%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         5.6%          3.6%        0.0%      4.6%    4.8%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Public expenditure                                                   0.0%            25.0%          0.0%          0.0%         5.6%         10.7%        0.0%     15.4%    4.8%       0.0%           0.0%      8.3%
 Public sector performance                                            11.1%           0.0%          10.7%          7.1%         3.7%          7.1%        6.3%      6.2%   14.3%       7.1%          11.1%      8.3%
 Labor markets/job creation                                           11.1%           0.0%           7.1%          0.0%         5.6%         21.4%       12.5%      9.2%    4.8%       0.0%          11.1%      8.3%
 Financial markets                                                    0.0%            0.0%          17.9%          0.0%         20.4%         0.0%       14.6%     12.3%    0.0%       7.1%           0.0%     16.7%
 Urban/metropolitan development                                       33.3%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         9.3%          7.1%        4.2%      1.5%    0.0%       7.1%           5.6%      8.3%
 Environmental sustainability/ natural resources management           11.1%           0.0%           0.0%         14.3%         3.7%          3.6%       10.4%      9.2%    4.8%       0.0%          11.1%      0.0%
 Improving equality of opportunity                                    0.0%            0.0%           7.1%          7.1%         1.9%          0.0%        2.1%      1.5%   14.3%       7.1%          11.1%      8.3%
 Rural development                                                    11.1%           0.0%           7.1%          0.0%         5.6%          3.6%        2.1%      1.5%    0.0%       7.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Food security                                                        0.0%            0.0%          10.7%          7.1%         7.4%          3.6%        4.2%      4.6%    0.0%       0.0%           5.6%      8.3%
 Climate change                                                       11.1%           0.0%           3.6%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        2.1%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                                0.0%            0.0%           3.6%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           5.6%      8.3%

Which of the following statements best represents how the Bank should work in Ethiopia? (Choose only ONE)
                                                                      Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of           Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                           Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The Bank should work primarily with the Government of Ethiopia to
                                                                      66.7           75.0           17.9            14.3        32.7         28.6         10.4     23.8    29.2       21.4            17.6      30.8
 advance the country's development program
 The Bank should work in partnership with a broad range of
                                                                      33.3           25.0           82.1            85.7        67.3         71.4         89.6     76.2    70.8       78.6            82.4      69.2
 stakeholders to advance the country's development program




                                                                                                               71
The World Bank                                                                                                  Ethiopia                                                                            Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which of the following statements best represents how the Bank does work in Ethiopia? (Choose only ONE)
                                                                        Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                         of           Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The Bank works primarily with the Government of Ethiopia to advance
                                                                        90.0          100.0           57.7            64.3        55.1         55.6         58.7     62.9    56.5       76.9            50.0      63.6
 the country's development program
 The Bank works in partnership with a broad range of stakeholders to
                                                                        10.0             -            42.3            35.7        44.9         44.4         41.3     37.1    43.5       23.1            50.0      36.4
 advance the country's development program

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank work with more in your country to ensure better development
results there? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                        Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                          of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                             Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 NGOs                                                                   0.0%            20.0%          7.1%         30.8%         9.3%         17.9%       12.2%     20.6%    8.7%      21.4%           5.6%     15.4%
 Local Government                                                       90.0%           60.0%         35.7%         15.4%         35.2%        10.7%       10.2%     14.3%   13.0%      28.6%           0.0%     38.5%
 Beneficiaries                                                          40.0%           0.0%           3.6%          0.0%         16.7%         7.1%        6.1%      7.9%    0.0%      14.3%          22.2%     23.1%
 Private sector                                                         20.0%           0.0%          53.6%         53.8%         27.8%        57.1%       51.0%     49.2%   56.5%      28.6%          55.6%     69.2%
 Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                   20.0%           0.0%          14.3%         15.4%         24.1%        10.7%       20.4%     17.5%   17.4%      21.4%          33.3%      0.0%
 Donor community                                                        20.0%           0.0%          39.3%         15.4%         20.4%        10.7%       18.4%     17.5%   17.4%      14.3%          11.1%      0.0%
 Parliament                                                             0.0%            40.0%          7.1%          7.7%         11.1%        14.3%       10.2%     12.7%    8.7%      14.3%           0.0%     15.4%
 Media                                                                  0.0%            0.0%           7.1%         15.4%         20.4%        35.7%       28.6%     27.0%   30.4%      28.6%          16.7%     15.4%
 Academia and think tanks                                               0.0%            0.0%          14.3%         23.1%         5.6%         10.7%       16.3%      1.6%    0.0%       0.0%          38.9%      7.7%
 Other                                                                  0.0%            20.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          3.6%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%


On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following statements about the World Bank in Ethiopia.




                                                                                                                 72
The World Bank                                                                                            Ethiopia                                                              Country Survey 2012

D. The Work of the World Bank

How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in Ethiopia? (Asked on a 10-point importance scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




                                                                                                            73
The World Bank                                                                                           Ethiopia                                                                                 Country Survey 2012

D. The Work of the World Bank (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of development in Ethiopia? (Asked on a 10-point effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




                                                                                                            74
The World Bank                                                                                             Ethiopia                                                                                    Country Survey 2012

E. The Way the World Bank does Business

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below using a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”.




                                                                                                             75
The World Bank                                                                                                    Ethiopia                                                                            Country Survey 2012

F. Project/Program Related Issues
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.




G. The Future Role of the World Bank in Ethiopia




(Asked on a 10-pt. scale, 1 meaning that the Bank should not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should play a very significant role)

Which one of the following should the Bank do to make itself of greater value in Ethiopia? (Choose only ONE)
                                                                          Office                      Employee      Consultant                 Bilateral or                            Independent
                                                                           of           Office of       of a         on Bank        Local      Multilateral   Private                  Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government      Agency       Sector    NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Ethiopia’s specific
                                                                          12.5           25.0           21.4            22.2        19.6          19.2         28.2     15.3   28.6       15.4            17.6      16.7
 challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                  50.0           25.0           17.9            22.2        21.6          11.5         12.8     25.4   23.8       15.4            35.3      33.3
 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                            12.5            -             14.3            22.2        13.7          23.1         15.4     23.7              30.8            17.6      8.3
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing (e.g., cost, timeliness,
                                                                            -              -            21.4            33.3        31.4          19.2         30.8     23.7   28.6       23.1             5.9      16.7
 and other terms) compared to markets
 Offer more innovative financial products                                 12.5           25.0           14.3             -          11.8          23.1         5.1      10.2   14.3       15.4            11.8       -
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                  -              -             3.6              -           2.0            -          7.7      1.7    4.8         -              5.9        -
 Other                                                                    12.5           25.0           7.1              -            -            3.8          -        -      -          -              5.9       25.0



                                                                                                                   76
The World Bank                                                                                                    Ethiopia                                                                            Country Survey 2012

G. The Future Role of the World Bank in Ethiopia (continued)

When Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose only ONE)
                                                                          Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                            of          Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                             37.5           33.3           4.0             -           9.8          11.5         7.9     15.0     10.5       15.4             -        -
 Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                   -              -             -             8.3         19.6          19.2         7.9     21.7     26.3       30.8            7.1      12.5
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation       -              -           16.0            8.3         17.6          11.5        18.4     13.3     10.5        7.7           35.7       -
 Poor donor coordination                                                     -            33.3          32.0           41.7         21.6          26.9        26.3     33.3     15.8       38.5           14.3      37.5
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                       25.0           33.3          36.0           41.7         21.6          30.8        21.1     11.7     15.8          -            7.1      12.5
 Political pressures and obstacles                                           -              -            4.0             -           9.8            -          7.9      3.3     10.5        7.7           28.6      12.5
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges           37.5             -            8.0             -            -             -         10.5      1.7     10.5          -            7.1      25.0




H. Communication and Outreach
From where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                          Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                            of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Local newspapers                                                         50.0%           75.0%         46.4%         50.0%         46.3%        59.3%       36.7%     37.5%   28.6%      57.1%          38.9%     41.7%
 International newspapers                                                 12.5%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         1.9%          0.0%        2.0%      3.1%    4.8%       0.0%           5.6%      8.3%
 Local radio                                                              0.0%            0.0%          10.7%         14.3%         16.7%        14.8%       18.4%     17.2%   14.3%       7.1%          16.7%      8.3%
 International radio                                                      0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         7.4%          3.7%        2.0%      3.1%    0.0%       0.0%           5.6%      0.0%
 Local television                                                         75.0%           50.0%         39.3%         50.0%         42.6%        22.2%       32.7%     28.1%   33.3%      35.7%          33.3%     25.0%
 International television                                                 0.0%            0.0%          17.9%          0.0%         3.7%          3.7%       14.3%     10.9%    4.8%       7.1%           5.6%     25.0%
 Periodicals                                                              12.5%           0.0%           7.1%         21.4%         20.4%        18.5%       24.5%     17.2%    4.8%      14.3%          16.7%     16.7%
 Internet                                                                 37.5%           0.0%          25.0%          7.1%         13.0%        14.8%       18.4%     25.0%   28.6%      14.3%          22.2%     25.0%
 Other                                                                    0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      1.6%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%     16.7%

From where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development activities in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                          Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                            of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                               Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Local newspapers                                                         40.0%           40.0%         24.1%         50.0%         29.6%        44.4%       33.3%     30.2%   20.0%      28.6%          33.3%     40.0%
 International newspapers                                                 0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         3.7%          0.0%        2.1%      1.6%    0.0%       0.0%          11.1%      0.0%
 Local radio                                                              0.0%            0.0%           3.4%          7.1%         24.1%        18.5%       14.6%     17.5%   10.0%      28.6%          11.1%     10.0%
 International radio                                                      10.0%           0.0%           0.0%          7.1%         1.9%          3.7%        4.2%      1.6%    0.0%       0.0%           5.6%      0.0%
 Local television                                                         30.0%           0.0%          24.1%          7.1%         25.9%        25.9%       33.3%     23.8%   15.0%      14.3%          27.8%     30.0%
 International television                                                 0.0%            0.0%           3.4%          0.0%         1.9%          0.0%        0.0%      6.3%   15.0%       7.1%           0.0%     20.0%
 Periodicals                                                              0.0%            0.0%          17.2%         21.4%         13.0%        11.1%        8.3%     12.7%   15.0%      21.4%          16.7%     10.0%
 Blogs                                                                    0.0%            0.0%           3.4%          0.0%         9.3%          7.4%        2.1%      6.3%   10.0%       0.0%          11.1%      0.0%
 Internet                                                                 30.0%           60.0%         27.6%         28.6%         29.6%        18.5%       31.3%     30.2%   15.0%      35.7%          27.8%     30.0%
 World Bank Development Information Corners                               0.0%            0.0%           3.4%          0.0%         1.9%          3.7%        2.1%      6.3%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                              0.0%            0.0%          10.3%          0.0%         9.3%         11.1%        2.1%      4.8%   20.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 World Bank publications, materials                                       30.0%           0.0%          10.3%          0.0%         3.7%          3.7%        8.3%      6.3%    5.0%       7.1%          11.1%     10.0%
 World Bank website                                                       20.0%           20.0%         17.2%         14.3%         7.4%          7.4%        6.3%      7.9%    5.0%       7.1%          16.7%      0.0%
 World Bank Public Information Center (PIC)                               0.0%            0.0%           0.0%         28.6%         3.7%          7.4%        4.2%      3.2%    5.0%       0.0%           0.0%     10.0%
 Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff                         10.0%           0.0%           6.9%          7.1%         0.0%          3.7%        2.1%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%     10.0%
 Other                                                                    10.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        2.1%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%




                                                                                                                   77
The World Bank                                                                                              Ethiopia                                                                            Country Survey 2012

H. Communication and Outreach (continued)

How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                    Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of          Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector     NGO    Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 World Bank website                                                 44.4%           25.0%         78.6%         64.3%         43.4%        35.7%       56.3%     46.9%   50.0%      71.4%          50.0%     27.3%
 Face to face meetings/discussions                                  66.7%          100.0%         21.4%         42.9%         43.4%        57.1%       22.9%     31.3%   31.8%      14.3%          27.8%     18.2%
 e-newsletters                                                      0.0%            0.0%          21.4%          7.1%         11.3%        17.9%       10.4%      9.4%   22.7%      14.3%          22.2%     36.4%
 Workshops/conferences                                              55.6%           25.0%         25.0%         14.3%         39.6%        17.9%       22.9%     21.9%   18.2%       0.0%          38.9%     36.4%
 Mobile phones                                                      0.0%            0.0%           7.1%          7.1%         5.7%          7.1%        8.3%     12.5%   13.6%      14.3%          11.1%     18.2%
 Social media                                                       0.0%            0.0%           7.1%         14.3%         15.1%        10.7%       18.8%     21.9%   13.6%      28.6%          11.1%     18.2%
 Blogs                                                              0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         7.5%          0.0%        6.3%      6.3%    4.5%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                              0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%

Do you have access to the Internet:
                                                                    Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                     of           Office of        of a        on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Yes                                                                100.0           100.0         100.0          100.0        100.0         96.4        97.9     96.8    100.0       100.0          100.0    100.0
 No                                                                   -               -             -              -            -            3.6         2.1      3.2      -            -             -        -

I use/have used the World Bank website:
                                                                    Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of          Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Yes                                                                 77.8           100.0         95.8           100.0        100.0        100.0        88.9     94.3     91.7       92.9           77.8      60.0
 No                                                                  22.2             -            4.2             -            -             -         11.1      5.7     8.3         7.1           22.2      40.0

I primarily use:
                                                                    Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of          Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The World Bank’s country website                                    16.7             -           28.0           25.0         37.5          39.1        28.9     34.0     57.1       22.2           37.5      33.3
 The World Bank’s main website                                       83.3           100.0         72.0           75.0         62.5          60.9        71.1     66.0     42.9       77.8           62.5      66.7

I use/have used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Ethiopia:
                                                                    Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of          Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Yes                                                                 37.5           50.0          55.6           100.0        59.3          53.6        55.3     67.2     54.2       57.1           64.7      41.7
 No                                                                  12.5           25.0          22.2             -          18.5          21.4        12.8     12.5     33.3       21.4           35.3      25.0
 I don’t know what PIC is                                            50.0           25.0          22.2             -          22.2          25.0        31.9     20.3     12.5       21.4             -       33.3

I use/have used the World Bank’s Development Information Corners in Ethiopia:
                                                                    Office                      Employee      Consultant                Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of          Office of       of a         on Bank        Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         Minister   Parliamentarian    Ministry    project/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Yes                                                                 37.5           50.0          48.1           100.0        59.3          50.0        55.3     70.3     62.5       57.1           70.6      33.3
 No                                                                  12.5           25.0          25.9             -          20.4          25.0        12.8     12.5     20.8       21.4           29.4      16.7
 I don’t know what World Bank Development Information Corners is     50.0           25.0          25.9             -          20.4          25.0        31.9     17.2     16.7       21.4             -       50.0




                                                                                                             78
The World Bank                                                                                      Ethiopia                                        Country Survey 2012

H. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.




                                                                                                      79
The World Bank                                                        Ethiopia                                              Country Survey 2012



Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Year1
                             FY ’06 Response Number = 306  FY ’11 Response Number = 312

A. Background Information




How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the World Bank's activities?
    Percentage of Respondents                                                          FY 2006           FY 2012
    Less than one year                                                                   12.2              12.6
    One to three years                                                                   34.3              39.9
    More than three years                                                                53.5              47.5

Which best represents your geographic location?
    Percentage of Respondents                                                          FY 2006           FY 2012
    Addis Ababa                                                                          82.7              93.8
    Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples' Regional State                           1.1               1.2
    Oromia                                                                               5.3                .9
    Amhara                                                                               3.8               1.9
    Tigray                                                                               2.3               1.2
    Other                                                                                4.9                .9



B. General Issues facing Ethiopia
In general, would you say that Ethiopia is currently headed...
  Percentage of Respondents                                                            FY 2006           FY 2012
  In the right direction                                                                 55.2              69.8
  In the wrong direction                                                                 26.1              19.8
  Have no real opinion*                                                                   -                6.8
  Don't know                                                                             18.7              3.7
*This response option not offered in FY 2006 country survey.




1
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’0 6 and FY ’12 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.



                                                                         80
The World Bank                                                     Ethiopia                                        Country Survey 2012



B. General Issues facing Ethiopia (continued)

Please identify which one of these you consider the first most important development priority.
  Percentage of Respondents                                                      FY 2006          FY 2012
  Government effectiveness/Improving governance                                   13.6%            23.7%
  HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                         2.3%             0.7%
  Economic growth*                                                                   -             19.4%
  Reducing corruption                                                              1.5%             8.5%
  Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment*                           -              5.7%
  Promote policies to stimulate domestic private investment*                         -              6.7%
  Increasing access to education                                                   1.5%             8.5%
  Increasing access to health services                                             0.4%             6.0%
  Reducing poverty                                                                71.6%             9.5%
  Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                            1.5%             2.5%
  Improving basic infrastructure                                                   1.1%             2.5%
  Improving environmental quality*                                                   -              0.7%
  Protecting natural resources*                                                      -              0.0%
  Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                           0.8%             1.4%
  Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                   2.3%             1.1%
  Agriculture development*                                                           -              2.8%
  Strengthening regulatory framework*                                                -              0.0%
  Improving trade and exports*                                                       -              0.0%
  Climate change*                                                                    -              0.0%
  Food security*                                                                     -              0.0%
  Other                                                                            3.8%             0.4%
*This response option not offered in FY 2006 country survey.

Then identify which one you consider the second most important development priority.
  Percentage of Respondents                                                      FY 2006          FY 2012
  Government effectiveness/Improving governance                                   19.2%             3.2%
  HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                         9.8%             0.4%
  Economic growth*                                                                   -              3.9%
  Reducing corruption                                                              4.3%             1.8%
  Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment*                           -              1.1%
  Promote policies to stimulate domestic private investment*                         -              1.1%
  Increasing access to education                                                   7.1%             1.8%
  Increasing access to health services                                             5.1%             1.8%
  Reducing poverty                                                                11.8%            13.9%
  Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                            9.4%             4.3%
  Improving basic infrastructure                                                   6.3%             7.1%
  Improving environmental quality*                                                   -              7.1%
  Protecting natural resources*                                                      -              9.6%
  Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                          14.1%            12.1%
  Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                   7.1%            14.2%
  Agriculture development*                                                           -             13.5%
  Strengthening regulatory framework*                                                -              2.5%
  Improving trade and exports*                                                       -              0.4%
  Climate change*                                                                    -              0.4%
  Food security*                                                                     -              0.0%
  Other                                                                            5.9%             0.4%
*This response option not offered in FY 2006 country survey.



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank
In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in Ethiopia’s development strategies?
  Percentage of Respondents                                                      FY 2006         FY 2011
  The Bank should be more involved                                                 74.5            76.9
  The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                               11.8             8.0
  The Bank should be less involved                                                  6.1            10.2
  The Bank shouldn't be involved at all*                                             -              2.8
  Don’t know                                                                        7.6             2.2
*This response option not offered in FY 2006 country survey.




                                                                     81
The World Bank                                                           Ethiopia                                  Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest value ” brought by the World Bank to Ethiopia?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           FY 2006        FY 2011
 The Bank's knowledge                                                                 18.6%          17.4%
 Technical advice                                                                     1.9%           17.4%
 Policy and economic advice                                                           4.9%           11.9%
 Lending when others won't                                                            2.7%           18.4%
 Donor coordination and convener                                                      5.7%           9.2%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                        1.1%           3.4%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                                             2.3%           3.8%
 Financial resources                                                                  60.5%          18.4%
 Other                                                                                2.3%           0.0%

What is the “second greatest value”?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           FY 2006        FY 2011
 The Bank's knowledge                                                                 22.2%          5.8%
 Technical advice                                                                     11.1%          9.9%
 Policy and economic advice                                                           20.2%          5.1%
 Lending when others won't                                                            7.4%           4.7%
 Donor coordination and convener                                                      10.3%          2.6%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                        4.1%           4.4%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                                             12.8%          15.7%
 Financial resources                                                                  11.5%          51.8%
 Other                                                                                19.3%          0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Ethiopia?
(Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
  Percentage of Respondents                                                          FY 2006        FY 2011
  Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities               37.2%          9.6%
  Not exploring alternative policy options*                                              -           4.0%
  Does not push Government hard enough on reforms needed for poverty reduction
                                                                                     18.4%          15.5%
  and private sector growth
  Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                        1.3%           39.6%
  Not client focused*                                                                  -            13.0%
  Staff too inaccessible                                                             1.3%           16.1%
  Is arrogant in its approach                                                        2.7%           4.3%
  Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country*        -            9.6%
  Too influenced by the US                                                           19.7%          16.4%
  Not enough public disclosure of its work*                                            -            23.8%
  World Bank processes too slow and complex*                                           -            22.0%
  Inadequately aligned with country priorities*                                        -            5.3%
  Other                                                                              0.0%           0.6%
*This response option not offered in FY 2006 country survey.

Which of the following statements best represents how the Bank should work in Ethiopia?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           FY 2006        FY 2011
 The Bank should work primarily with the Government of Ethiopia to advance the
                                                                                      18.2           24.6
 country's development program
 The Bank should work in partnership with a broad range of stakeholders to advance
                                                                                      81.8           75.4
 the country's development program

Which of the following statements best represents how the Bank does work in Ethiopia?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           FY 2006        FY 2011
 The Bank works primarily with the Government of Ethiopia to advance the country's
                                                                                      84.3           60.9
 development program
 The Bank works in partnership with a broad range of stakeholders to advance the
                                                                                      15.7           39.1
 country's development program




                                                                             82
The World Bank                                                     Ethiopia                                         Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following statements about the
World Bank in Ethiopia.




* In the FY ’06 survey, this statement read “The World Bank collaborates with other donors here”.


D. The Work of the World Bank: Importance
How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in Ethiopia?
(Asked on a 10-point* importance scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




* Responses from the FY ’06 survey were converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison.




                                                                      83
The World Bank                                                      Ethiopia                                         Country Survey 2012



D. The Work of the World Bank: Effectiveness
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of development in Ethiopia?
(Asked on a 10-point* effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




* Responses from the FY ’06 survey were converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison.


E. The Way the World Bank does Business
Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below.
(Asked on a 10-point* effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




* Responses from the FY ’06 survey were converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison.




                                                                        84
The World Bank                                                    Ethiopia                                       Country Survey 2012



F. Project/Program Related Issues
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you
“Strongly Agree”.




H. Communication and Outreach
I use/have used the World Bank website:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         FY 2006     FY 2011
 Yes                                                                                 54.5        92.3
 No                                                                                  45.5         7.7

I primarily use:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         FY 2006     FY 2011
 The World Bank’s country website                                                    26.8        33.7
 The World Bank’s main website                                                       73.2        66.3

I use/have used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Ethiopia :
  Percentage of Respondents                                                        FY 2006     FY 2011
  Yes                                                                                18.1        59.7
  No                                                                                 81.9        18.4
  I don't know what PIC is*                                                            -         21.9
*This response option not offered in FY 2006 country survey.




                                                                     85
The World Bank                                           Ethiopia                            Country Survey 2012


Appendix D: Ethiopia Questionnaire


                                 World Bank Client Survey FY12 – Ethiopia

The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Ethiopia or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey is meant to give the Bank’s team that works in Ethiopia, more in-depth insight into how the Bank’s work
is perceived. This is one tool the Bank uses to assess the views of its critical stakeholders. With this
understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies, outreach and programs that support
development in Ethiopia. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm to oversee the logistics of this
effort in Ethiopia. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the
survey, please circle the number that most accurately reflects your answer. If you prefer not to answer a
question, please leave it blank.

PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO
NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED
IN ANALYSIS.

SECTION A: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 A1. Which of the following best describes your current position? (Please mark only one
 response)
 1 Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2 Office of Minister
 3 Office of Parliamentarian
 4 Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5 Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 6 Project Management Unit (PMU - overseeing implementation of project)
 7 Local Government Office or Staff
 8 Bilateral or Multilateral Agency
 9 Private Sector Organization
 10 NGOs (including CBOs)
 11 Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web etc.)
 12 Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank)
 13 Trade Union
 14 Academia/Research Institute/Think tank
 15 Judiciary
 16 Other (please specify): ________________________




                                                           86
The World Bank                                             Ethiopia                      Country Survey 2012


SECTION A: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT..)

A2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only one
response)
 1 Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry
 2 Commerce, Trade and Manufacturing
 3 Communications, Information Services
 4 Economic Management
 5 Environment, Natural Resource Management
 6 Finance, Banking, Insurance
 7 Infrastructure (e.g., Transport, Water, Energy, Telecommunications)
 8 Law, Justice
 9 Legislature, Politics
10 Health
11 Education
12 Other social services
13 Other (please specify): ________________________


A3. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Ethiopia on
a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “extremely
familiar?"
      1          2      3     4      5       6      7       8         9       10
   Not                                                                    Extremel y
fami l i ar at                                                             fami l i ar
   all


A4. Which of the following best describes your exposure to the World Bank in Ethiopia?
(Please choose only one)
 1 Very familiar (collaborated, part of my professional duties, etc)
 2 Fairly familiar (personal interest, follow the press)
 3 Superficially (occasional press news, informal sources, etc.)


A5. How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the World Bank’s
activities?
 1 Less than one year
 2 One to three years
 3 More than three years




                                                                87
The World Bank                                         Ethiopia                                 Country Survey 2012


SECTION A: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT..)

A6. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1 Addis Ababa
 2 Southern Nations Nationalities and Peoples’ Regional State
 3 Oromia
 4 Amhara
 5 Tigray
 6 Other (please specify): _______________________


A7. Which best describes your age?
 1 18 - 25
 2 26 - 35
 3 36 - 45
 4 46+
 5 Prefer not to respond



SECTION B: GENERAL ISSUES FACING ETHIOPIA

B1. In general, would you say that Ethiopia is currently headed…(Please choose only ONE)
 1 In the right direction
 2 In the wrong direction
 3 Have no real opinion
 4 Don’t know


B2. In general, Ethiopia is headed in the right direction in terms of sustaining
economic recovery and promoting growth (Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning
Strongly disagree, 4 meaning Strongly agree.)
         1                   2                   3                      4              

  Strongly disagree                                               Strongly agree   Don't Know


B3. In general, Ethiopia is headed in the right direction in terms of improving
governance (Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning Strongly disagree, 4 meaning
Strongly agree.)
         1                   2                   3                      4              

  Strongly disagree                                               Strongly agree   Don't Know




                                                          88
The World Bank                                      Ethiopia                                 Country Survey 2012


SECTION B: GENERAL ISSUES FACING ETHIOPIA (CONT..)

B4. In general, Ethiopia is headed in the right direction in terms of delivering better
public services to the poor (Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning Strongly disagree, 4
meaning Strongly agree.)
         1                 2                  3                      4              

  Strongly disagree                                            Strongly agree   Don't Know



B5. In general, Ethiopia is headed in the right direction in terms of reducing
corruption (Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning Strongly disagree, 4 meaning
Strongly agree.)
         1                 2                  3                      4              

  Strongly disagree                                            Strongly agree   Don't Know


B6. In general, Ethiopia is headed in the right direction in terms of ensuring that all
children have access to education (Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning Strongly
disagree, 4 meaning Strongly agree.)
         1                 2                  3                      4              
  Strongly disagree                                            Strongly agree   Don't Know


B7. In general, Ethiopia is headed in the right direction in terms of ensuring
adequate and productive infrastructure (Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning
Strongly disagree, 4 meaning Strongly agree.)
         1                 2                  3                      4              

  Strongly disagree                                            Strongly agree   Don't Know


B8. In general, Ethiopia is headed in the right direction in terms of ensuring access
to clean water (Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning Strongly disagree, 4 meaning
Strongly agree.)
         1                 2                  3                      4              
  Strongly disagree                                            Strongly agree   Don't Know


B9. In general, Ethiopia is headed in the right direction in terms of reducing gender
disparities (Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning Strongly disagree, 4 meaning
Strongly agree.)
         1                 2                  3                      4              

  Strongly disagree                                            Strongly agree   Don't Know




                                                       89
The World Bank                                      Ethiopia                                  Country Survey 2012


SECTION B: GENERAL ISSUES FACING ETHIOPIA (CONT..)

B10. In general, Ethiopia is headed in the right direction in terms of increasing voice
and participation of the citizens of Ethiopia (Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning
Strongly disagree, 4 meaning Strongly agree.)
         1                 2                  3                      4              

  Strongly disagree                                            Strongly agree   Don't Know


B11. In general, Ethiopia is headed in the right direction in terms of responsive
leadership (Asked on a scale of 1-4, 1 meaning Strongly disagree, 4 meaning
Strongly agree.)
         1                 2                  3                      4              

  Strongly disagree                                            Strongly agree   Don't Know


B12. In general, over the past five years would you say that your economic status/standard of
living has.. (Please choose only ONE)
 1 Improved
 2 Worsened
 3 Stayed the same


B13. In general, over the next five years do you expect the standard of living in Ethiopia.. (Please
choose only ONE)
 1 To improve
 2 To worsen
 3 Stay the same
 4 Don’t have an opinion
 5 Don’t know


B14. Over the next five years do you expect your own economic status/standard of living to..
(Please choose only ONE)
 1 Improve
 2 Worsen
 3 Stay the same




                                                      90
The World Bank                                             Ethiopia                                       Country Survey 2012


SECTION B: GENERAL ISSUES FACING ETHIOPIA (CONT..)

B15. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Ethiopia.

                                                                      Most Important     Second Most
Please identify which one of these you consider the first Most
                                                                       Development        Important
Important Development Priority. Then identify which one you              priority        Development
consider the Second Most Important Development Priority.              (Choose only     priority (Choose
                                                                         ONE)            only ONE)
 1 Government effectiveness/improving governance                                             
 2 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                  
 3 Economic growth                                                                           
 4 Reducing corruption                                                                       
 5 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                                   
 6 Promote policies to stimulate domestic private investment                                 
 7 Increasing access to education                                                            
 8 Increasing access to health services                                                      
 9 Reducing poverty                                                                          
10 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                     
11 Improving basic infrastructure                                                            
12 Improving environmental quality                                                           
13 Protecting natural resources                                                              
14 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                                    

15 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                            

16 Agriculture development                                                                   
17 Strengthening regulatory framework                                                        
18 Improving trade and exports                                                               
19 Climate change                                                                            
20 Food security                                                                             
21 Other (please specify): ___________________                                               




                                                             91
The World Bank                                             Ethiopia                    Country Survey 2012


SECTION B: GENERAL ISSUES FACING ETHIOPIA (CONT..)

B16. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which
TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
poverty in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1 Government effectiveness/increasing governance
 2 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases
 3 Economic growth
 4 Reducing corruption
 5 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment
 6 Promote policies to stimulate domestic private investment
 7 Increasing access to education
 8 Increasing access to health services
 9 Reducing poverty
10 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system
11 Improving basic infrastructure
12 Improving environmental quality
13 Protecting natural resources
14 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities
15 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment
16 Agriculture development
17 Strengthening regulatory framework
18 Improving trade and exports
19 Climate change
20 Food security
21 Other (please specify): ___________________


B17. Sustainable economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which TWO areas
below do you believe would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in Ethiopia?
(Choose no more than TWO)
 1 Increasing agricultural productivity
 2 Reducing corruption
 3 Government effectiveness/increasing governance
 4 Promoting policies to stimulate domestic private investment
 5 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment
 6 Improving access to and/or quality of education
 7 Improving access to and/or quality of health care
 8 Strengthening the regulatory framework
 9 Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment
10 Improving trade and exports
11 Other (please specify): _______________________




                                                             92
The World Bank                                             Ethiopia                                          Country Survey 2012


SECTION C: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

C1. To what extent does the World Bank meet Ethiopia’s needs for knowledge
services (e.g., research, analysis, technical assistance), on a scale of 1-10, 1
meaning "to no degree at all", 10 meaning "to a very Significant degree."
      1          2      3       4         5    6       7          8   9           10         
to no degree                                                                   to a very    Don't
    at all                                                                    Significant   Know
                                                                                degree


C2. Based on your observations of the World Bank in Ethiopia...
Where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in its support of
country priorities? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                                            Where would it be most
                                                                                            productive for the Bank
                                                                                            to focus most of its
                                                                                            resources?   (Choose no
                                                                                            more               than
                                                                                            THREE)
 1 Improving trade and exports                                                                           
 2 Reducing poverty                                                                                      
 3 Economic growth                                                                                       
 4 Climate change                                                                                        
 5 Agriculture development                                                                               
 6 Increasing access to education                                                                        
 7 Food security                                                                                         
 8 Promoting policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                                             
 9 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                                 
10 Promoting policies to stimulate domestic private sector growth/investment                             
11 Improving environmental quality                                                                       
12 Increasing access to health services                                                                  
13 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities in private sector                              
14 Protecting natural resources                                                                          
15 Reducing corruption                                                                                   
16 Strengthening regulatory framework                                                                    
17 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                              
18 Government effectiveness/governance                                                                   
19 Improving basic infrastructure                                                                        
20 Other (please specify): ______________________________________                                        




                                                             93
The World Bank                                                      Ethiopia                               Country Survey 2012


SECTION C: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT..)

C3. In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in Ethiopia’s
development strategies?
 1 The Bank should be more involved
 2 The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level
 3 The Bank should be less involved
 4 The Bank shouldn’t be involved at all
 5 Don’t know


C4. In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest” value brought by the World Bank to
Ethiopia? What is the “second greatest” value ?
                                                                                                    Second Greatest
                                                                                 Greatest Value
                                                                                                         Value
                                                                               (Choose only ONE)
                                                                                                   (Choose only ONE)
 1 The Bank’s knowledge (studies and analyses)                                                           
 2 Technical advice                                                                                      
 3 Policy and economic advice                                                                            
 4 Lending when others won’t                                                                             
 5 Donor coordination and convenor                                                                       
 6 Ability to mobilize resources (from private sector, government, etc.)                                 
 7 Ability to build implementation capacity                                                              
 8 Financial resources                                                                                   
 9 Other (please specify): ___________________                                                           


C5. Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in
Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2 Not exploring alternative policy options
     Does not push Government hard enough on reforms needed for poverty reduction and private sector
 3
     growth
 4   Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 5   Not client focused
 6   Staff too inaccessible
 7   Is arrogant in its approach
 8   Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country
 9   Too influenced by the US
10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
12   Inadequately aligned with country priorities
13   Other (please specify): __________________________




                                                                       94
The World Bank                                             Ethiopia                                      Country Survey 2012


SECTION C: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT..)

C6. To what extent do you believe the World Bank encourages the Government of
Ethiopia to support and see through the reform that is necessary for poverty
reduction and private sector growth on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning to "no degree at
all", 10 meaning "to a very high degree".
       1          2       3       4       5       6       7        8      9          10        
 to no degree                                                                     to a very   Don't
     at all                                                                     high degree   Know



C7. The World Bank wants to ensure that the knowledge and studies it produces are relevant. Which
TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
efforts on in the next few years in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1 Education
 2 Health
 3 Social protection
 4 Transport
 5 Poverty
 6 Governance
 7 Anti-corruption
 8 Enhanced business environment for private sector development
 9 Energy
10 Agricultural development
11 Water and sanitation
12 Monitoring and evaluation
13 Public expenditure
14 Public sector performance
15 Labor markets/job creation
16 Financial markets
17 Urban/metropolitan development
18 Environmental sustainability/ natural resources management
19 Improving equality of opportunity
20 Rural development
21 Food security
22 Climate change
23 Other (please specify): ____________________________________


C8. Which of the following statements best represents how the Bank should work in Ethiopia?
(Choose only ONE)
 1 The Bank should work primarily with the government of Ethiopia to advance the country's development program

     The Bank should work in partnership with a broad range of stakeholders to advance the country's development
 2
     program




                                                              95
The World Bank                                                                Ethiopia                                          Country Survey 2012


SECTION C: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT..)

C9. Which of the following statements best represents how the Bank does work in Ethiopia? (Choose
only ONE)
 1 The Bank works primarily with the government of Ethiopia to advance the country's development program

       The Bank works in partnership with a broad range of stakeholders to advance the country's development
 2
       program

C10. In addition to the regular relations with the national Government as its main interlocutor, which
TWO of the following groups should the World Bank work with more in your country to ensure better
development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1 NGOs
  2 Local Government
  3 Beneficiaries
  4 Private sector
  5 Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
  6 Donor community
  7 Parliament
  8 Media
  9 Academia and think tanks
 10 Other (please specify): ____________________________________


On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following
statements about the World Bank in Ethiopia.
                                                                                         Strongly                           Strongly Don't
                                                                                         Disagree                             Agree Know

C11.    Overall the Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Ethiopia       1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    

        The Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
C12.                                                                                      1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
        for this country
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic and
C13.                                                                                      1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
        sustainable for Ethiopia
C14.    The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Ethiopia with respect           1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    

C15.    The World Bank collaborates well with other donors here                           1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
C16.    The World Bank is responsive                                                      1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
        The Bank is an effective catalyst for discussion on critical issues related to
C17.                                                                                      1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
        poverty and growth.
        The World Bank's work promotes country ownership of development
C18.                                                                                      1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
        strategies
        The Bank's work promotes the empowerment of Ethiopian citizens to
C19.                                                                                      1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
        participate in development
C20.    The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                       1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
C21.    The Bank gives appropriate priority to growth issues                              1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    




                                                                                  96
The World Bank                                                                 Ethiopia                                                             Country Survey 2012


SECTION D: THE WORK OF THE WORLD BANK

For each item in the following section, please provide two responses: first, importance, meaning, in your opinion,
how important it is for the Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in Ethiopia. Second, effectiveness,
meaning, how effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of
development in Ethiopia.
                                                   Level of Importance                     Level of Effectiveness
                                                   Not                                                        Not
                                                   important                                                  effective




                                                                                                      Know




                                                                                                                                                              Know
                                                                                                      Don't




                                                                                                                                                              Don't
                                                                                              Very                                                    Very
                                                   at all                                 important           at all                              effective
D1.    Helping to reduce poverty                   1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       Helping to bring about economic
D2.                                                1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       growth
       Encouraging greater transparency in
D3.                                                1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       governance
D4.    Helping to strengthen the private sector    1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       Helping to strengthen the financial
D5.                                                1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       system
       Helping to strengthen the regulatory
D6.                                                1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       framework
       Helping to strengthen the judicial
D7.                                                1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       system
D8.    Helping to strengthen the public sector     1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       Helping to strengthen the education
D9.                                                1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       sector
D10.   Helping to strengthen the health sector     1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
     Safeguarding against corruption in
D11. projects/ programs that it funds with         1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
     its procurement rules
       Helping to integrate Ethiopia into the
D12.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       global economy
       Ensuring that attention is paid to the
       environmental impact (the physical
D13.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       environment – land, water, air) of Bank
       supported programs and strategies
       Ensuring that attention is paid to
D14.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       gender disparities
       Helping to strengthen agricultural
D15.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       development
       Helping to strengthen infrastructure
D16.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       development
       Helping to strengthen environment and
D17.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       natural resources management
       Helping to strengthen the social
D18.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       protection sector
       Helping to improve the quality of life in
D19.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       urban areas
       Helping to reduce corruption in the
D20.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       country with its advice and support
       Helping to empower communities to
D21.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       participate in their own development
       Helping Ethiopia adapt to/avert risk of
D22.                                               1    2      3   4   5   6     7    8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       climate change




                                                                                 97
The World Bank                                                     Ethiopia                                            Country Survey 2012


SECTION E: THE WAY THE WORLD BANK DOES BUSINESS

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/ activity listed below using
a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”.
                                                                              Not
                                                                              effective                               Very Don't
                                                                              at all                              effective Know
E1.    Technical competence                                                    1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
E2.    Producing knowledge and research (studies, analyses) that are useful    1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
E3.    Making the results of studies and analyses readily available            1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
E4.    Sharing knowledge about international best practices                    1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
E5.    Ability to adapt its knowledge to your country’s needs                  1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
E6.    Ensuring its staff is accessible                                        1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
E7.    Providing sound policy and economic advice                              1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
E8.    Straightforwardness in its dealings with you                            1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
E9.    Maintaining consistent messages                                         1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       Promoting the inclusion of local communities (beneficiaries) in the
E10.                                                                           1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       development of strategies
       Promoting the inclusion of civil society (NGOs, religious groups,
E11.                                                                           1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       interest groups) in the development of strategies
       Promoting the inclusion of local project experts in the development
E12.                                                                           1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       of strategies
       Promoting the inclusion of private sector in the development of
E13.                                                                           1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       strategies
E14. Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction                          1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
E15. Lending in a way that promotes effective development                      1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    




SECTION F: PROJECT/PROGRAM RELATED ISSUES

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”,
10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.
                                                                              Strongly                            Strongly Don't
                                                                              Disagree                               Agree Know
F1.    The Bank is flexible in terms of adjusting to changing circumstances    1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
F2.    The Bank disburses funds promptly                                       1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
F3.    The Bank works efficiently                                              1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
F4.                                                                            1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       programs it supports
F5.    The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level                 1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
F6.    The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials                1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       The Bank and partners in government collaborate well together on
F7.                                                                            1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       Bank supported programs and projects in Ethiopia
F8.    The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity                     1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       The Government supports and takes responsibility for development
F9.                                                                            1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       efforts in Ethiopia
F10. The Bank’s procurement requirements are reasonable                        1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    




                                                                      98
The World Bank                                                Ethiopia                                   Country Survey 2012


SECTION G: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN ETHIOPIA

G1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank should play in
Ethiopia’s development over the medium term in the near future? (1 meaning
that the Bank should not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank
should play a very significant role)
        1           2   3       4       5       6       7       8          9        10          
      Not a                                                                         Very        Don't
 s i gni fi ca nt                                                              s i gni fi ca nt Know
 rol e a t a l l                                                                    rol e


G2. Which one of the following should the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in
Ethiopia? (Choose only ONE)
 1 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Ethiopia ’s specific challenges
 2 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues
     Improve the competitiveness of its financing (e.g., cost, timeliness and other terms) compared to
 4
     markets
 5 Offer more innovative financial products
 6 Offer more innovative knowledge services
 7 Other (please specify): ___________________________________


G3. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the
following would you attribute this to? (Choose only ONE)
 1 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly
 2 Government works inefficently/too slowly
 3 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4 Poor donor coordination
 5 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in government
 6 Political pressures and obstacles
 7 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 8 Other (please specify): ___________________________________




                                                                 99
The World Bank                                            Ethiopia                                      Country Survey 2012


SECTION H: COMMUNICATION AND OUTREACH

H1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development
issues in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1 Local newspapers
 2 International newspapers
 3 Local radio
 4 International radio
 5 Local television
 6 International television
 7 Periodicals
 8 Internet
 9 Other (please specify): _________________________


H2. Where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development
activities in Ethiopia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1 Local newspapers
 2 International newspapers
 3 Local radio
 4 International radio
 5 Local television
 6 International television
 7 Periodicals
 8 Blogs
 9 Internet
     World Bank Development Information Corners (i.e., at university libraries, the National Archives
10
     and Library and CCRDA)
11 World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops
12 World Bank publications, materials
13 World Bank website
14 World Bank Public Information Center (PIC)
15 Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff
16 Other (please specify): _________________________




                                                            100
The World Bank                                            Ethiopia                                 Country Survey 2012


SECTION H: COMMUNICATION AND OUTREACH (CONT..)

H3. How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no
more than TWO)
 1 World Bank website
 2 Face to face meetings/discussions
 3 e-newsletters
 4 Workshops/conferences
 5 Mobile phones
 6 Social media (facebook, twitter, youtube)
 7 Blogs
 8 Others (please specify): ______________________________________________


H4. Do you have access to the internet?              H5. I use/have used the World Bank website:
 1       Yes                                          1   Yes
 2       No                                           2   No


H6. I primarily use:
     1    The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/ethiopia)
     2    The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)


H7. I use/have used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers
(PICs) in Ethiopia:
     1    Yes
     2    No
     3    I don’t know what PIC is


H8. I use/have used the World Bank Development Information
Corners in Ethiopia:
     1    Yes
     2    No
     3    I don’t know what World Bank Development Information Corner is




                                                            101
The World Bank                                                      Ethiopia                                          Country Survey 2012


SECTION H: COMMUNICATION AND OUTREACH (CONT..)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”,
10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.
                                                                               Strongly                           Strongly Don't
                                                                               Disagree                              Agree Know
       The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of information related to
H9.                                                                             1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       development in Ethiopia. (Only answer if you have used the PIC)
       The World Bank’s Development Information Corner is a valuable
       source of information related to development in Ethiopia . (Only
H10.                                                                            1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       answer if you have used the World Bank Development Information
       Corner)
       I find the Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only answer if you have
H11.                                                                            1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       used a Bank website)
       I find the information on the Bank’s websites useful. (Only answer if
H12.                                                                            1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       you have used a Bank website)
       When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it
H13.                                                                            1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    
       (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them, etc.)
H14. The Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries            1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10    




                                         Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                                      102
