                              88161




The Gambia Country Opinion
      Survey Report

    (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                       The Gambia                                   Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. The General Environment in The Gambia ....................................9
          V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank in The Gambia .......14
         VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank .....................................23
        VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in The Gambia ....................39
       VIII. Communication and Outreach ..................................................42
         IX. Appendices ................................................................................53




                                                          2
The World Bank                               The Gambia                             Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in The
        Gambia perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in The Gambia regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in The Gambia;
            Their perceived overall value of the World Bank in The Gambia;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank as related to programs, poverty reduction,
               personal relationships, effectiveness, knowledge base, collaboration, and its
               day-to-day operation;
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in The Gambia; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s communication and outreach in The Gambia.

       Use data to help inform The Gambia country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In January thru March 2012, 250 stakeholders of the World Bank in The Gambia were invited to
provide their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country
survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President, Prime
Minister, Minister, or Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial department, or
implementation agency; local government officials or staff; federal/central government; bilateral
or multilateral agencies; private sector; NGOs (including CBOs); the media; independent
government institutions; trade unions; faith-based groups; academia or research institutes; and
the judiciary. A total of 150 stakeholders participated in the country survey (60%).

Respondents received the questionnaire via post and returned it accordingly. Respondents were
asked to indicate: their overall attitudes toward the Bank; the importance of specific areas of the
Bank’s work and the Bank’s effectiveness in those areas; and their level of agreement with a
series of statements about the way the World Bank does business. Respondents were also asked
about general issues facing The Gambia, the Bank’s future role in The Gambia, and the Bank’s
communication and outreach efforts in The Gambia.




                                                 3
The World Bank                             The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)

The questionnaire was broken into eight sections:
    1. Background Information: The first section asked respondents for their current position,
       specialization, familiarity and involvement with the Bank, and geographic location.

    2. General Issues facing The Gambia: Respondents were asked to indicate what they
       thought were the most important development priorities and which areas would
       contribute most to poverty reduction and economic growth in The Gambia, as well as
       rating their optimism for the next generation in The Gambia.
    3. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate the Bank’s
       overall effectiveness, the extent to which the Bank’s financial instruments and knowledge
       services fulfilled The Gambia’s needs, and their agreement with various statements
       regarding the Bank’s programs, poverty mission, relationships, and collaborations in The
       Gambia. Respondents were also asked to indicate the areas they perceived as the Bank’s
       priorities, the areas on which it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its
       resources and research, what the Bank’s level of involvement should be, what they felt
       were the Bank’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses in its work, and with which
       groups the Bank should work more in The Gambia.
    4. The Work of the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of importance
       and the Bank’s level of effectiveness across twenty-four areas in which the Bank was
       involved, such as helping to reduce poverty, helping to bring about macro-economic
       growth, and fighting against corruption.
    5. The Way the World Bank does Business: Respondents were asked to rate the Bank’s
       level of effectiveness in the way it does business, including the Bank’s knowledge,
       personal relationships, collaborations, and poverty mission.
    6. Project/Program Related Issues: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement
       with a series of statements regarding the Bank’s programs, day-to-day operations, and
       collaborations in The Gambia.
    7. The Future of the World Bank in The Gambia: Respondents were asked to rate the extent
       to which the Bank will play a significant role in The Gambia’s development over the
       medium term. Respondents were also asked to indicate what the Bank could do to make
       itself of greater value in The Gambia and to what they attribute reform effort failures.
    8. Communication and Outreach: Respondents were asked to indicate where they get
       information about development issues, the Bank’s development activities in The Gambia,
       and their preferred mode to receive information from the Bank. Respondents were asked
       their awareness of the Bank’s new Access to Information Policy and about their past
       information requests. Respondents were also asked to indicate their Internet access and
       usage of the Bank’s website, and to evaluate the Bank’s websites, Knowledge Space, and
       communication and outreach efforts.



                                               4
The World Bank                              The Gambia                          Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position

       The majority of respondents was from ministries and private sector. Because of the small
        number of respondents from local government and trade unions, these respondents were
        included in the category “Other” for all further analyses.




                                                5
The World Bank                   The Gambia   Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                     6
The World Bank                               The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Involvement with the World Bank

       Over half of all respondents indicated that they have been involved with or a close
        observer of World Bank activities for more than three years.




Geographic Location

       Two-thirds of all respondents indicated that they were located in Banjul. Because of the
        small number of respondents from North Bank, Central River, and Upper River, these
        respondents were included in the category “Other” for all further analyses.




                                                 7
The World Bank                               The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank

       Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 5.3 on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from independent government
              institutions and bilateral or multilateral agencies indicated the highest levels of
              familiarity with the Bank whereas respondents from private sector, other
              organizations, and the office of the President indicated significantly lower levels
              of familiarity.
             Respondents from Banjul had significantly higher levels of familiarity with the
              work of the Bank in The Gambia compared to respondents from the West Coast
              and other areas.




                                                 8
The World Bank                               The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in The Gambia

Optimism

       When asked about perceptions of the future for the next generation in The Gambia,
        across all respondents, the overall mean rating was 6.8 on a 10-point scale of 1 being
        extremely pessimistic and 10 being extremely optimistic.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from independent
              government institutions had the highest ratings of optimism whereas respondents
              from the office of the President had the lowest ratings.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings of
              optimism for the next generation in The Gambia.




                                                 9
The World Bank                              The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in The Gambia (continued)

Development Priority

       Respondents indicated that the most important development priorities for The Gambia
        were agriculture development (crop production, processing) and food security;
        government effectiveness/governance; access to and quality of health services; and skills
        development, employment and income generating opportunities.




                                                10
The World Bank                              The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in The Gambia (continued)

Poverty Reduction

       Respondents indicated that skills development, employment and income generating
        opportunities, specifically for young people, agriculture development (crop production,
        processing) and food security, and government effectiveness/governance would
        contribute most to poverty reduction in The Gambia.




                                                11
The World Bank                             The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in The Gambia (continued)

Economic Growth

       Respondents indicated that agriculture development (crop production, processing) and
        food security, skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
        specifically for young people, and government effectiveness/governance would
        contribute most to generating faster economic growth in The Gambia.




                                               12
The World Bank                             The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in The Gambia (continued)

The Government supports Development Efforts

   Across all respondents, agreement that the government supports and takes responsibility for
    development efforts in The Gambia received a mean rating of 7.5 on a 10-point scale, with 1
    being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
         Respondents from the West Coast had the highest levels of agreement that the
          government supports and takes responsibility for development efforts in The Gambia
          whereas respondents from other areas had significantly lower levels of agreement.
         Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
          agreement that the government supports and takes responsibility for development
          efforts in The Gambia.




                                               13
The World Bank                             The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank

Perceived Bank Priorities

       Respondents indicated that they considered the Bank’s priorities to be access to and
        quality of basic education and macro-economic growth. Government effectiveness/
        governance, agriculture development (crop production, processing)/food security, and
        improving public financial management and procurement were also considered key
        Bank priorities.




                                               14
The World Bank                              The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Focusing Bank Resources
       Respondents indicated that it would be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its
        resources on skills development, employment, and income generating opportunities,
        specifically for young people, and agriculture development/ food security.
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups and geographic locations indicated
                that the Bank should focus on skills development/employment and agriculture
                development, except respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies who
                indicated that the Bank should focus on government effectiveness and
                respondents from private sector who indicated that the Bank should focus
                on basic education and opportunities private sector investment.




                                                15
The World Bank                              The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Focusing Bank Research

       Respondents indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
        efforts on agricultural production/food security. Respondents also identified education
        and health as valuable research endeavors.
             Respondents across most stakeholders groups and geographic locations indicated
              that the Bank should focus its research efforts on agricultural production/food
              security, education, and health, except for respondents from academia who
              indicated that the Bank should focus on private sector development.




                                                16
The World Bank                              The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Level of Bank Involvement

       The vast majority of respondents indicated that the Bank should be more involved in The
        Gambia’s development strategies; just 5% indicated that the Bank is currently involved at
        an optimum level.
             The majority of respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic
              locations indicated that the Bank should be more involved in The Gambia’s
              development strategies.




                                                17
The World Bank                             The Gambia                          Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Collaborating in The Gambia

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely with private sector,
        community-based organizations (CBOs), NGOs, and beneficiaries to ensure better
        development results in The Gambia. Respondents also indicated that it would be
        beneficial for the Bank to work more closely with local government and the development
        community in The Gambia.




                                              18
The World Bank                             The Gambia                          Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest values to The Gambia were its financial
        resources and policy and economic advice. The Bank’s technical advice was also highly
        valued.




                                               19
The World Bank                              The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weakness in its work in
        The Gambia was being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures. The
        World Bank’s procedures being too slow and complex to show results on the ground in a
        timely manner and not enough public disclosure of its work were also identified as key
        weaknesses.




                                                20
The World Bank                               The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance

   Respondents indicated that it was most important for the Bank to help reduce poverty,
    receiving a mean rating of 9.6 on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all and 10 being very
    important.




                                                21
The World Bank                              The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance (continued)

       There were two instances in which there were significant stakeholder differences in their
        ratings of importance across these twenty-four areas.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from private sector, independent
                government institutions, and other organizations had the highest importance
                ratings for “Helping to strengthen the public financial management and
                procurement system” whereas respondents from the office of the President,
                bilateral or multilateral agencies, NGOs, and academia had significantly lower
                importance ratings; and
             Respondents from the office of the President, bilateral or multilateral agencies,
                and NGOs had the highest importance ratings for “Helping to empower local
                communities” whereas respondents from private sector, independent government
                institutions, and academia had significantly lower importance ratings.

       There was just one significant difference between respondents from different geographic
        locations in their ratings of importance across these twenty-four areas. Respondents from
        Banjul had significantly lower importance ratings for “Helping to strengthen the capacity
        of civil society and private sector organizations” compared to respondents from the West
        Coast or Other areas.

       Ratings across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations can be found in the
        Appendix.




                                                22
The World Bank                                The Gambia                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank

The Bank’s Overall Effectiveness in The Gambia

   Across all respondents, the Bank’s overall effectiveness in The Gambia received a mean
    rating of 6.7 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents from other organizations and independent government institutions
              had the highest ratings for the Bank’s overall effectiveness whereas respondents
              from bilateral or multilateral agencies, NGOs, and the office of the President had
              significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s overall effectiveness.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for
              the Bank’s overall effectiveness in The Gambia.




                                                  23
The World Bank                               The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

The Bank’s Financial Instruments in The Gambia

   Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank’s financial instruments meet the needs
    of The Gambia received a mean rating of 6.3 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at
    all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from other organizations and academia had the highest ratings for
              the Bank’s financial instruments meeting the needs of The Gambia whereas
              respondents from NGOs and the office of the President had significantly lower
              ratings.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for
              the Bank’s financial instruments meeting the needs of The Gambia .




                                                24
The World Bank                               The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

The Bank’s Knowledge Services in The Gambia

   Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank’s knowledge services meet the needs of
    The Gambia received a mean rating of 6.3 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at
    all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from NGOs and the office of the President had significantly lower
              ratings for the Bank’s knowledge services meeting the needs of The Gambia
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for
              the Bank’s knowledge services meeting the needs of The Gambia.




                                                25
The World Bank                              The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness

       Respondents saw the Bank as most effective in helping to increase access and quality of
        basic education, receiving a mean rating of 8.2 on a 10-point scale with 1 being not
        effective at all and 10 being very effective.




                                               26
The World Bank                                The Gambia                         Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       There was just one instance in which there was a significant stakeholder group difference
        in their ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness across these twenty-four areas. Respondents
        from academia and other organizations had the highest ratings for the Bank’s
        effectiveness at “Helping to improve the quality of life in urban areas” whereas
        respondents from the office of the President and NGOs had significantly lower ratings for
        the Bank’s effectiveness.

       There were two instances in which there were significant differences between
        respondents from different geographic locations in their ratings of the Bank’s
        effectiveness across these twenty-four areas. Respondents from Other areas gave
        significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at “Helping to increase
        professional skills, employment and income generation, specifically for young people ”
        and “Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources management ” compared to
        respondents from Banjul or the West Coast.

       Ratings across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations can be found in the
        Appendix.




                                                 27
The World Bank                               The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in The
Gambia, bivariate correlational analyses were conducted on respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness in The Gambia with respondents’ ratings of the twenty-four specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness
increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one specific
area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness.

   Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined
    to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness, suggesting
    that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s
    overall effectiveness. The areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:

             The Bank’s effectiveness at helping to reduce poverty and

             The Bank’s effectiveness at helping to strengthen the public financial
              management and procurement system.




                                                28
The World Bank                               The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Importance versus Effectiveness – Sector Analysis

By plotting respondents’ ratings of importance versus effectiveness, one can assess where
respondents perceived the Bank to be performing well on priority issues in The Gambia, as well
as areas in which respondents perceived the Bank to not be performing so well on priority issues,
areas in which respondents perceived the Bank was performing well, but on lower priority issues,
and areas in which respondents perceived the Bank to not be performing so well on lower
priority issues.

   Bank relatively good and issue is a priority : Areas in this quadrant are those that
    respondents indicated a high level of importance and gave the Bank a relatively high rating
    of effectiveness (although it should be noted that ratings of effectiveness were nearly two
    points lower than ratings of importance). It is important that the Bank continue to do well in
    these areas (in order of mean importance):
         Helping to reduce poverty;
         Helping to increase access and quality of basic education;
         Helping to strengthen the agricultural sector/food security;
         Helping to bring about macro-economic growth;
         Helping to strengthen higher education;
         Helping to improve the investment climate for private sector growth and attracting
            foreign investment;
         Helping to strengthen the public financial management and procurement system; and
         Helping to increase access and quality of health services, including the fight against
            HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases.




                                                29
The World Bank                               The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Importance versus Effectiveness – Sector Analysis (continued)

       Bank not so good on priority issues: Areas in this quadrant were those for which
        respondents indicated a high level of importance, but gave the Bank a relatively low
        rating of effectiveness. These were just three areas in this quadrant:
             Helping to increase professional skills, employment and income generation,
                specifically for young people (although this is on the borderline of the Bank being
                good);
             Helping to improve basic infrastructure (although this is on the borderline of the
                Bank being good); and
             Helping to strengthen the government ’s effectiveness.

       Bank not so good, but issue not perceived to be a priority : Areas in this quadrant were
        those for which respondents gave the Bank a relatively low rating of effectiveness and a
        moderate level of importance. These areas were (in order of mean importance):
             Helping to strengthen the fisheries sector (although this is on the borderline of
                being more of a priority);
             Helping to strengthen the capacity of civil society and private sector
                organizations;
             Helping to empower local communities;
             Helping to improve the quality of life in urban areas;
             Helping to integrate The Gambia into the global and/or sub-regional economy;
             Helping to improve the legal and regulatory systems;
             Helping to improve nutrition for vulnerable groups;
             Fighting against corruption;
             Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources management;
             Help strengthening the national statistical system (although this is on the
                borderline of the Bank being good);
             Helping The Gambia adapt to/avert risk of climate change; and
             Ensuring that attention is paid to gender disparities (although this is on the
                borderline of the Bank being good).

       Bank good, but issue not perceived to be a priority: Areas in this quadrant were those
        for which respondents indicated a moderate level of importance, but gave the Bank a
        relatively high rating of effectiveness. There was just one area in this quadrant:
             Helping to expand internet connectivity.




                                                30
The World Bank                              The Gambia                          Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Respondents were asked a variety of questions regarding the Bank’s programs, poverty mission,
personal relationships, collaborations/partnerships, knowledge, and day-to-day operations.

       There were several instances in which there were significant differences between
        stakeholder groups in their ratings of the Bank across these areas. For the most part,
        employees of ministries and respondents from independent government institutions,
        academia, and other organizations tended to have the highest ratings whereas respondents
        from the office of the President, bilateral or multilateral agencies, and NGOs tended to
        have the lowest ratings. Those areas for which there were significant stakeholder group
        differences were:
             “Overall the Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in The Gambia”;
             “The Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for
                this country”;
             “The Bank’s work reflects its own mission of poverty reduction”;
             “The World Bank collaborates with other donors here”;
             “The World Bank is responsive”;
             “The Bank is an effective catalyst for discussion on issues related to poverty”;
             “In general, the strategies that the Bank recommends are sustainable over time ”;
             “The World Bank ’s work promotes country ownership of development
                strategies”;
             “Ability to adapt its kno wledge to your country’s needs”;
             “Ensuring its staff is accessible”;
             “Providing sound policy and economic advice”;
             “Straightforwardness in its dealings with you”;
             “Maintaining consistent messages”;
             “Promoting the inclusion of local communities in the development of strategies ”;
             “Promoting the inclusion of civil society in the development of strategies ”;
             “Promoting the inclusion of local project experts in the development of
                strategies”;
             “Promoting the inclusion of private sector in the development of strategies”;
             “The Bank disburses funds promptly”;
             “The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level”; and
             “The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials ”.




                                               31
The World Bank                              The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

       There were significant differences between geographic locations in their ratings of the
        Bank across four of these areas.
            Respondents from the West Coast had the highest ratings for the Bank’s
               effectiveness at “The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
               programs it supports”, “The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity”, and
               “The Government supports and takes responsibility for development efforts in
               The Gambia” whereas respondents from Other areas had significantly lower
               ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness ; and
            Respondents from the West Coast had significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
               effectiveness at “The Bank’s procurement requirements are reasonable” compared
               to respondents from Banjul and Other areas.

       Ratings across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations can be found in the
        Appendix.




                                                32
The World Bank                               The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Bank Programs in The Gambia

       In terms of the Bank’s programs in The Gambia, the Bank currently playing a relevant
        role in development in The Gambia received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.3,
        across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being
        strongly agree.

       The Bank’s effectiveness at lending in a way that promotes effective development
        received a mean rating of 7.3 across all respondents on a 10-point scale with 1 being not
        at all effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                33
The World Bank                               The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Poverty Mission

       In terms of the Bank’s poverty mission in The Gambia, the Bank being an effective
        catalyst for discussion on issues related to poverty received the highest mean level of
        agreement, 7.3, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree
        and 10 being strongly agree.

       The Bank’s effectiveness at giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction received a
        mean rating of 7.8 across all respondents on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all
        effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                34
The World Bank                                The Gambia                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Personal Relationships

       In terms of the Bank’s personal relationships in The Gambia, respondents liking to work/
        interact with Bank staff received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.8, across all
        respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly
        agree.

       In terms of maintaining relationships with clients and stakeholders in The Gambia, the
        Bank’s effectiveness at being straightforward in its dealings received the highest mean
        rating, 7.8, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and
        10 being very effective.




                                                  35
The World Bank                              The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Collaboration/Partnerships

       In terms of the Bank’s collaborations in The Gambia, the Bank helping to strengthen
        institutional capacity received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.7, across all
        respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly
        agree.

       The Bank’s effectiveness at promoting the inclusion of local project experts and local
        communities in the development of strategies both received the highest mean rating, 6.8,
        on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                36
The World Bank                               The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Knowledge

       In terms of the Bank’s effectiveness at being a knowledge base in The Gambia, the
        Bank’s technical competence received the highest mean rating, 8.7, across all
        respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very
        effective.




                                                37
The World Bank                               The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Day-to-Day Operations

       In terms of the Bank’s day-to-day operations in The Gambia, the Bank effectively
        monitoring and evaluating its projects and programs received the highest mean level of
        agreement, 7.3, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree
        and 10 being strongly agree.




                                                38
The World Bank                               The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in The Gambia

Role Significance

       The Bank was expected to play a very significant role in The Gambia’s development over
        the medium term, receiving a mean rating of 9.2 across all respondents on a 10-point
        scale with 1 being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of the
              President gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s role sig nificance whereas
              respondents from NGOs gave the lowest ratings.
             Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for
              the Bank’s role significance in The Gambia.




                                                39
The World Bank                             The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in The Gambia (cont.)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank should reduce the
        complexity of obtaining Bank financing to make itself of greater value in The Gambia.




                                               40
The World Bank                              The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in The Gambia (cont.)

Attributing Reform Effort Failures

       Respondents indicated that they most often attributed failures of World Bank-assisted
        reform efforts to inadequate government capacity, reforms not being well thought out in
        light of challenges in The Gambia, and the government working inefficiently.




                                               41
The World Bank                              The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach

Information Sources

       Two-thirds of all respondents indicated that they got most of their information about
        economic and social development issues in The Gambia from local newspapers. The
        Internet and local television were also popular information sources.
             The majority of respondents across all stakeholder groups and all geographic
              locations indicated that they got most of their information about economic and
              social development issues in The Gambia from local newspapers.




                                                42
The World Bank                             The Gambia                          Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       The majority of respondents were again most likely to utilize local newspapers for
        information about the Bank’s development activities in The Gambia. The Internet, Bank
        website, and local television were also popular information sources.




                                              43
The World Bank                             The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       Over half of all respondents indicated they would prefer to receive information from the
        World Bank through the World Bank website. E-newsletters, workshops/conferences, and
        face to face meetings were also popular preferred information sources.




                                               44
The World Bank                               The Gambia                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Internet Access

       The vast majority of all respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet.
             Respondents from Other areas were significantly less likely to have Internet
              access compared to respondents from the West Coast and Banjul.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar Internet access.




       Nearly three-quarters of all respondents indicated that when they access the Bank
        website, they utilized a high speed Internet connection.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of usage of high speed and dial-up connections.




                                                 45
The World Bank                              The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Website Usage

       More than two-thirds of all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies
              were significantly more likely to have used the World Bank’s website compared
              to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from Other areas were significantly less likely to have used the
              World Bank’s website compared to respondents from Banjul and the West Coast.




       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, the vast majority indicated that they
        used the World Bank’s main website.
             Respondents from all stakeholder groups and across all geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of usage for the Bank’s main and country websites.




                                                46
The World Bank                              The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Website Usage

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they used the Bank’s website in English.




       Respondents who used the Bank’s website indicated that they were looking for project
        information, country information, or data.




                                                47
The World Bank                              The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Website Evaluation

   Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, respondents finding the
    information on the Bank’s websites useful received the highest mean level of agreement, 8.2,
    across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being
    strongly agree.
         Respondents from the office of the President and academia had significantly lower
          levels of agreement that they find the information on the Bank’s websites useful
          compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups. Respondents across all
          stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of agreement that they find the
          Bank websites easy to navigate.
         Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar levels of
          agreement that they find the information on the Bank’s websites useful and that they
          find the Bank websites easy to navigate.




                                               48
The World Bank                               The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

The World Bank’s Knowledge Space

       The Bank’s Knowledge Space being a valuable source of information related to
        development in The Gambia received a mean level of agreement of 7.8, across all
        respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being
        strongly agree.
             Respondents from the office of the President, academia, and other organizations
              had significantly lower levels of agreement regarding the value of the Bank’s
              Knowledge Space compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.

             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar levels of
              agreement regarding the value of the Bank’s Knowledge Space.




                                                49
The World Bank                              The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Access to Information

       Most respondents indicated that they were not aware of the Bank’s Access to Information
        Policy.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
                statistically similar levels of awareness of the Bank’s Access to Information
                Policy.




       Less than a quarter of all respondents indicated that they had requested information from
        the Bank in the past year.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
               statistically similar rates of requesting information from the Bank.




                                                50
The World Bank                              The Gambia                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Of those who had requested information from the Bank in the past year, nearly half
        indicated that they were able to obtain this information.

             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of obtaining information from the Bank.




                                               51
The World Bank                               The Gambia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Communication and Outreach Efforts

       In terms of the Bank’s communication and outreach efforts in The Gambia, respondents
        had the same levels of agreement that “When I need information from the World Bank I
        know how to find it” and that “The Bank is appropriately responsive to my information
        requests and inquiries”, both receiving a mean rating of 6.9, across all respondents, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents from other organizations had the highest levels of agreement that
              “When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it” whereas
              respondents from the office of the President and academia had significantly lower
              levels of agreement. Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically
              similar levels of agreement that “The Bank is appropriately responsive to my
              information requests and inquiries”.
             Respondents from all geographic locations had statistically similar levels of
              agreement that “When I need information from the World Bank I know how to
              find it” and that “The Bank is appropriately responsive to my information requests
              and inquiries”.




                                                 52
The World Bank                            The Gambia                         Country Survey 2012




IX. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 54


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 68


          C. Responses to All Questions by Geographic Locations ................... 84


          D. World Bank Client Survey 2012 – The Gambia Questionnaire ..... 95




                                   THE GAMBIA IN AFRICA




                                              53
The World Bank                                     The Gambia                                  Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents
                                         Total Response Number = 150
A. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                    29.7%
Private Sector                                                                             20.9%
Bilateral or Multilateral Agency                                                           13.5%
NGOs (including CBOs)                                                                      13.5%
Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank)                 6.8%
Other                                                                                      6.8%
Academia or Research Institute                                                             4.7%
Office of the President, Prime Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian                         2.0%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                           1.4%
Trade Union                                                                                0.7%

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                      Percentage of Respondents
Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry                                                        21.8%
Other                                                                                      21.8%
Social Services (e.g., Education, Health)                                                  21.1%
Finance, Banking, Insurance                                                                10.9%
Economic Management                                                                        8.2%
Communications, Information Services                                                       5.4%
Environment, Natural Resource Management                                                   4.8%
Commerce, Trade and Manufacturing                                                          3.4%
Infrastructure (e.g., Transport, Water, Energy, Telecommunications)                        1.4%
Law, Justice                                                                               1.4%

3. Familiarity with the World Bank                                                       N       Mean       SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in The Gambia on a scale of 1-
                                                                                        143       5.34     2.74
10, 1 meaning “not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “extremely familiar"?

4. How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the
                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
   World Bank's activities?
Less than one year                                                                           10.9%
One to three years                                                                           32.8%
More than three years                                                                        56.2%

5. Which best represents your geographic location?                               Percentage of Respondents
Banjul                                                                                       66.2%
West Coast                                                                                   27.0%
North Bank                                                                                   2.7%
Central River                                                                                2.0%
Upper River                                                                                  2.0%




                                                       54
The World Bank                                       The Gambia                                 Country Survey 2012


B. General Issues Facing The Gambia

1. Perspective on the Next Generation                                                      N       Mean       SD
On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “extremely pessimistic”, 10 meaning “extremely
optimistic”, please indicate your perspective on the future of the next generation in     133      6.81     2.15
The Gambia.

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
2. Please identify which one of these you consider the first (second)
                                                                                Most       2nd Most
   most important development priority.
                                                                              Important   Important   Combined
Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security            20.9%      13.8%          34.6%
Government effectiveness/governance                                             20.0%      11.0%          31.0%
Access to health services, quality of health care                               14.8%      15.6%          30.4%
Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                13.0%      13.8%          26.8%
specifically for young people
Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                       4.3%        8.3%          12.6%
Access to basic education, quality of basic education                           6.1%        4.6%          10.7%
Macro-economic growth                                                           5.2%        4.6%          9.8%
Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                1.7%        6.4%          8.2%
investment
Higher education                                                                4.3%        3.7%          8.0%
Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector
                                                                                2.6%        4.6%          7.2%
organizations
Agriculture development (livestock)                                             0.0%        3.7%          3.7%
Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                  1.7%        0.9%          2.7%
Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                         1.7%        0.9%          2.7%
Fight against corruption                                                        2.6%        0.0%          2.6%
Improving public financial management and procurement                           0.0%        1.8%          1.8%
Expanding internet connectivity                                                 0.0%        1.8%          1.8%
Improving trade and exports                                                     0.9%        0.9%          1.8%
Empower local communities                                                       0.9%        0.9%          1.8%
Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                1.7%        0.0%          1.7%
Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                          0.0%        0.9%          0.9%
Mitigate the effects of climate change                                          0.0%        0.9%          0.9%
Fishery                                                                         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Mitigate gender inequality                                                      0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Promote regional cooperation                                                    0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Strengthening the national statistical system                                   0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                    0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Other                                                                           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%




                                                         55
The World Bank                                     The Gambia                              Country Survey 2012


B. General Issues Facing The Gambia (continued)

3. Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would            Percentage of Respondents
    contribute most to reducing poverty in The Gambia? (Choose only TWO)         (Responses Combined)
Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                        43.0%
specifically for young people
Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                    37.6%
Government effectiveness/governance                                                     23.7%
Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                   16.1%
Access to health services, quality of health care                                       15.1%
Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                        14.0%
investment
Fight against corruption                                                                 8.6%
Macro-economic growth                                                                    5.4%
Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                                5.4%
Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                   3.2%
Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                           3.2%
Improving trade and exports                                                              3.2%
Higher education                                                                         2.2%
Fishery                                                                                  2.2%
Empower local communities                                                                2.2%
Agriculture development (livestock)                                                      1.1%
Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                  1.1%
Improving public financial management and procurement                                    1.1%
Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                             1.1%
Other                                                                                    1.1%
Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                         0.0%
Mitigate gender inequality                                                               0.0%
Promote regional cooperation                                                             0.0%
Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                   0.0%
Strengthening the national statistical system                                            0.0%
Expanding internet connectivity                                                          0.0%
Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations             0.0%




                                                       56
The World Bank                                      The Gambia                             Country Survey 2012


B. General Issues Facing The Gambia (continued)

4. Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to               Percentage of Respondents
    generating faster economic growth in The Gambia? (Choose only TWO)           (Responses Combined)
Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                     37.9%
Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                        31.7%
specifically for young people
Government effectiveness/governance                                                     28.3%
Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                        17.9%
investment
Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                               14.5%
Improving trade and exports                                                             14.5%
Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                   11.7%
Access to health services, quality of health care                                       8.3%
Fight against corruption                                                                7.6%
Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations            4.1%
Empower local communities                                                               4.1%
Higher education                                                                        3.4%
Improving public financial management and procurement                                   3.4%
Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                  2.1%
Agriculture development (livestock)                                                     2.1%
Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                          1.4%
Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                 1.4%
Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                            1.4%
Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                        0.7%
Fishery                                                                                 0.7%
Promote regional cooperation                                                            0.7%
Other                                                                                   0.7%
Mitigate gender inequality                                                              0.0%
Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                  0.0%
Strengthening the national statistical system                                           0.0%
Expanding internet connectivity                                                         0.0%




                                                        57
The World Bank                                        The Gambia                                   Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Overall Effectiveness                                                                        N          Mean    SD
1. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in The
                                                                                            139         6.65   2.15
Gambia, on a scale of 1-10, 1 being “not effective at all”, 10 being “very effective”?
2. To what extent do the World Bank's financial instruments meet the needs of The
Gambia, on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “to no degree at all”, 10 meaning “to a very          131         6.31   2.19
significant degree”?
3. To what extent does the World Bank meet the needs of The Gambia for knowledge
services (e.g., research, analysis, technical assistance), on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning    127         5.98   2.44
“to no degree at all”, 10 meaning “to a very significant degree”?

4a. Based on your observations of the World Bank in The Gambia, what do
                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
    you think the Bank considers its top priorities in The Gambia?
                                                                                       (Responses Combined)
    (Choose no more than TWO)
Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                         35.7%
Macro-economic growth                                                                         35.0%
Government effectiveness/governance                                                           23.8%
Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                          18.2%
Improving public financial management and procurement                                         15.4%
Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                                 7.0%
investment
Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                                 6.3%
specifically for young people
Access to health services, quality of health care                                                5.6%
Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                           4.9%
Improving trade and exports                                                                      4.9%
Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                                        4.2%
Fishery                                                                                          4.2%
Fight against corruption                                                                         3.5%
Higher education                                                                                 3.5%
Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                                   3.5%
Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                                 2.1%
Expanding internet connectivity                                                                  2.1%
Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations                     2.1%
Mitigate gender inequality                                                                       1.4%
Empower local communities                                                                        1.4%
Other                                                                                            1.4%
Agriculture development (livestock)                                                              0.7%
Strengthening the national statistical system                                                    0.7%
Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                          0.0%
Promote regional cooperation                                                                     0.0%
Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                           0.0%
Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                                     0.0%




                                                          58
The World Bank                                      The Gambia                             Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
4b. Based on your observations of the World Bank in The Gambia, where
                                                                               Percentage of Respondents
    would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources
                                                                                 (Responses Combined)
    in its support of country priorities? (Choose no more than TWO)
Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                        33.1%
specifically for young people
Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                    29.0%
Government effectiveness/governance                                                     14.5%
Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                   14.5%
Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                        14.5%
investment
Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                               13.1%
Macro-economic growth                                                                   10.3%
Access to health services, quality of health care                                       9.7%
Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations            7.6%
Improving public financial management and procurement                                   5.5%
Fight against corruption                                                                4.8%
Higher education                                                                        4.8%
Improving trade and exports                                                             4.8%
Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                          3.4%
Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                        3.4%
Agriculture development (livestock)                                                     2.8%
Fishery                                                                                 1.4%
Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                 1.4%
Promote regional cooperation                                                            1.4%
Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                  1.4%
Expanding internet connectivity                                                         1.4%
Empower local communities                                                               1.4%
Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                            1.4%
Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                  0.0%
Mitigate gender inequality                                                              0.0%
Strengthening the national statistical system                                           0.0%
Other                                                                                   0.0%

5. In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World
                                                                               Percentage of Respondents
   Bank in The Gambia’s development strategies?
The Bank should be more involved                                                        86.3%
The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                                      5.5%
The Bank should be less involved                                                        0.7%
The Bank shouldn’t be involved at all                                                   2.7%
Don’t know/refused                                                                      4.8%




                                                        59
The World Bank                                     The Gambia                                 Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

6. In broad terms of economic and social development, what is                 Percentage of Respondents
   the “greatest” value brought by the World Bank to The              Greatest
                                                                                      nd
                                                                                     2 Greatest
   Gambia? What is the “second greatest” value?                        Value           Value        Combined
Financial resources                                                    35.0%           16.8%          51.8%
Policy and economic advice                                             22.9%           28.5%          51.3%
Technical advice                                                       16.4%           19.0%          35.4%
Ability to build implementation capacity                                7.9%            8.8%          16.6%
The Bank’s knowledge                                                    7.9%            5.8%          13.7%
Donor coordination                                                      5.0%            8.0%          13.0%
Lending when others won’t                                               3.6%            6.6%          10.1%
Ability to mobilize resources                                           1.4%            3.6%           5.1%
None of the above                                                       2.1%            1.5%           3.6%
Other                                                                   0.7%            1.5%           2.2%
Convener/facilitator                                                    0.7%            0.0%           0.7%

7. Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses       Percentage of Respondents
   in its work in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO)                             (Combined Responses)
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                 42.5%
World Bank procedures too slow and complex to show results on the ground
                                                                                            27.6%
in reasonable time
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                    25.4%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                       17.9%
The Bank's instruments are not flexible enough to respond to country needs                  15.7%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                    11.2%
The interventions of the World Bank are inadequately aligned with country
                                                                                            10.4%
priorities
The Bank is too influenced by the US or others                                               6.0%
Other                                                                                        4.5%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                       3.7%
Bank management is not accessible                                                            3.7%
Bank staff are arrogant in their approach                                                    0.0%




                                                       60
The World Bank                                     The Gambia                                Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

8. Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for
                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
   the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the next few years in The
                                                                                     (Responses Combined)
   Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
Agricultural production/Food security                                                       32.7%
Education                                                                                   23.1%
Health                                                                                      19.7%
Enhanced business environment for private sector development                                16.3%
Rural development                                                                           16.3%
Poverty                                                                                     15.6%
Governance                                                                                  12.9%
Energy                                                                                      10.2%
Labor markets/job creation                                                                   9.5%
Public sector performance                                                                    6.1%
Environmental sustainability/natural resources management                                    5.4%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                    4.8%
Social protection                                                                            4.1%
Urban/metropolitan development                                                               4.1%
Anti-corruption                                                                              3.4%
Agri-business                                                                                2.7%
Other                                                                                        2.7%
Transport                                                                                    1.4%
Water and sanitation                                                                         1.4%
Public expenditure                                                                           1.4%
Improving equality of opportunity                                                            1.4%
Climate change                                                                               1.4%
Service sector expansion                                                                     1.4%
Financial markets                                                                            0.0%

9. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
    interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank work     Percentage of Respondents
    with more in your country to ensure better development results there?            (Combined Responses)
    (Choose no more than TWO)
Private sector                                                                              39.9%
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                        36.4%
NGOs                                                                                        35.7%
Beneficiaries                                                                               30.8%
Local Government                                                                            21.7%
Donor community                                                                             11.9%
Other                                                                                        4.9%
Parliament                                                                                   2.8%
Media                                                                                        2.8%
Faith-based organizations                                                                    1.4%




                                                       61
The World Bank                                        The Gambia                                Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

On a scale of 1-10, with 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly         Level of Agreement
agree, please respond to the following statements about the World Bank in The
Gambia.                                                                                    N      Mean       SD
10. Overall the Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in The Gambia         136     7.33      2.14
11. The Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for this
                                                                                          133      6.59     2.31
    country
12. The Bank’s work reflects its own mission of poverty reduction                         117      6.77     2.50
13. The World Bank recommends programs and strategies that are realistic for The
                                                                                          124      6.45     2.29
    Gambia
14. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in The Gambia with respect             121      7.61     1.97
15. The World Bank collaborates with other donors here                                    109      7.37     2.21
16. The World Bank is responsive                                                          125      6.90     2.30
17. Overall I like to work/interact with Bank staff                                       128      7.77     2.10
18. The Bank is an effective catalyst for discussion on issues related to poverty         118      7.32     2.34
19. In general, the strategies that the Bank recommends are sustainable over time         112      6.56     2.22
20. The World Bank’s work promotes country ownership of development strategies            117      6.53     2.45
21. The Bank’s work promotes the empowerment of poor people to participate in
                                                                                          125      6.38     2.58
    development
22. The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                           112      5.95     2.62
23. The Bank gives appropriate priority to growth issues                                  123      7.03     2.11




                                                         62
The World Bank                                             The Gambia                                 Country Survey 2012


D. The Work of the World Bank
How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that                   Importance               Effectiveness
particular area of work in The Gambia? How effective do you
believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive
impact on that area of development in The Gambia?
(Asked on a 5-point importance/effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all,
5 being Very; converted to a 10-point scale for analysis)                  N      Mean        SD     N      Mean      SD
1.    Helping to reduce poverty                                           135     9.55       1.31   121     6.76     2.38
2.    Helping to strengthen the government's effectiveness                118     8.78       2.09   111     5.99     2.36
3.    Helping to increase access and quality of health services,
      including the fight against HIV/AIDS and other                      125      8.58      2.28   112      6.79    2.33
      communicable diseases
4.    Helping to bring about macro-economic growth                        125      9.06      1.62   118      7.20    2.28
5.    Fighting against corruption                                         119      8.03      2.37   108      5.27    2.52
6.    Helping to increase access and quality of basic education           125      9.33      1.37   117      8.23    2.09
7.    Helping to strengthen higher education                              123      8.83      1.59   114      6.76    2.41
8.    Helping to improve the legal and regulatory systems                 114      8.14      2.10    99      5.95    2.43
9.    Helping to increase professional skills, employment and
                                                                          121      8.98      1.74   110      6.34    2.45
      income generation, specifically for young people
10.   Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources
                                                                          115      8.02      2.07   103      6.07    2.13
      management
11.   Helping to improve basic infrastructure (port, electricity,
                                                                          122      8.88      1.92   112      6.32    2.53
      roads)
12.   Helping to improve the investment climate for private
                                                                          116      8.80      1.84   105      6.61    2.16
      sector growth and attracting foreign investment
13.   Helping to strengthen the agricultural sector/food security         126      9.32      1.54   112      6.93    2.28
14.   Helping to strengthen the fisheries sector                          118      8.44      1.92   107      5.88    2.28
15. Ensuring that attention is paid to gender disparities                 119      7.50      2.38   104      6.30    2.39
16. Helping to integrate The Gambia into the global and/or
                                                                          121      8.23      1.91   103      5.85    2.22
    sub-regional economy
17. Helping to improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                    117      8.04      2.39   102      6.23    2.73
18. Helping The Gambia adapt to/avert risk of climate change              114      7.79      2.30   102      5.70    2.15
19. Helping to strengthen the public financial management
                                                                          45       8.75      2.12   40       7.36    2.64
    and procurement system
20. Help strengthening the national statistical system                    121      7.86      2.41   102      6.32    2.17
21. Helping to expand internet connectivity                               116      7.91      2.65    95      6.54    2.58
22. Helping to strengthen the capacity of civil society and
                                                                          124      8.39      2.04   104      6.13    2.54
    private sector organizations
23. Helping to empower local communities                                  119      8.36      2.30   105      6.19    2.70
24. Helping to improve the quality of life in urban areas                 114      8.24      2.13   104      5.98    2.64




                                                               63
The World Bank                                       The Gambia                                 Country Survey 2012


E. The Way the World Bank does Business

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular        Level of Effectiveness
attribute/activity listed below using a 1-5 scale, 1 meaning “not effective at all”, 5
meaning “very effective” (converted to a 10-point scale for analysis)                     N     Mean        SD
1. Technical competence                                                                  123    8.74       1.89
2.   Producing “knowledge” (studies, analyses) that is useful                            117     8.21      2.10
3.   Making the results of studies and analyses readily available                        117     7.44      2.36
4.   Sharing knowledge about international best practices                                117     7.79      2.21
5.   Ability to adapt its knowledge to your country’s needs                              114     7.02      2.31
6.   Ensuring its staff is accessible                                                    115     7.01      2.49
7.   Providing sound policy and economic advice                                          114     7.99      2.19
8.   Straightforwardness in its dealings with you                                        112     7.81      2.29
9.   Maintaining consistent messages                                                     107     7.35      2.45
10. Promoting the inclusion of local communities in the development of strategies        110     6.81      2.72
11. Promoting the inclusion of civil society in the development of strategies            112     6.56      2.63
12. Promoting the inclusion of local project experts in the development of strategies    119     6.84      2.59
13. Promoting the inclusion of private sector in the development of strategies           120     6.66      2.22
14. Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction                                     125     7.77      2.38
15. Lending in a way that promotes effective development                                 112     7.31      2.34


F. Project/Program Related Issues

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale,            Level of Agreement
1 meaning you “strongly disagree”, 10 meaning you “strongly agree”.                      N      Mean       SD
1. The Bank is flexible in terms of adjusting to changing circumstances                  70     5.81      2.42
2.   The Bank disburses funds promptly                                                   72      5.93     3.14
3.   The Bank works efficiently                                                          75      7.07     2.46
4.   The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                         72      7.29     2.45
     supports
5.   The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level                             71      6.76     2.47
6.   The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials                            72      7.17     2.13
7.   The Bank provides strategic advice and helps strengthening country systems          73      7.33     2.27
8.   The Bank and partners in government collaborate well together on Bank
                                                                                         73      7.41     2.25
     supported programs and projects in The Gambia
9.   The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity                                 76      7.68     1.99
10. The Government supports and takes responsibility for development efforts in
                                                                                         77      7.47     2.14
    The Gambia
11. The Bank’s procurement requirements are reasonable                                   69      6.77     2.34




                                                           64
The World Bank                                              The Gambia                                        Country Survey 2012


G. The Future Role of the World Bank in The Gambia

The Bank’s Role                                                                                          N      Mean       SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank should play in The Gambia’s
development over the medium term in the near future? (1 meaning that the Bank should                    132      9.19     1.38
not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should play a very significant role)

2. Which of the following should the World Bank do to make itself of greater
                                                                                                    Percentage of Respondents
    value in The Gambia? (Choose only ONE)
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                                       42.4%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                                      13.6%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to The Gambia’s specific challenges                             12.1%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                              10.6%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                                      9.8%
Other                                                                                                         6.1%
Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                                                 5.3%

3. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which                    Percentage of Respondents
    TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose TWO only)                               (Combined Responses)
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in government                                                           40.7%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                               33.3%
Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                                                     31.9%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                             23.0%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                         20.0%
Poor donor coordination                                                                                       17.8%
The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                                                                 13.3%
Other                                                                                                         0.7%




                                                                 65
The World Bank                                     The Gambia                              Country Survey 2012


H. Communication and Outreach

1. From where do you get most of your information about economic and             Percentage of Respondents
  social development issues in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO)               (Combined Responses)
Local newspapers                                                                           66.2%
Internet                                                                                   36.6%
Local television                                                                           31.0%
Local radio                                                                                14.8%
Periodicals                                                                                14.8%
International television                                                                   12.0%
International radio                                                                         6.3%
Other                                                                                       4.9%
International newspapers                                                                    3.5%
Social media: Facebook, Twitter, Youtube                                                    1.4%

2. From where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s         Percentage of Respondents
    development activities in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO)                (Combined Responses)
Local newspapers                                                                           50.7%
Internet                                                                                   27.1%
World Bank website                                                                         24.3%
Local television                                                                           21.4%
Local radio                                                                                13.6%
World Bank publications, materials                                                         13.6%
World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                                                10.7%
Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff                                           10.0%
International radio                                                                         3.6%
Periodicals                                                                                 3.6%
Other                                                                                       3.6%
International newspapers                                                                    1.4%
International television                                                                    1.4%
Blogs                                                                                       0.7%

3. How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank?              Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                        (Combined Responses)
World Bank website                                                                         55.6%
e-Newsletters                                                                              44.4%
Workshops/conferences                                                                      25.4%
Face to face meetings/discussions                                                          21.1%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                                  12.0%
Other                                                                                      10.6%
Mobile phones                                                                               2.1%
Blogs                                                                                       0.0%

4. Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to information Policy under
which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not   Percentage of Respondents
on a list of exceptions?
Yes                                                                                       16.1%
No                                                                                        83.9%




                                                       66
The World Bank                                      The Gambia                                Country Survey 2012


H. Communication and Outreach (continued)

5. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in
                                                                                    Percentage of Respondents
    the past year?
Yes                                                                                          17.3%
No                                                                                           82.7%

6. Were you able to obtain this information?                                        Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                           46.8%
No                                                                                            53.2%

7. Do you have access to the Internet?                                              Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                           93.3%
No                                                                                             6.7%

8. I use/have used the World Bank website:                                          Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                           68.3%
No                                                                                            31.7%

9. I primarily use:                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
The World Bank’s country website                                                              17.4%
The World Bank’s main website                                                                 82.6%

10. The Internet connection, I mainly use when visiting a World Bank website:      Percentage of Respondents
High speed                                                                                    73.5%
Dial-up                                                                                       26.5%

11. When I visit the World Bank website, I am generally looking for:               Percentage of Respondents
Project information                                                                           33.3%
Country information                                                                           26.7%
Data                                                                                          22.7%
News                                                                                           9.3%
Other                                                                                          8.0%

12. I generally use the World Bank’s website in:                                   Percentage of Respondents
English                                                                                       98.9%
French                                                                                         1.1%


Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale,            Level of Agreement
1 meaning you “strongly disagree”, 10 meaning you “strongly agree”.                      N     Mean      SD
13. The World Bank’s Knowledge Space is a valuable source of information related
                                                                                        87      7.83    2.19
    to development in The Gambia
14. I find the Bank websites easy to navigate                                           93      7.85    1.90
15. I find the information on the Bank’s websites useful                                97      8.24    1.84
16. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it                   95      6.88    2.64
17. The Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries                     80      6.91    2.56




                                                           67
The World Bank                                                                                                                                          The Gambia                                                                                                           Country Survey 2012

Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups
A. Background Information
                                                                                                                                                  Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                     Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                          Independent Government
                                                                                                             Bilateral or Multilateral Agency            Private Sector                      NGOs                                             Academia, Research Institute             Other
                                   Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                       Institution
                                       N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD          N         Mean         SD        N        Mean         SD        N       Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD         N      Mean           SD
How familiar are you with the
work of the World Bank in The          3          1.67         .58          41         6.39        2.55        20         5.75         2.63        29        4.38         2.86      19          4.95     2.76       10       5.80      2.78     7         5.29       2.29       12     4.42           2.54
Gambia?
(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “Extremely familiar”)

B. General Issues facing The Gambia
                                                                                                                                                  Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                     Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                          Independent Government
                                                                                                             Bilateral or Multilateral Agency            Private Sector                      NGOs                                             Academia, Research Institute             Other
                                   Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                       Institution
                                       N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD          N         Mean         SD        N         Mean        SD         N      Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD         N      Mean           SD
Please indicate your
perspective on the future of the       3          5.00        3.61          37         7.22        1.80        18         6.06         1.59        26        7.00         2.21      20          7.00     2.36       10       7.50      2.32     6         6.83       2.56       11     5.55           2.34
next generation in The Gambia

(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Extremely pessimistic”, 10 meaning “Extremely optimistic”)

Please identify which one of these you consider the first most important development priority.
                                                                                                           Office of the President,              Employee of Ministry,              Bilateral or                                                    Independent           Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                               Prime Minister, Minister,                Ministerial Dep,                 Multilateral           Private Sector           NGOs            Government            Research            Other
                                                                                                               Parliamentarian                  Implementation Agency                 Agency                                                         Institution           Institute
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                                                 0.0%                              34.4%                           18.8%                     15.4%              31.3%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                              0.0%                               0.0%                            0.0%                      0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Macro-economic growth                                                                                               0.0%                               6.3%                            0.0%                      3.8%               6.3%               0.0%                33.3%              0.0%
 Fight against corruption                                                                                            0.0%                               0.0%                            0.0%                     11.5%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                                               0.0%                               3.1%                            6.3%                     11.5%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%             22.2%
 Higher education                                                                                                    0.0%                               0.0%                            6.3%                      3.8%               6.3%               0.0%                 0.0%             22.2%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                                                   0.0%                               6.3%                           31.3%                      3.8%              25.0%              28.6%                 0.0%             22.2%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                                                      0.0%                               0.0%                            6.3%                      3.8%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                                                     0.0%                                 18.8%                          12.5%                   3.8%               6.3%               14.3%                 50.0%            11.1%
 specifically for young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                                                    0.0%                                 3.1%                           6.3%                    0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                                                           0.0%                                 9.4%                           6.3%                    0.0%               0.0%               14.3%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                                                     0.0%                                 0.0%                           0.0%                    7.7%               0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%
 investment
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                                               100.0%                                18.8%                          0.0%                    30.8%              25.0%              28.6%                 16.7%            11.1%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                                                 0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Fishery                                                                                                             0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                                                         0.0%                                  3.1%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                                             0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%              28.6%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                                                          0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                                                        0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                                              0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                                               0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                                                       0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                                                     0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations                                        0.0%                                  0.0%                          6.3%                     3.8%               6.3%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                                                           0.0%                                  3.1%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                                                        0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Other                                                                                                               0.0%                                  0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%



                                                                                                                                                              68
The World Bank                                                                                                     The Gambia                                                                 Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing The Gambia (continued)
Then identify which one you consider the second most important development priority.
                                                                                 Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                            Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                     Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector   NGOs    Government     Research     Other
                                                                                     Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                 Institution    Institute
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                       0.0%                    10.7%                20.0%           4.0%         12.5%       0.0%         33.3%      11.1%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                    0.0%                     0.0%                 6.7%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Macro-economic growth                                                                     50.0%                    3.6%                 0.0%           0.0%          6.3%       0.0%          0.0%      22.2%
 Fight against corruption                                                                  0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                     0.0%                     7.1%                13.3%           4.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Higher education                                                                          0.0%                     3.6%                 0.0%           4.0%         12.5%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                         0.0%                     3.6%                 6.7%          24.0%         25.0%      14.3%          0.0%      44.4%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                            0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         16.7%       0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                         50.0%                      25.0%               0.0%           12.0%         18.8%      0.0%          16.7%      0.0%
 specifically for young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                         0.0%                      0.0%                0.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                                0.0%                      3.6%                6.7%           16.0%         0.0%       28.6%         0.0%       0.0%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                          0.0%                      10.7%               0.0%            8.0%         0.0%       14.3%         0.0%       11.1%
 investment
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                     0.0%                      21.4%              13.3%            8.0%         12.5%      14.3%         16.7%      11.1%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                      0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%            16.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Fishery                                                                                  0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                              0.0%                       0.0%              6.7%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                  0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%      14.3%         0.0%        0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                               0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                             0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                   0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         16.7%       0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                    0.0%                       7.1%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                            0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                          0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%             4.0%          6.3%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations             0.0%                       0.0%              20.0%            0.0%         12.5%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                                0.0%                       3.6%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                             0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Other                                                                                    0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%




                                                                                                                       69
The World Bank                                                                                                     The Gambia                                                                 Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing The Gambia (continued)

Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                                 Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                            Independent    Academia,
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector   NGOs    Government     Research     Other
                                                                                     Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                 Institution    Institute
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                       0.0%                    21.4%                37.5%          14.3%         23.1%       0.0%         50.0%      37.5%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                    0.0%                     0.0%                12.5%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%      12.5%
 Macro-economic growth                                                                     33.3%                    7.1%                 6.3%           7.1%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Fight against corruption                                                                  0.0%                     7.1%                 6.3%          14.3%         15.4%       0.0%          0.0%      12.5%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                     33.3%                   14.3%                12.5%          14.3%         15.4%      16.7%         25.0%      25.0%
 Higher education                                                                          0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          7.7%      16.7%          0.0%       0.0%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                         0.0%                     7.1%                12.5%          14.3%          7.7%      50.0%          0.0%      50.0%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                            0.0%                     0.0%                 6.3%           0.0%          7.7%       0.0%         25.0%       0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                         33.3%                      57.1%              43.8%           50.0%         23.1%      16.7%         25.0%      37.5%
 specifically for young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                         0.0%                      0.0%                0.0%            0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                                0.0%                      7.1%                0.0%            0.0%         15.4%      16.7%         0.0%       0.0%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                          0.0%                      14.3%              12.5%           21.4%         15.4%      16.7%         0.0%       12.5%
 investment
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                    66.7%                      46.4%              12.5%           42.9%         38.5%      50.0%         75.0%      12.5%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                     0.0%                        0.0%              6.3%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Fishery                                                                                 0.0%                        0.0%              6.3%             0.0%          7.7%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                             0.0%                        0.0%              6.3%             0.0%         15.4%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                 0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%      16.7%         0.0%        0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                              0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                            0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                  0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                   0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                           0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                         0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations            0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                               0.0%                        7.1%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                            0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             7.1%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Other                                                                                   0.0%                        3.6%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%




                                                                                                                       70
The World Bank                                                                                                                                           The Gambia                                                                                                         Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing The Gambia (continued)
Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                                                         Office of the President,              Employee of Ministry,               Bilateral or                                                    Independent           Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                             Prime Minister, Minister,                Ministerial Dep,                  Multilateral           Private Sector           NGOs            Government            Research            Other
                                                                                                             Parliamentarian                  Implementation Agency                  Agency                                                         Institution           Institute
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                                               33.3%                             25.0%                            25.0%                     22.6%              45.0%              30.0%                14.3%             41.7%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                            0.0%                               0.0%                            10.0%                      3.2%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Fight against corruption                                                                                          0.0%                               5.0%                             5.0%                      9.7%              20.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              8.3%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                                             0.0%                              10.0%                            10.0%                     12.9%              15.0%               0.0%                 0.0%             33.3%
 Higher education                                                                                                  0.0%                               0.0%                             0.0%                      6.5%              10.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              8.3%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                                                 0.0%                               5.0%                            20.0%                      6.5%               0.0%              20.0%                 0.0%             16.7%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                                                    0.0%                               2.5%                             0.0%                      0.0%               5.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                                                   33.3%                                  47.5%                         30.0%                   19.4%              30.0%              30.0%                 28.6%            25.0%
 specifically for young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                                                  0.0%                                    0.0%                         5.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                                                         0.0%                                   15.0%                         10.0%                   12.9%              10.0%              20.0%                 14.3%            16.7%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                                                   0.0%                                   20.0%                         25.0%                   19.4%              10.0%              20.0%                 28.6%             8.3%
 investment
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                                              33.3%                                  40.0%                         20.0%                   58.1%              30.0%              40.0%                 42.9%            25.0%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                                               0.0%                                    0.0%                         0.0%                     3.2%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%             16.7%
 Fishery                                                                                                           0.0%                                    0.0%                         5.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                                                       33.3%                                   7.5%                         20.0%                   12.9%              20.0%              20.0%                 28.6%             0.0%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                                           0.0%                                    0.0%                         0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%              20.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                                                        0.0%                                    0.0%                         0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                                                      33.3%                                   0.0%                         0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                                            0.0%                                    0.0%                         0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                                             0.0%                                    7.5%                         0.0%                     3.2%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                                                     0.0%                                    0.0%                         0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                                                   0.0%                                    0.0%                         0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations                                      0.0%                                    2.5%                         10.0%                    3.2%               0.0%               0.0%                 28.6%             0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                                                         0.0%                                   10.0%                         5.0%                     0.0%               5.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                                                      0.0%                                    0.0%                         0.0%                     3.2%               0.0%               0.0%                 14.3%             0.0%
 Other                                                                                                             0.0%                                    0.0%                         0.0%                     3.2%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank
                                                                                                                                                       Overall Effectiveness
                                                                                                                                                 Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                   Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                           Independent Government
                                                                                                           Bilateral or Multilateral Agency              Private Sector                     NGOs                                             Academia, Research Institute             Other
                                 Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                        Institution
                                     N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD            N         Mean         SD       N         Mean        SD         N      Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD         N      Mean           SD
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank’s       3          3.33        3.21          42         7.24        1.64        18         5.83         2.07         30          7.03        1.77     17        4.94       2.49        9       7.56      2.24     7         6.86       1.77       11     7.73           1.90
effectiveness in The Gambia

(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”)
                                                                                                                                              World Bank's Financial Instruments
                                                                                                                                                 Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                   Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                           Independent Government
                                                                                                           Bilateral or Multilateral Agency              Private Sector                     NGOs                                             Academia, Research Institute             Other
                                 Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                        Institution
                                     N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD            N         Mean         SD       N        Mean         SD        N       Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD         N      Mean           SD
To what extent do the World
Bank's financial instruments
                                     3          3.67        3.79          41         6.66        1.54        16         5.94         1.84         26          6.12        2.39     16        4.94       2.24        9       6.67      2.83     7         7.43       1.40       11     8.00           2.28
meet the needs of The
Gambia?
(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “To no degree at all”, 10 meaning “To a very significant degree”)


                                                                                                                                                               71
The World Bank                                                                                                                                       The Gambia                                                                                                           Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
                                                                                                                                             World Bank's Knowledge Services
                                                                                                                                               Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                  Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                          Independent Government
                                                                                                          Bilateral or Multilateral Agency            Private Sector                      NGOs                                             Academia, Research Institute             Other
                                Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                       Institution
                                    N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD           N        Mean         SD        N        Mean         SD        N       Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD         N      Mean           SD
To what extent does the World
Bank meet the needs of The
                                    3          3.33        3.21          41         6.02        1.99        15         5.87         2.59        27        6.74         2.57      15          4.27     1.91        9       6.67      2.83     6         6.67       1.97       9      6.78           2.73
Gambia for knowledge
services?
(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “To no degree at all”, 10 meaning “To a very significant degree”)

Based on your observations of the World Bank in The Gambia, what do you think the Bank considers its top priorities in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                                                        Office of the President,              Employee of Ministry,              Bilateral or                                                    Independent           Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                            Prime Minister, Minister,                Ministerial Dep,                 Multilateral           Private Sector           NGOs            Government            Research            Other
                                                                                                            Parliamentarian                  Implementation Agency                 Agency                                                         Institution           Institute
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                                              0.0%                              22.0%                           36.8%                     13.3%              22.2%              10.0%                57.1%             30.8%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                           0.0%                               7.3%                           10.5%                      3.3%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Macro-economic growth                                                                                            33.3%                             24.4%                           31.6%                     46.7%              38.9%              10.0%                42.9%             46.2%
 Fight against corruption                                                                                         0.0%                               2.4%                            0.0%                      3.3%              11.1%               0.0%                 0.0%              7.7%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                                            66.7%                             36.6%                           26.3%                     36.7%              22.2%              80.0%                14.3%             38.5%
 Higher education                                                                                                 0.0%                               0.0%                            5.3%                      3.3%               5.6%              10.0%                14.3%              0.0%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                                                0.0%                               4.9%                            5.3%                      6.7%               5.6%               0.0%                14.3%              7.7%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                                                   0.0%                               9.8%                            5.3%                      0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                                                  0.0%                                12.2%                           5.3%                    3.3%               0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%             15.4%
 specifically for young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                                                 0.0%                                 4.9%                           0.0%                    3.3%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                                                        0.0%                                 2.4%                           5.3%                    6.7%               0.0%               10.0%                 0.0%              7.7%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                                                  33.3%                                9.8%                           15.8%                   3.3%               5.6%               0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%
 investment
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                                             0.0%                                22.0%                           5.3%                    20.0%              22.2%              20.0%                 14.3%            23.1%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                                              0.0%                                 0.0%                           5.3%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Fishery                                                                                                          33.3%                                0.0%                           5.3%                    10.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 14.3%             0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                                                      0.0%                                 0.0%                           5.3%                     0.0%              22.2%               0.0%                 0.0%             15.4%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                                          0.0%                                 0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                                                       0.0%                                 0.0%                           0.0%                     3.3%               5.6%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                                                     0.0%                                 0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                                           0.0%                                 0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                                            0.0%                                24.4%                           5.3%                    13.3%              16.7%              30.0%                 0.0%              7.7%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                                                    0.0%                                 0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%              10.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                                                  0.0%                                 4.9%                           0.0%                     3.3%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations                                     0.0%                                 2.4%                           5.3%                     3.3%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                                                        0.0%                                 2.4%                           5.3%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                                                     0.0%                                 0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%
 Other                                                                                                            0.0%                                 0.0%                           5.3%                     0.0%               5.6%               0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%




                                                                                                                                                           72
The World Bank                                                                                                     The Gambia                                                                 Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Based on your observations of the World Bank in The Gambia, where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in its support of country priorities?
(Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                                 Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                            Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                     Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector   NGOs    Government     Research     Other
                                                                                     Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                 Institution    Institute
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                       0.0%                    12.2%                33.3%           9.7%         15.0%      20.0%          0.0%      15.4%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                    0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Macro-economic growth                                                                     66.7%                    7.3%                11.1%           9.7%          0.0%       0.0%         28.6%      23.1%
 Fight against corruption                                                                  0.0%                     0.0%                 5.6%           6.5%         10.0%      10.0%          0.0%       7.7%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                     0.0%                     9.8%                27.8%          25.8%          5.0%      10.0%          0.0%      15.4%
 Higher education                                                                          0.0%                     0.0%                11.1%           0.0%         15.0%       0.0%          0.0%       7.7%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                         0.0%                     4.9%                11.1%           9.7%         20.0%      10.0%          0.0%      15.4%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                            0.0%                     2.4%                 0.0%           0.0%         10.0%       0.0%         14.3%       7.7%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities,
                                                                                         33.3%                      41.5%              27.8%           22.6%         25.0%      30.0%         57.1%      38.5%
 specifically for young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                         0.0%                      2.4%               0.0%             6.5%          0.0%       0.0%         14.3%       0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                                0.0%                      7.3%               16.7%            9.7%         25.0%      10.0%         14.3%      23.1%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                                                                                          0.0%                      12.2%              16.7%           25.8%         15.0%      0.0%          14.3%      7.7%
 investment
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                    66.7%                      51.2%              11.1%           19.4%         25.0%      30.0%         14.3%      15.4%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                     0.0%                        0.0%              5.6%             3.2%          5.0%      10.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Fishery                                                                                 0.0%                        4.9%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                             0.0%                        2.4%              11.1%            6.5%          0.0%      10.0%         0.0%        7.7%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                 0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%      20.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                              0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                            0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%      10.0%         0.0%        7.7%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                  0.0%                        2.4%              0.0%             3.2%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                   0.0%                       12.2%              0.0%             6.5%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                           0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                         0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             3.2%          0.0%       0.0%         14.3%       0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations            0.0%                        9.8%              11.1%            3.2%         15.0%       0.0%         0.0%        7.7%
 Empower local communities                                                               0.0%                        4.9%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                            0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             3.2%          0.0%      10.0%         0.0%        0.0%
 Other                                                                                   0.0%                        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%


In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in The Gambia’s development strategies?
                                                                                 Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                            Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                     Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector   NGOs    Government     Research     Other
                                                                                     Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                 Institution    Institute
 The Bank should be more involved                                                         100.0%                   86.0%                75.0%          93.1%         73.7%      90.0%         100.0%     92.3%
 The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                                        0.0%                     7.0%                 5.0%           0.0%         10.5%      10.0%          0.0%       7.7%
 The Bank should be less involved                                                          0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          5.3%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                                                     0.0%                     2.3%                 5.0%           3.4%          5.3%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Don't know/refused                                                                        0.0%                     4.7%                15.0%           3.4%          5.3%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                       73
The World Bank                                                                                                  The Gambia                                                                 Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest” value brought by the World Bank to The Gambia?
                                                                              Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                            Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                  Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector   NGOs    Government     Research     Other
                                                                                  Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                 Institution    Institute
 The Bank’s knowledge                                                                   0.0%                     2.4%                11.1%          17.2%          5.6%       0.0%         14.3%       8.3%
 Technical advice                                                                       0.0%                    12.2%                16.7%          24.1%         11.1%      20.0%         14.3%      25.0%
 Policy and economic advice                                                             66.7%                   14.6%                22.2%          34.5%         22.2%       0.0%         14.3%      25.0%
 Lending when others won’t                                                              0.0%                     2.4%                 0.0%           0.0%         16.7%      10.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Convener/facilitator                                                                   0.0%                     2.4%                 0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Donor coordination                                                                     0.0%                     2.4%                 5.6%           3.4%          0.0%      10.0%         42.9%       0.0%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                          0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          0.0%      10.0%         14.3%       0.0%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                                               0.0%                    12.2%                 5.6%           6.9%          0.0%      10.0%          0.0%      16.7%
 Financial resources                                                                    0.0%                    53.7%                33.3%          20.7%         38.9%      40.0%         14.3%      25.0%
 Other                                                                                  0.0%                     0.0%                 5.6%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 None of the above                                                                      33.3%                    0.0%                 5.6%           0.0%          5.6%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%

What is the “second greatest” value?
                                                                              Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                            Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                  Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector   NGOs    Government     Research     Other
                                                                                  Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                 Institution    Institute
 The Bank’s knowledge                                                                   0.0%                     2.4%                11.8%           3.7%         11.1%      10.0%          0.0%       8.3%
 Technical advice                                                                       33.3%                   14.6%                 5.9%          14.8%         38.9%      30.0%         28.6%       8.3%
 Policy and economic advice                                                             0.0%                    39.0%                23.5%          33.3%         16.7%      20.0%          0.0%      33.3%
 Lending when others won’t                                                              0.0%                     4.9%                 0.0%           7.4%         11.1%       0.0%         28.6%       8.3%
 Convener/facilitator                                                                   0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Donor coordination                                                                     33.3%                    7.3%                 5.9%           7.4%          5.6%       0.0%         14.3%      16.7%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                          0.0%                     0.0%                11.8%           3.7%          5.6%       0.0%          0.0%       8.3%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                                               0.0%                    14.6%                23.5%           0.0%          5.6%       0.0%          0.0%       8.3%
 Financial resources                                                                    0.0%                    14.6%                11.8%          25.9%          0.0%      40.0%         42.9%       8.3%
 Other                                                                                  0.0%                     2.4%                 5.9%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 None of the above                                                                      33.3%                    0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          5.6%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                              Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                            Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                  Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector   NGOs    Government     Research     Other
                                                                                  Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                 Institution    Institute
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                  0.0%                    16.2%                15.0%          24.1%         35.3%      11.1%          0.0%      10.0%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                               0.0%                     8.1%                 0.0%          24.1%         11.8%       0.0%         28.6%      10.0%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                            66.7%                   59.5%                30.0%          37.9%         23.5%      77.8%         28.6%      30.0%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                                 0.0%                     0.0%                10.0%           6.9%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%      10.0%
 Bank management is not accessible                                                      0.0%                     0.0%                 5.0%          13.8%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Bank staff are arrogant in their approach                                              0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                               0.0%                    24.3%                30.0%          24.1%         35.3%       0.0%         42.9%      30.0%
 The Bank is too influenced by the US or others                                         0.0%                     5.4%                 5.0%           6.9%          5.9%       0.0%         14.3%      10.0%
 World Bank procedures too slow and complex to show results on the
                                                                                      33.3%                      29.7%              25.0%           24.1%         29.4%      33.3%         28.6%      30.0%
 ground in reasonable time
 The interventions of the World Bank are inadequately aligned with country
                                                                                      33.3%                      2.7%               15.0%            6.9%         11.8%      11.1%         14.3%      20.0%
 priorities
 The Bank's instruments are not flexible enough to respond to country
                                                                                       0.0%                      24.3%              15.0%            3.4%         5.9%       22.2%         14.3%      30.0%
 needs
 Other                                                                                 0.0%                      2.7%               15.0%            0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       10.0%


                                                                                                                    74
The World Bank                                                                                         The Gambia                                                                          Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the nex t few years in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                     Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                                   Independent     Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                         Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector     NGOs         Government      Research        Other
                                                                         Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                        Institution     Institute
 Education                                                                     33.3%                   16.7%                25.0%          19.4%           15.8%           20.0%          42.9%         53.8%
 Health                                                                        0.0%                    14.3%                30.0%          19.4%           31.6%           20.0%           0.0%         23.1%
 Social protection                                                             0.0%                     4.8%                10.0%           0.0%            5.3%            0.0%          14.3%          0.0%
 Transport                                                                     0.0%                     2.4%                 0.0%           0.0%            5.3%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Poverty                                                                       0.0%                    16.7%                15.0%          12.9%           10.5%           30.0%          28.6%          7.7%
 Governance                                                                    0.0%                    11.9%                15.0%           9.7%           31.6%           10.0%           0.0%          7.7%
 Anti-corruption                                                               0.0%                     0.0%                 5.0%           6.5%            5.3%            0.0%           0.0%          7.7%
 Enhanced business environment for private sector development                  0.0%                    11.9%                20.0%          16.1%           10.5%            0.0%          57.1%         30.8%
 Energy                                                                        0.0%                     9.5%                 5.0%          22.6%            5.3%            0.0%           0.0%          7.7%
 Agricultural production/Food security                                        100.0%                   31.0%                25.0%          38.7%           21.1%           50.0%          28.6%         23.1%
 Agri-business                                                                 0.0%                     2.4%                 0.0%           3.2%           10.5%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                          0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           3.2%            5.3%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                     0.0%                     4.8%                 5.0%           6.5%            5.3%           10.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Public expenditure                                                            0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           6.5%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Public sector performance                                                     0.0%                     9.5%                10.0%           0.0%            5.3%            0.0%          14.3%          7.7%
 Labor markets/job creation                                                    0.0%                     9.5%                10.0%           3.2%            5.3%           40.0%           0.0%         15.4%
 Financial markets                                                             0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Urban/metropolitan development                                                0.0%                     4.8%                 5.0%           6.5%            0.0%            0.0%          14.3%          0.0%
 Environmental sustainability/natural resources management                     66.7%                   11.9%                 0.0%           0.0%            5.3%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Improving equality of opportunity                                             0.0%                     0.0%                 5.0%           3.2%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Rural development                                                             0.0%                    26.2%                15.0%          19.4%           15.8%            0.0%           0.0%          7.7%
 Climate change                                                                0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           3.2%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          7.7%
 Service sector expansion                                                      0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%            5.3%           10.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Other                                                                         0.0%                     4.8%                 0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           10.0%           0.0%          0.0%

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank work with more in your country to ensure better development
results there? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                     Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                                   Independent     Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                         Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector     NGOs         Government      Research        Other
                                                                         Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                        Institution     Institute
 NGOs                                                                          0.0%                    21.4%                38.9%          25.8%           78.9%           40.0%          28.6%         46.2%
 Local Government                                                             100.0%                   28.6%                22.2%           9.7%           15.8%           20.0%          42.9%         23.1%
 Beneficiaries                                                                 0.0%                    47.6%                16.7%          22.6%           15.8%           50.0%           0.0%         30.8%
 Private sector                                                                0.0%                    31.0%                33.3%          77.4%            5.3%           20.0%          85.7%         38.5%
 Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                         100.0%                   38.1%                33.3%          29.0%           57.9%           30.0%          14.3%         23.1%
 Donor community                                                               0.0%                     7.1%                22.2%           6.5%           10.5%           10.0%          28.6%         23.1%
 Parliament                                                                    0.0%                     2.4%                 5.6%           3.2%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          7.7%
 Media                                                                         0.0%                     0.0%                 5.6%           9.7%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Faith-based organizations                                                     0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           3.2%            5.3%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%
 Other                                                                         0.0%                     7.1%                16.7%           0.0%            5.3%            0.0%           0.0%          0.0%




                                                                                                           75
The World Bank                                                                                                                                         The Gambia                                                                                                        Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following statements about the Worl d Bank in The Gambia.

                                                                                                                                                 Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                      Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                     Independent Government
                                                                                                              Bilateral or Multilateral Agency          Private Sector                      NGOs                                          Academia, Research Institute           Other
                                    Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                  Institution
                                        N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD        N         Mean         SD        N        Mean         SD     N       Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD        N     Mean    SD
Overall the Bank currently plays
a relevant role in development          3          3.67        3.79          42         8.05        1.71        19         6.63         2.22      27        7.37         1.86      18        6.17       2.23    9        8.33      2.06     7         7.71       2.06      9     8.00    1.73
in The Gambia
The Bank’s work is aligned with
what I consider the
                                        2          1.00         .00          40         7.48        1.75        18         6.11         2.37      26        6.65         1.87      18        4.83       2.31    9        6.89      2.37     7         7.57       2.23      11    7.45    2.07
development priorities for this
country
The Bank’s work reflects its
own mission of poverty                  3          3.67        4.62          37         7.78        2.14        19         6.21         2.62      17        7.00         1.84      17        5.76       2.59    9        6.56      2.65     5         6.20       3.03      8     6.38    2.26
reduction
The World Bank recommends
programs and strategies that            3          3.67        4.62          39         6.64        2.32        16         6.25         2.14      22        6.68         1.67      17        6.00       2.35    10       6.40      3.06     7         7.71       1.60      8     6.50    2.14
are realistic for The Gambia
The World Bank treats clients
and stakeholders in The                 3          7.67        2.08          41         7.93        1.71        16         7.00         2.37      21        7.95         1.12      15        6.13       2.39    8        8.13      2.64     7         8.43       1.90      9     7.89    1.90
Gambia with respect
The World Bank collaborates
                                        2          7.00        2.83          34         7.85        1.56        18         6.83         2.77      17        7.41         1.87      12        5.17       2.59    8        7.38      1.51     7         8.86       1.46      9     8.11    2.57
with other donors here
The World Bank is responsive            3          4.00        5.20          39         7.46        1.77        18         6.33         2.83      22        7.09         1.60      17        5.41       2.50    8        7.50      2.33     7         7.57       2.30      9     8.00    1.66
Overall I like to work/interact
                                        3          7.33        2.31          40         7.95        1.91        17         6.65         2.60      24        7.96         1.55      16        7.19       2.71    10       9.00      1.25     5         7.20       3.11      11    8.64    1.63
with Bank staff
The Bank is an effective catalyst
for discussion on issues                3          3.67        4.62          38         8.05        1.54        19         6.16         2.69      17        7.29         1.99      18        6.72       3.08    7        8.29      1.11     6         8.33       1.97      8     7.63    1.69
related to poverty
In general, the strategies that
the Bank recommends are                 3          3.67        4.62          36         7.31        1.69        14         6.07         2.13      18        6.61         1.54      17        5.24       2.84    9        7.11      2.37     6         7.33       1.37      7     7.00    2.16
sustainable over time
The World Bank's work
promotes country ownership of           3          3.33        4.04          39         7.46        1.92        14         5.50         2.44      17        6.71         1.76      19        5.37       2.87    10       6.50      2.80     5         7.00       2.24      8     7.25    2.49
development strategies
The Bank's work promotes the
empowerment of poor people to           2          6.50        3.54          41         7.10        2.29        15         6.20         2.86      21        6.10         2.62      18        4.67       2.72    10       7.30      3.20     7         7.14       1.86      9     5.89    1.54
participate in development
The World Bank imposes
reasonable conditions on its            2          6.00        2.83          37         6.00        2.35        15         6.07         3.01      20        6.45         2.82      16        4.50       2.63    8        6.25      3.37     5         7.00       1.58      7     6.14    1.21
lending
The Bank gives appropriate
                                        3          6.33        2.52          38         7.13        1.63        15         7.40         1.64      22        7.14         2.38      18        5.78       2.67    9        7.33      2.60     7         8.00       1.53      9     7.33    2.29
priority to growth issues




                                                                                                                                                             76
The World Bank                                                                                                                                          The Gambia                                                                                                        Country Survey 2012

D. The Work of the World Bank
How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in The Gambia?
(Asked on a 5-point importance scale, 1 being Not at all, 5 being Very; converted to a 10-point scale for analysis.)

                                                                                                                                                  Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                       Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                     Independent Government
                                                                                                               Bilateral or Multilateral Agency          Private Sector                      NGOs                                          Academia, Research Institute           Other
                                     Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                  Institution
                                         N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD        N         Mean         SD        N        Mean         SD     N       Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD        N     Mean    SD
Helping to reduce poverty                3          9.25        1.30          42         9.52        1.17        17         9.07         2.11      26        9.74         .97       18        9.75       1.06    9        9.25      2.25     7         9.68       .85       11    9.80    .68
Helping to strengthen the
                                         3          9.25        1.30          36         9.19        1.54        17         7.49         3.36      22        8.77         2.17      14        8.88       1.92    7        9.04      1.77     6         8.88       1.88      11    8.77    1.55
government's effectiveness
Helping to increase access and
quality of health services,
including the fight against              3          7.75        2.25          37         8.91        1.96        15         7.45         3.28      25        8.56         2.42      16        9.16       1.62    9        9.50      1.50     7         8.07       2.73      11    8.16    2.21
HIV/AIDS and other
communicable diseases
Helping to bring about macro-
                                         3          7.00        1.30          40         9.38        1.02        15         8.65         2.22      23        9.02         2.02      16        9.02       1.64    9        8.50      1.95     6         9.63       .92       11    9.18    1.52
economic growth
Fighting against corruption              3          6.25        1.30          37         8.30        2.15        15         7.00         3.26      21        7.64         2.30      16        8.59       2.31    9        7.50      2.63     6         8.88       1.88      10    8.88    1.91
Helping to increase access and
                                         3          8.50        1.30          39         9.19        1.41        14         9.20         2.09      25        9.01         1.60      16        9.58        .91    9       10.00      .00      5        10.00       .00       12    9.81    .65
quality of basic education
Helping to strengthen higher
                                         3          7.75        2.25          37         8.30        1.94        16         9.30         1.35      24        8.97         1.32      16        9.16       1.13    8        8.59      2.06     7         9.68       .85       10    9.10    1.16
education
Helping to improve the legal
                                         2          6.63        1.59          36         8.38        1.67        15         7.30         2.97      22        8.06         2.63      14        8.55       1.89    9        7.50      1.76     5         9.10       1.23      9     8.25    1.50
and regulatory systems
Helping to increase
professional skills, employment
                                         3         10.00         .00          37         8.66        1.80        17         8.68         2.65      21        9.04         1.52      16        9.30       1.35    9        9.50      .99      6         9.25       1.84      10    9.33    1.52
and income generation,
specifically for young people
Helping to strengthen
environment and natural                  2          7.75        3.18          37         8.18        1.90        14         7.59         2.06      22        7.75         2.50      15        8.50       1.84    8        8.88      1.20     6         8.13       1.69      9     7.50    2.86
resources management
Helping to improve basic
infrastructure (port, electricity,       3          8.50        1.30          36         8.88        1.90        16         8.03         2.83      25        8.65         1.95      15        8.95       2.06    8       10.00      .00      6         9.25       1.16      11    9.59    .91
roads)
Helping to improve the
investment climate for private
                                         3          7.00        1.30          36         8.88        1.37        16         8.45         2.43      23        9.12         1.63      16        9.02       2.01    5        6.85      2.01     6         8.88       2.76      9     9.25    1.59
sector growth and attracting
foreign investment
Helping to strengthen the
                                         3         10.00         .00          37         9.33        1.39        16         9.02         2.32      25        9.19         1.70      17        9.34       1.32    8       10.00      .00      7        10.00       .00       11    8.77    1.85
agricultural sector/food security
Helping to strengthen the
                                         3          8.50        1.30          36         8.50        1.86        16         8.31         2.53      22        8.16         1.79      16        8.45       2.28    8        9.44      1.04     6         8.13       1.69      9     8.50    1.95
fisheries sector
Ensuring that attention is paid
                                         3          7.75        2.25          37         7.93        1.94        16         7.05         2.81      23        7.46         2.65      15        7.60       2.32    9        6.75      2.28     5         7.30       2.46      9     8.00    2.37
to gender disparities
Helping to integrate The
Gambia into the global and/or            3          8.50        1.30          36         8.31        1.89        15         8.20         2.28      23        7.75         2.04      17        8.15       1.99    9        8.75      1.63     7         8.39       2.14      9     8.50    1.59
sub-regional economy
Helping to improve nutrition for
                                         3          7.00        2.60          36         8.50        1.94        14         7.75         3.18      23        7.65         2.75      16        8.03       2.45    8        8.59      1.67     7         8.07       2.73      8     7.47    2.53
vulnerable groups
Helping The Gambia adapt
                                         3         10.00         .00          38         7.69        2.19        15         7.60         2.75      20        7.41         2.45      15        7.90       2.32    7        8.39      2.50     6         8.13       2.21      8     7.75    2.41
to/avert risk of climate change
Helping to strengthen the public
financial management and                 3          4.75        4.68          17         9.21        1.36        3          8.50         2.60      6         9.25         1.16       6        8.13       2.63    4        9.44      1.13     3         8.50       1.30      2     10.00   .00
procurement system
Help strengthening the national
                                         3          5.50         .00          37         8.18        2.24        15         7.60         3.34      22        7.65         2.35      16        8.73       1.64    9        8.25      1.88     7         5.82       3.03      10    7.98    2.48
statistical system
Helping to expand internet
                                         3          4.00        1.30          36         8.25        2.29        15         8.05         3.05      19        8.70         2.41      17        7.75       2.87    8        7.75      2.41     6         5.88       3.60      10    8.20    2.32
connectivity
Helping to strengthen the
capacity of civil society and            3          7.00        2.60          39         8.73        1.70        15         8.05         2.53      24        8.50         1.84      17        8.81       1.97    9        7.25      2.46     5         8.65       2.01      10    7.98    2.48
private sector organizations
Helping to empower local
                                         3         10.00         .00          36         8.81        1.66        15         9.10         1.66      23        7.26         3.03      16        9.02       2.01    9        7.50      3.07     6         7.00       1.16      9     8.25    2.70
communities
Helping to improve the quality of
                                         3          9.25        1.30          37         8.24        2.06        14         7.43         2.91      21        8.50         1.93      14        8.23       2.01    8        8.88      1.20     6         9.63       .92       9     8.00    1.76
life in urban areas




                                                                                                                                                              77
The World Bank                                                                                                                                          The Gambia                                                                                                        Country Survey 2012

D. The Work of the World Bank (continued)
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of development in The Gambia?
(Asked on a 5-point effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 5 being Very; converted to a 10-point scale for analysis.)

                                                                                                                                                  Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                       Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                     Independent Government
                                                                                                               Bilateral or Multilateral Agency          Private Sector                      NGOs                                          Academia, Research Institute           Other
                                     Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                  Institution
                                         N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD        N         Mean         SD        N        Mean         SD     N       Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD        N     Mean    SD
Helping to reduce poverty                3          4.00        3.44          39         7.06        1.94        15         6.25         2.35      24        6.81         2.38      15        5.95       2.58    9        7.25      2.93     5         6.85       2.01      9     8.50    1.59
Helping to strengthen the
                                         3          4.00        3.44          36         6.25        1.94        14         5.66         2.24      21        6.04         2.84      14        4.86       2.41    7        6.46      2.20     5         6.40       2.01      9     7.50    2.37
government's effectiveness
Helping to increase access and
quality of health services,
including the fight against              3          4.00        3.44          35         7.30        1.95        13         6.37         2.68      22        6.32         2.56      13        6.54       2.85    9        7.00      1.59     5         8.20       2.93      10    6.85    1.57
HIV/AIDS and other
communicable diseases
Helping to bring about macro-
                                         3          5.50        2.25          39         7.52        1.99        14         7.11         2.24      23        7.26         2.53      14        6.63       3.15    9        6.00      1.50     5         7.75       1.59      9     8.50    1.59
economic growth
Fighting against corruption              3          4.75        3.44          37         6.11        2.23        12         5.31         3.10      19        4.32         1.89      15        4.15       2.79    7        4.86      1.70     5         5.05       1.88      8     6.91    2.93
Helping to increase access and
                                         3          6.25        1.30          38         8.46        1.66        15         8.20         2.12      23        7.85         2.67      15        7.75       2.69    9        9.00      1.63     3        10.00       .00       9     8.75    1.19
quality of basic education
Helping to strengthen higher
                                         3          6.25        1.30          37         6.29        2.26        13         7.23         2.28      23        6.77         2.43      14        6.30       3.13    9        7.50      2.37     5         8.20       1.88      8     8.03    1.44
education
Helping to improve the legal
                                         2          4.38        1.59          35         5.89        2.08        11         5.91         2.21      19        5.86         2.83      12        4.56       2.62    6        7.00      2.32     4         8.31       1.13      8     7.47    1.88
and regulatory systems
Helping to increase
professional skills, employment
and income generation,                   3          4.75        3.44          37         6.05        1.94        13         5.85         2.57      20        6.29         2.66      13        5.85       3.29    8        7.19      2.33     5         8.20       1.88      9     8.00    1.76
specifically for young people
Helping to strengthen
environment and natural                  2          2.13        1.59          36         6.31        1.95        12         6.63         2.04      19        5.26         2.11      12        5.88       2.32    7        6.79      2.86     5         6.85       1.23      8     6.34    1.67
resources management
Helping to improve basic
infrastructure (port, electricity,       3          5.50         .00          37         6.17        2.70        15         6.25         2.20      22        6.01         2.50      12        7.00       2.60    7        6.46      2.86     4         7.75       1.84      10    6.85    2.64
roads)
Helping to improve the
investment climate for private
                                         3          6.25        1.30          35         7.11        2.01        13         6.88         1.73      21        5.71         2.24      12        7.00       2.22    5        5.50      2.25     5         6.40       2.57      9     7.25    2.19
sector growth and attracting
foreign investment
Helping to strengthen the
                                         3          6.25        3.44          38         6.80        2.20        12         7.38         2.11      21        6.79         2.42      13        6.37       2.52    8        7.75      2.08     5         8.20       1.88      10    7.30    1.77
agricultural sector/food security
Helping to strengthen the
                                         3          4.75        1.30          35         5.89        2.41        12         5.88         2.69      20        5.39         2.13      13        5.67       1.94    8        6.34      2.67     5         5.50       2.25      9     7.50    1.76
fisheries sector
Ensuring that attention is paid
                                         3          6.25        1.30          36         6.63        2.44        13         5.85         2.73      19        6.21         2.13      12        5.13       2.32    7        6.14      3.11     4         6.06       2.83      9     7.50    1.76
to gender disparities
Helping to integrate The
Gambia into the global and/or            3          4.75        1.30          35         6.21        2.30        9          5.25         2.09      19        5.38         1.91      14        5.82       2.47    8        6.34      1.67     5         6.40       2.01      8     6.06    2.88
sub-regional economy
Helping to improve nutrition for
                                         3          2.50        2.60          34         6.89        2.35        9          5.00         3.86      20        5.84         2.45      12        6.06       2.90    9        7.50      2.37     5         5.50       2.76      8     6.91    2.06
vulnerable groups
Helping The Gambia adapt
                                         3          3.25        3.90          37         5.86        2.28        11         5.91         1.97      18        5.50         1.89      12        5.31       1.78    7        5.50      2.25     5         5.95       2.93      8     6.34    1.67
to/avert risk of climate change
Helping to strengthen the public
financial management and                 3          5.50        2.25          17         8.15        1.64        3          7.00         2.60      5         7.75         2.76       4        7.19       4.26    3        7.75      2.25     2         3.25       .00       2     10.00   .00
procurement system
Help strengthening the national
                                         3          5.50        2.25          37         6.78        1.95        10         5.50         2.81      17        6.29         1.94      12        6.06       2.17    9        6.00      1.88     5         5.50       3.56      8     6.63    2.41
statistical system
Helping to expand internet
                                         1          5.50          .           34         6.36        2.60        10         7.53         2.69      18        6.75         2.70      11        6.32       2.89    7        5.82      2.41     4         6.06       2.15      9     7.00    2.76
connectivity
Helping to strengthen the
capacity of civil society and            2          5.50        3.18          36         6.00        2.64        11         6.11         2.86      21        6.36         2.30      12        6.44       2.95    8        5.50      2.41     4         4.94       2.15      9     7.00    2.52
private sector organizations
Helping to empower local
                                         3          3.25        3.90          36         6.38        2.48        9          6.50         3.58      19        5.26         2.48      13        5.67       3.11    9        7.00      2.76     4         6.06       1.13      10    7.75    2.12
communities
Helping to improve the quality of
                                         3          3.25        3.90          36         6.44        2.43        11         5.70         2.75      20        5.95         2.79      13        4.29       2.85    8        5.78      1.88     4         7.19       2.15      8     7.75    1.70
life in urban areas




                                                                                                                                                              78
The World Bank                                                                                                                                         The Gambia                                                                                                        Country Survey 2012

E. The Way the World Bank does Business

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below using a 1-5 scale, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 5 meaning “Very effective”.
(Asked on a 5-point scale; converted to a 10-point scale for analysis.)
                                                                                                                                                 Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                      Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                     Independent Government
                                                                                                              Bilateral or Multilateral Agency          Private Sector                      NGOs                                          Academia, Research Institute           Other
                                    Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                  Institution
                                        N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD        N         Mean         SD        N        Mean         SD     N       Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD        N     Mean    SD
Technical competence                    3          7.00        2.60          39         9.13        1.22        13         8.10         2.57      24        8.97         1.62      15        8.35       1.99    10       9.10      2.85     7         8.07       2.41      10    8.65    1.90
Producing "knowledge"
(studies, analyses) that is             3          6.25        1.30          35         8.59        2.19        14         7.11         2.41      23        8.34         1.94      16        7.89       2.25    9        8.50      1.95     6         8.13       2.21      9     9.00    1.19
useful
Making the results of studies
                                        3          6.25        1.30          36         8.06        2.35        15         6.25         2.78      22        7.85         2.14      15        7.45       1.88    8        6.06      2.62     7         7.11       3.11      9     8.00    1.76
and analyses readily available
Sharing knowledge about
                                        3          6.25        1.30          35         8.46        1.71        16         6.77         2.46      20        7.98         2.91      15        7.15       2.32    9        8.25      2.46     7         7.75       1.30      10    7.53    1.66
international best practices
Ability to adapt its knowledge to
                                        3          3.25        3.90          36         6.88        1.72        14         6.30         2.43      22        7.55         2.49      12        6.06       2.17    9        7.75      2.76     7         8.39       1.10      9     8.00    2.09
your country’s needs
Ensuring its staff is accessible        3          3.25        3.90          35         7.36        2.08        14         5.98         3.08      21        7.54         2.45      14        5.82       3.04    9        6.75      1.98     7         8.07       .85       10    8.20    1.42
Providing sound policy and
                                        3          4.75        4.68          35         7.62        1.63        13         7.75         2.05      20        8.65         1.70      15        7.30       3.32    8        8.31      1.99     7         9.04       1.20      11    8.98    1.85
economic advice
Straightforwardness in its
                                        3          4.00        3.44          38         8.34        2.00        12         6.81         2.62      18        8.00         1.71      16        6.91       2.83    8        8.59      2.06     6         8.88       1.88      10    7.75    1.50
dealings with you
Maintaining consistent
                                        3          4.75        3.44          37         8.24        1.99        9          6.25         2.25      19        6.57         2.42      17        6.56       3.29    8        7.47      1.44     6         8.50       1.84      7     7.75    1.84
messages
Promoting the inclusion of local
communities in the                      3          3.25        3.90          36         7.88        2.15        12         5.31         2.44      20        6.85         1.99      15        4.75       3.37    8        7.47      2.80     6         7.75       2.01      8     8.03    1.88
development of strategies
Promoting the inclusion of civil
society in the development of           3          3.25        3.90          36         7.38        2.25        14         5.02         2.19      19        6.92         1.71      16        4.80       3.46    9        7.50      2.63     5         6.85       2.01      8     8.03    1.44
strategies
Promoting the inclusion of local
project experts in the                  3          3.25        3.90          37         7.26        2.44        14         6.30         2.74      20        7.30         2.14      17        5.24       2.62    10       7.53      1.97     7         6.79       3.40      9     8.25    1.50
development of strategies
Promoting the inclusion of
private sector in the                   3          6.25        1.30          36         7.44        1.95        14         6.30         2.09      24        6.25         2.17      17        5.50       2.10    9        6.75      2.54     7         5.82       3.03      8     8.03    1.88
development of strategies
Giving appropriate priority to
                                        3          4.75        4.68          40         8.31        1.96        15         7.30         2.72      23        7.75         2.04      17        7.09       2.84    9        7.25      2.70     6         7.75       2.01      10    9.10    1.16
poverty reduction
Lending in a way that promotes
effective development                   3          5.50        2.25          37         7.51        2.17        11         7.14         1.77      21        7.43         2.05      15        5.80       2.80    7        7.43      3.29     7         8.39       2.14      10    8.20    2.07




                                                                                                                                                             79
The World Bank                                                                                                                                          The Gambia                                                                                                           Country Survey 2012

F. Project/Program Related Issues
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.

                                                                                                                                                  Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                     Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                          Independent Government
                                                                                                             Bilateral or Multilateral Agency            Private Sector                      NGOs                                             Academia, Research Institute              Other
                                   Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                       Institution
                                       N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD          N         Mean         SD        N        Mean         SD         N      Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD          N      Mean           SD
The Bank is flexible in terms of
adjusting to changing                  1          8.00          .           27         6.07        2.11        7          6.14         3.24        15        5.40         1.84      5         3.40       3.71        7       6.00      2.52     2         6.00       1.41        5      6.80       3.03
circumstances
The Bank disburses funds
                                       1          3.00          .           29         6.48        2.38        7          4.43         3.41        15        5.00         3.38      6         3.17       3.43        7       8.71      1.38     3         6.67       4.93        3      7.67       4.04
promptly
The Bank works efficiently             1          6.00          .           28         7.39        2.18        8          6.75         3.28        15        6.60         2.03      6         6.00       3.69        7       7.71      1.60     4         9.00       1.15        5      6.20       3.90
The Bank effectively monitors
and evaluates the projects and         1          7.00          .           31         7.77        1.93        8          7.00         3.12        14        6.00         2.83      5         6.40       3.51        6       7.50      2.59     2         9.00       1.41        4      8.75       1.50
programs it supports
The Bank helps to build
                                       1          9.00          .           28         7.00        1.98        7          6.57         2.51        15        6.27         2.76      6         3.83       2.14        7       7.57      3.15     3         8.67       .58         3      8.67       1.53
capacity at the community level
The Bank helps to build
                                       1          9.00          .           29         7.48        1.62        6          5.67         2.50        14        6.57         2.10      5         5.20       2.39        7       9.00      1.41     4         6.50       3.00        5      8.80       1.64
capacity of government officials
The Bank provides strategic
advice and helps strengthening                                              29         7.52        1.60        7          7.29         2.36        13        6.92         2.56      6         5.83       3.19        7       8.71      1.50     4         7.25       3.50        6      7.33       3.39
country systems
The Bank and partners in
government collaborate well
together on Bank supported             1          7.00          .           30         8.07        1.82        8          6.75         2.43        13        6.08         2.29      6         6.83       2.93        6       8.50      1.76     3         5.67       3.51        5      8.80       1.64
programs and projects in The
Gambia
The Bank helps to strengthen
                                       1          8.00          .           30         7.87        1.55        8          7.25         1.98        15        6.93         2.31      6         6.50       3.73        7       8.71      .76      4         9.00       1.41        4      8.50       1.73
institutional capacity
The Government supports and
takes responsibility for
                                       1          9.00          .           31         7.84        1.49        7          7.86         2.12        15        7.53         1.85      6         5.17       3.60        7       7.00      2.24     4         8.50       2.38        5      6.80       3.49
development efforts in The
Gambia
The Bank’s procurement
                                       1          8.00          .           30         7.03        2.11        7          6.43         3.10        12        6.58         2.43      6         4.67       3.14        6       6.50      1.22     3         7.67       2.52        3      8.33       1.53
requirements are reasonable



G. The Future Role of the World Bank in The Gambia
                                                                                                                                                  Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                     Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                          Independent Government
                                                                                                             Bilateral or Multilateral Agency            Private Sector                      NGOs                                             Academia, Research Institute              Other
                                   Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                       Institution
                                       N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD          N         Mean         SD        N        Mean         SD         N      Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD          N      Mean           SD
How significant a role do you
believe the World Bank should
play in The Gambia’s                   2         10.00         .00          33         9.12        1.29        19         9.05         1.22        30        9.47         .86       18        8.44       2.50        9       9.67      .71      6         9.67       .52         13     9.38       1.19
development over the medium
term in the near future?
(Asked on a 10-pt. scale, 1 meaning that the Bank should not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should play a very significant role)

Which one of the following should the Bank do to make itself of greater value in The Gambia? (Choose only ONE)
                                                                                                           Office of the President,              Employee of Ministry,              Bilateral or                                                    Independent            Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                               Prime Minister, Minister,                Ministerial Dep,                 Multilateral           Private Sector           NGOs            Government             Research            Other
                                                                                                               Parliamentarian                  Implementation Agency                 Agency                                                         Institution            Institute
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to The Gambia’s specific
                                                                                                                    33.3%                                 5.6%                           15.8%                   14.3%              11.8%              20.0%                 0.0%              16.7%
 challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                                            33.3%                                55.6%                           21.1%                   35.7%              52.9%              60.0%                 50.0%             25.0%
 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                                                      0.0%                                  5.6%                           10.5%                    3.6%               0.0%              10.0%                 0.0%               8.3%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                                   0.0%                                 13.9%                           5.3%                    17.9%               0.0%              10.0%                 16.7%              8.3%
 Offer more innovative financial products                                                                           33.3%                                 8.3%                           21.1%                   10.7%              23.5%               0.0%                 16.7%             16.7%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                                           0.0%                                 11.1%                           10.5%                   14.3%               5.9%               0.0%                 16.7%              8.3%
 Other                                                                                                              0.0%                                  0.0%                           15.8%                    3.6%               5.9%               0.0%                 0.0%              16.7%



                                                                                                                                                              80
The World Bank                                                                                              The Gambia                                                                    Country Survey 2012

G. The Future Role of the World Bank in The Gambia (continued)
When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose TWO only) (Combined Responses)
                                                                          Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                               Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                              Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector   NGOs       Government     Research     Other
                                                                              Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                    Institution    Institute
 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                                      0.0%                     7.7%                 5.6%          22.2%         17.6%         20.0%         14.3%      16.7%
 Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                          0.0%                    20.5%                16.7%          59.3%         29.4%         10.0%         85.7%      33.3%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation              33.3%                   12.8%                38.9%          14.8%         47.1%         10.0%          0.0%       8.3%
 Poor donor coordination                                                            0.0%                    23.1%                27.8%          11.1%         17.6%         20.0%         14.3%       8.3%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in government                                33.3%                   43.6%                50.0%          40.7%         29.4%         50.0%         28.6%      25.0%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                                  33.3%                   15.4%                27.8%          22.2%          5.9%         40.0%         28.6%      41.7%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                    66.7%                   38.5%                22.2%          18.5%         47.1%         30.0%         14.3%      50.0%
 Other                                                                              0.0%                     0.0%                 5.6%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%


H. Communication and Outreach
From where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                          Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                               Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                              Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector   NGOs       Government     Research     Other
                                                                              Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                    Institution    Institute
 Local newspapers                                                                  100.0%                   53.8%                63.2%          77.4%         55.6%         60.0%         100.0%     69.2%
 International newspapers                                                           0.0%                     5.1%                10.5%           3.2%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Local radio                                                                        33.3%                   12.8%                10.5%          16.1%         11.1%         20.0%          0.0%      30.8%
 International radio                                                                0.0%                     7.7%                 0.0%           6.5%          5.6%         10.0%          0.0%      15.4%
 Local television                                                                   0.0%                    33.3%                10.5%          41.9%         27.8%         60.0%         28.6%      23.1%
 International television                                                           0.0%                     7.7%                26.3%          12.9%         11.1%         10.0%         14.3%       7.7%
 Periodicals                                                                        0.0%                    23.1%                15.8%           6.5%         11.1%         10.0%         14.3%      23.1%
 Internet                                                                           33.3%                   33.3%                63.2%          29.0%         38.9%         30.0%         28.6%      23.1%
 Social media: Facebook, Twitter, YouTube                                           0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         28.6%       0.0%
 Other                                                                              33.3%                    2.6%                 0.0%           3.2%         16.7%          0.0%          0.0%       7.7%

From where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development activities in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                          Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                               Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                              Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral   Private Sector   NGOs       Government     Research     Other
                                                                              Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                    Institution    Institute
 Local newspapers                                                                  100.0%                   33.3%                36.8%          76.7%         50.0%         55.6%         42.9%      53.8%
 International newspapers                                                           0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          5.6%         11.1%          0.0%       0.0%
 Local radio                                                                        33.3%                    5.1%                15.8%          23.3%          5.6%         22.2%          0.0%      23.1%
 International radio                                                                0.0%                     2.6%                 5.3%           0.0%          5.6%          0.0%         14.3%       7.7%
 Local television                                                                   0.0%                    20.5%                 5.3%          26.7%         27.8%         33.3%         14.3%      30.8%
 International television                                                           0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%          5.6%         11.1%          0.0%       0.0%
 Periodicals                                                                        0.0%                     5.1%                 0.0%           0.0%          5.6%         11.1%          0.0%       7.7%
 Blogs                                                                              0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%           3.3%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Internet                                                                           0.0%                    28.2%                26.3%          26.7%         27.8%         22.2%         42.9%      23.1%
 World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                                        33.3%                   23.1%                 5.3%           3.3%          5.6%          0.0%          0.0%       7.7%
 World Bank publications, materials                                                 0.0%                    15.4%                21.1%          13.3%         16.7%          0.0%         14.3%       7.7%
 World Bank website                                                                 33.3%                   41.0%                36.8%          13.3%         11.1%         22.2%         14.3%       0.0%
 Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff                                   0.0%                    10.3%                31.6%           0.0%          0.0%         11.1%         14.3%      15.4%
 Other                                                                              0.0%                     5.1%                 5.3%           3.3%          0.0%          0.0%         14.3%       0.0%




                                                                                                                81
The World Bank                                                                                           The Gambia                                                                              Country Survey 2012

H. Communication and Outreach (continued)
How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                       Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                                         Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                           Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral     Private Sector      NGOs            Government     Research     Other
                                                                           Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                              Institution    Institute
 World Bank website                                                              33.3%                   70.0%                42.1%            56.7%            52.6%              55.6%         28.6%      46.2%
 Face to face meetings/discussions                                               66.7%                   15.0%                42.1%             3.3%            31.6%              33.3%         28.6%      15.4%
 e-Newsletters                                                                   0.0%                    57.5%                57.9%            30.0%            47.4%              22.2%         42.9%      38.5%
 Workshops/conferences                                                           66.7%                   22.5%                26.3%            20.0%            31.6%              66.7%         14.3%       0.0%
 Mobile phones                                                                   0.0%                     0.0%                 5.3%             0.0%             0.0%               0.0%          0.0%      15.4%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                       0.0%                    10.0%                 5.3%            20.0%            15.8%               0.0%         28.6%       7.7%
 Blogs                                                                           0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%             0.0%             0.0%               0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
 Other                                                                           0.0%                     7.5%                10.5%            20.0%             0.0%               0.0%         28.6%      15.4%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions ?
                                                                       Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                                         Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                           Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral     Private Sector      NGOs            Government     Research     Other
                                                                           Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                              Institution    Institute
 Yes                                                                             0.0%                    29.7%                16.7%             6.5%            17.6%              22.2%         14.3%       0.0%
 No                                                                             100.0%                   70.3%                83.3%            93.5%            82.4%              77.8%         85.7%      100.0%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
                                                                       Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                                         Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                           Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral     Private Sector      NGOs            Government     Research     Other
                                                                           Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                              Institution    Institute
 Yes                                                                             0.0%                    17.9%                33.3%            16.1%            0.0%               11.1%         14.3%      33.3%
 No                                                                             100.0%                   82.1%                66.7%            83.9%           100.0%              88.9%         85.7%      66.7%

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                                       Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                                         Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                           Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral     Private Sector      NGOs            Government     Research     Other
                                                                           Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                              Institution    Institute
 Yes                                                                             0.0%                    75.0%                62.5%            36.4%            0.0%               40.0%         33.3%      57.1%
 No                                                                             100.0%                   25.0%                37.5%            63.6%           100.0%              60.0%         66.7%      42.9%

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                                       Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                                         Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                           Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral     Private Sector      NGOs            Government     Research     Other
                                                                           Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                              Institution    Institute
 Yes                                                                            100.0%                   100.0%              100.0%            86.7%            94.4%              88.9%         83.3%      83.3%
 No                                                                              0.0%                     0.0%                 0.0%            13.3%             5.6%              11.1%         16.7%      16.7%

I use/have used the World Bank website:
                                                                       Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                                         Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                           Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral     Private Sector      NGOs            Government     Research     Other
                                                                           Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                              Institution    Institute
 Yes                                                                             66.7%                   87.9%                82.4%            64.3%            62.5%              55.6%         50.0%      25.0%
 No                                                                              33.3%                   12.1%                17.6%            35.7%            37.5%              44.4%         50.0%      75.0%

I primarily use:
                                                                       Office of the President,    Employee of Ministry,   Bilateral or                                         Independent    Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                           Prime Minister, Minister,      Ministerial Dep,      Multilateral     Private Sector      NGOs            Government     Research     Other
                                                                           Parliamentarian        Implementation Agency      Agency                                              Institution    Institute
 The World Bank's country website                                                0.0%                    11.1%                15.4%            25.0%            16.7%              33.3%         40.0%       0.0%
 The World Bank's main website                                                  100.0%                   88.9%                84.6%            75.0%            83.3%              66.7%         60.0%      100.0%


                                                                                                             82
The World Bank                                                                                                                                          The Gambia                                                                                                            Country Survey 2012

H. Communication and Outreach (continued)
The Internet connection, I mainly use when visiting a World Bank website:
                                                                                                           Office of the President,              Employee of Ministry,              Bilateral or                                                     Independent            Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                               Prime Minister, Minister,                Ministerial Dep,                 Multilateral           Private Sector            NGOs            Government             Research            Other
                                                                                                               Parliamentarian                  Implementation Agency                 Agency                                                          Institution            Institute
 High speed                                                                                                          0.0%                              75.9%                           78.6%                     73.7%               84.6%              57.1%                 60.0%             85.7%
 Dial-up                                                                                                            100.0%                             24.1%                           21.4%                     26.3%               15.4%              42.9%                 40.0%             14.3%

When I visit the World Bank website, I am generally looking for:
                                                                                                           Office of the President,              Employee of Ministry,              Bilateral or                                                     Independent            Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                               Prime Minister, Minister,                Ministerial Dep,                 Multilateral           Private Sector            NGOs            Government             Research            Other
                                                                                                               Parliamentarian                  Implementation Agency                 Agency                                                          Institution            Institute
 Project information                                                                                                 0.0%                              55.6%                           14.3%                     35.7%               25.0%              40.0%                  0.0%              0.0%
 Country information                                                                                                100.0%                             14.8%                            0.0%                     35.7%               37.5%              40.0%                 60.0%             20.0%
 Data                                                                                                                0.0%                              18.5%                           42.9%                     21.4%               37.5%               0.0%                 40.0%             20.0%
 News                                                                                                                0.0%                               7.4%                           28.6%                      7.1%                0.0%              20.0%                  0.0%             20.0%
 Other                                                                                                               0.0%                               3.7%                           14.3%                      0.0%                0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%             40.0%

I generally use the World Bank's website in:
                                                                                                           Office of the President,              Employee of Ministry,              Bilateral or                                                     Independent            Academia,
  Percentage of Respondents                                                                               Prime Minister, Minister,                Ministerial Dep,                 Multilateral           Private Sector            NGOs            Government             Research            Other
                                                                                                               Parliamentarian                  Implementation Agency                 Agency                                                          Institution            Institute
 English                                                                                                            100.0%                             100.0%                          93.8%                     100.0%              100.0%             100.0%                100.0%        100.0%
 French                                                                                                              0.0%                               0.0%                            6.3%                      0.0%                0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.

                                                                                                                                                  Which of the following best describes your current position?
                                     Office of the President, Prime      Employee of Ministry, Ministerial                                                                                                           Independent Government
                                                                                                             Bilateral or Multilateral Agency            Private Sector                      NGOs                                              Academia, Research Institute              Other
                                   Minister, Minister, Parliamentarian    Dep, Implementation Agency                                                                                                                        Institution
                                       N         Mean          SD           N         Mean          SD         N         Mean          SD          N         Mean         SD        N        Mean         SD         N       Mean       SD       N        Mean        SD          N      Mean           SD
The World Bank's Knowledge
Space is a valuable source of
                                       3          3.67        3.06          28         8.25        2.08        12         8.33         1.92        16        8.50         1.32      11        7.00       2.61        6        7.67      2.25     6         8.00       .89         3      6.67       3.06
information related to
development in The Gambia
I find the Bank websites easy to
                                       2          6.50         .71          31         8.10        1.92        15         8.07         2.05        17        8.29         1.21      10        7.60       2.22        6        6.50      2.81     6         6.83       1.83        4      8.25       1.71
navigate
I find the information on the
                                       2          3.00        2.83          31         8.42        1.98        15         8.60         1.40        19        8.47         1.22      11        7.82       2.09        6        8.67      1.21     6         7.17       1.83        5      9.00       1.00
Bank’s websites useful
When I need information from
the World Bank I know how to           2          1.00         .00          30         6.90        2.72        15         6.60         2.72        18        7.33         2.03      11        6.36       2.87        5        7.60      1.52     5         5.60       3.44        7      8.86       1.21
find it
The Bank is responsive to my
information requests and                                                    27         7.07        2.45        13         6.54         2.70        15        7.47         1.96      7         6.00       3.32        5        6.20      3.27     5         5.80       3.11        6      8.67       1.75
inquiries




                                                                                                                                                              83
The World Bank                                                          The Gambia                                                        Country Survey 2012


Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location

A. Background Information
                                                                                        Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                          Banjul                          West Coast                           Other
                                                                 N         Mean         SD         N           Mean      SD           N        Mean           SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in The
                                                                 94        5.80         2.57       38          4.68     3.14          10       3.50           1.58
Gambia?
(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “Extremely familiar”)



B. General Issues facing The Gambia
                                                                                        Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                          Banjul                          West Coast                           Other
                                                                 N        Mean          SD         N        Mean         SD           N        Mean           SD
Please indicate your perspective on the future of the next
                                                                 89        6.70         2.16       33          6.91     2.04          10       7.40           2.63
generation in The Gambia.
(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Extremely pessimistic”, 10 meaning “Extremely optimistic”)

Please identify which one of these you consider the first most important development priority.
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                           Banjul               West Coast                  Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                                   23.6%                  15.6%                   10.0%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                 0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Macro-economic growth                                                                                  4.2%                   9.4%                   0.0%
 Fight against corruption                                                                               0.0%                   6.3%                   10.0%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                                  5.6%                   9.4%                   0.0%
 Higher education                                                                                       1.4%                   3.1%                   20.0%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                                     16.7%                  12.5%                   10.0%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                                         1.4%                   3.1%                   0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities, specifically for
                                                                                                       18.1%                   6.3%                    0.0%
 young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                                       1.4%                   3.1%                   0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                                              6.9%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign investment                     0.0%                   6.3%                   0.0%
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                                  16.7%                  25.0%                   40.0%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                                    0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Fishery                                                                                                0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                                            1.4%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                                2.8%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                                             0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                                           0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                                 0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                                  0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                                          0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                                        0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations                           1.4%                   6.3%                   0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                                              1.4%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                                           0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Other                                                                                                  0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%




                                                                              84
The World Bank                                                          The Gambia                              Country Survey 2012


B. General Issues facing The Gambia (continued)
Then identify which one you consider the second most important development priority.
 Percentage of Respondents                                                              Banjul     West Coast           Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                    11.6%          6.5%             22.2%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                  0.0%          0.0%             11.1%
 Macro-economic growth                                                                   5.8%          3.2%             0.0%
 Fight against corruption                                                                0.0%          0.0%             0.0%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                   7.2%          0.0%             0.0%
 Higher education                                                                        2.9%          6.5%             0.0%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                       8.7%         25.8%             33.3%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                          1.4%          0.0%             0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities, specifically for
                                                                                        11.6%         22.6%              0.0%
 young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                        0.0%          0.0%             0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                               8.7%          9.7%             0.0%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign investment     10.1%          0.0%             0.0%
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                   14.5%         12.9%             11.1%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                     1.4%          3.2%             22.2%
 Fishery                                                                                 0.0%          0.0%             0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                             1.4%          0.0%             0.0%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                 1.4%          0.0%             0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                              0.0%          0.0%             0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                  1.4%          0.0%             0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                   2.9%          0.0%             0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                         2.9%          0.0%             0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations            2.9%          9.7%             0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                               0.0%          3.2%             0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%
 Other                                                                                   0.0%          0.0%             0.0%

Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in The Gambia? (Choose no more
than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                              Banjul     West Coast           Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                    25.4%         21.7%              0.0%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                  1.5%          0.0%             100.0%
 Macro-economic growth                                                                   7.5%          0.0%              0.0%
 Fight against corruption                                                               10.4%          4.3%              0.0%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                  16.4%         17.4%              0.0%
 Higher education                                                                        1.5%          4.3%              0.0%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                      13.4%         17.4%              0.0%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                          4.5%          0.0%              0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities, specifically for
                                                                                        41.8%         43.5%             100.0%
 young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                        0.0%          0.0%              0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                               3.0%         13.0%              0.0%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign investment     14.9%         13.0%              0.0%
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                   41.8%         26.1%              0.0%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                     0.0%          4.3%              0.0%
 Fishery                                                                                 1.5%          4.3%              0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                             1.5%          8.7%              0.0%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                 1.5%          0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                              0.0%          0.0%              0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                            0.0%          0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                  0.0%          0.0%              0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                   1.5%          0.0%              0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                           0.0%          0.0%              0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                         0.0%          0.0%              0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations            0.0%          0.0%              0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                               1.5%          4.3%              0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                            0.0%          4.3%              0.0%
 Other                                                                                   1.5%          0.0%              0.0%




                                                                              85
The World Bank                                                            The Gambia                                                       Country Survey 2012


B. General Issues facing The Gambia (continued)
Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in The Gambia? (Choose no more than
TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                            Banjul               West Coast                  Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                                     30.9%                 25.0%                   22.2%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                   2.1%                  0.0%                   11.1%
 Fight against corruption                                                                                 6.4%                 10.0%                   11.1%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                                    9.6%                 15.0%                   11.1%
 Higher education                                                                                         1.1%                  7.5%                   11.1%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                                        8.5%                 10.0%                   0.0%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                                           2.1%                  0.0%                   0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities, specifically for
                                                                                                         39.4%                 20.0%                   11.1%
 young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                                         1.1%                  0.0%                   0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                                               16.0%                 15.0%                   0.0%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign investment                      17.0%                 20.0%                   11.1%
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                                    33.0%                 45.0%                   66.7%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                                      0.0%                  0.0%                   22.2%
 Fishery                                                                                                  1.1%                  0.0%                   0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                                             13.8%                 15.0%                   11.1%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                                  2.1%                  0.0%                   0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                                               0.0%                  0.0%                   0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                                             1.1%                  0.0%                   0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                                   0.0%                  0.0%                   0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                                    4.3%                  2.5%                   0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                                            0.0%                  0.0%                   0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                                          0.0%                  0.0%                   0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations                             5.3%                  2.5%                   0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                                                4.3%                  5.0%                   0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                                             0.0%                  5.0%                   0.0%
 Other                                                                                                    0.0%                  0.0%                   11.1%



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank
                                                                        Overall Effectiveness
                                                                                         Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                             Banjul                         West Coast                          Other
                                                                   N         Mean        SD          N        Mean        SD           N        Mean           SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s
                                                                   93         6.49       1.97        35          6.91    2.73          9        6.89           1.05
effectiveness in The Gambia.
(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”)


                                                                World Bank's Financial Instruments
                                                                                         Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                             Banjul                         West Coast                          Other
                                                                   N         Mean        SD          N        Mean        SD           N        Mean           SD
To what extent do the World Bank's financial instruments meet
                                                                   90         6.19       2.08        33          6.45    2.55          6        6.67           1.86
the needs of The Gambia?
(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “To no degree at all”, 10 meaning “To a very significant degree”)


                                                                World Bank's Knowledge Services
                                                                                         Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                             Banjul                         West Coast                          Other
                                                                   N         Mean        SD          N        Mean        SD           N        Mean           SD
To what extent does the World Bank meet the needs of The
                                                                   89         5.71       2.26        31          6.58    2.90          5        6.60           1.52
Gambia for knowledge services?
(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “To no degree at all”, 10 meaning “To a very significant degree”)




                                                                                86
The World Bank                                                          The Gambia                                   Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Based on your observations of the World Bank in The Gambia, what do you think the Bank considers its top priorities in The Gambia?
(Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                              Banjul          West Coast            Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                    26.6%             16.2%              30.0%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                  5.3%              2.7%              10.0%
 Macro-economic growth                                                                  36.2%             32.4%              30.0%
 Fight against corruption                                                                3.2%              0.0%              10.0%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                  37.2%             35.1%              30.0%
 Higher education                                                                        3.2%              5.4%              0.0%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                       2.1%             13.5%              10.0%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                          3.2%              5.4%              0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities, specifically for
                                                                                        5.3%               5.4%              20.0%
 young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                        0.0%              5.4%              10.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                               5.3%              0.0%              0.0%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign investment      7.4%              8.1%              0.0%
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                   18.1%             16.2%              30.0%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                     0.0%              2.7%              0.0%
 Fishery                                                                                 2.1%             10.8%              0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                             4.3%              5.4%              0.0%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                 0.0%              0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                              1.1%              2.7%              0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                            0.0%              0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                  0.0%              0.0%              0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                  21.3%              5.4%              0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                           1.1%              0.0%              0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                         3.2%              0.0%              0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations            2.1%              2.7%              0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                               1.1%              2.7%              0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                            0.0%              0.0%              0.0%
 Other                                                                                   0.0%              5.4%              0.0%

Based on your observations of the World Bank in The Gambia, where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources
in its support of country priorities? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                              Banjul          West Coast            Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                    14.9%             15.4%              10.0%
 Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                  0.0%              0.0%              0.0%
 Macro-economic growth                                                                  10.6%             12.8%              0.0%
 Fight against corruption                                                                5.3%              2.6%              10.0%
 Access to basic education, quality of basic education                                  17.0%              5.1%              30.0%
 Higher education                                                                        4.3%              5.1%              10.0%
 Access to health services, quality of health care                                       8.5%             10.3%              10.0%
 Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system                          5.3%              0.0%              0.0%
 Skills development, employment and income generating opportunities, specifically for
                                                                                        34.0%             33.3%              20.0%
 young people
 Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources                        3.2%              5.1%              0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)                              14.9%              7.7%              10.0%
 Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign investment     11.7%             20.5%              20.0%
 Agriculture development (crop production, processing)/ Food security                   29.8%             25.6%              30.0%
 Agriculture development (livestock)                                                     1.1%              5.1%              10.0%
 Fishery                                                                                 1.1%              2.6%              0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                             3.2%              5.1%              20.0%
 Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                                                 2.1%              0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate gender inequality                                                              0.0%              0.0%              0.0%
 Promote regional cooperation                                                            2.1%              0.0%              0.0%
 Mitigate the effects of climate change                                                  1.1%              2.6%              0.0%
 Improving public financial management and procurement                                   6.4%              5.1%              0.0%
 Strengthening the national statistical system                                           0.0%              0.0%              0.0%
 Expanding internet connectivity                                                         1.1%              2.6%              0.0%
 Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations            7.4%             10.3%              0.0%
 Empower local communities                                                               1.1%              2.6%              0.0%
 Improving the quality of life in urban areas                                            2.1%              0.0%              0.0%
 Other                                                                                   0.0%              0.0%              0.0%




                                                                              87
The World Bank                                                        The Gambia                                     Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in The Gambia’s development strategies?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                Banjul       West Coast            Other
 The Bank should be more involved                                                         86.5%           82.1%              100.0%
 The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                                        5.2%            7.7%               0.0%
 The Bank should be less involved                                                          0.0%            2.6%               0.0%
 The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                                                     2.1%            5.1%               0.0%
 Don't know/refused                                                                        6.3%            2.6%               0.0%

In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest” value brought by the World Bank to The Gambia?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                Banjul       West Coast            Other
 The Bank’s knowledge                                                                      5.5%            7.9%              33.3%
 Technical advice                                                                         15.4%           15.8%              33.3%
 Policy and economic advice                                                               18.7%           31.6%              22.2%
 Lending when others won’t                                                                 3.3%            5.3%              0.0%
 Convener/facilitator                                                                      1.1%            0.0%              0.0%
 Donor coordination                                                                        6.6%            2.6%              0.0%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                             0.0%            5.3%              0.0%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                                                  7.7%           10.5%              0.0%
 Financial resources                                                                      42.9%           21.1%              11.1%
 Other                                                                                     1.1%            0.0%              0.0%
 None of the above                                                                         1.1%            5.3%              0.0%

What is the “second greatest” value?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                Banjul       West Coast            Other
 The Bank’s knowledge                                                                      7.8%            0.0%              11.1%
 Technical advice                                                                         15.6%           25.0%              33.3%
 Policy and economic advice                                                               31.1%           25.0%              11.1%
 Lending when others won’t                                                                 4.4%           11.1%              11.1%
 Convener/facilitator                                                                      0.0%            0.0%              0.0%
 Donor coordination                                                                        8.9%            5.6%              11.1%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                             4.4%            2.8%              0.0%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                                                  7.8%            8.3%              11.1%
 Financial resources                                                                      16.7%           19.4%              11.1%
 Other                                                                                     1.1%            2.8%              0.0%
 None of the above                                                                         1.1%            2.8%              0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
(Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                Banjul       West Coast            Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                    17.2%           19.4%              11.1%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                                 10.3%           16.7%              0.0%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                              41.4%           38.9%              77.8%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                                    2.3%            5.6%              0.0%
 Bank management is not accessible                                                         1.1%           11.1%              0.0%
 Bank staff are arrogant in their approach                                                 0.0%            0.0%              0.0%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                 19.5%           36.1%              33.3%
 The Bank is too influenced by the US or others                                            6.9%            5.6%              0.0%
 World Bank procedures too slow and complex to show results on the ground in reasonable
                                                                                          31.0%           13.9%              44.4%
 time
 The interventions of the World Bank are inadequately aligned with country priorities     11.5%           11.1%              0.0%
 The Bank's instruments are not flexible enough to respond to country needs               18.4%           11.1%              11.1%
 Other                                                                                     5.7%            2.8%              0.0%




                                                                           88
The World Bank                                                            The Gambia                                                     Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the nex t few years in
The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                          Banjul               West Coast                  Other
 Education                                                                                            21.9%                  28.2%                   10.0%
 Health                                                                                               17.7%                  23.1%                   30.0%
 Social protection                                                                                     6.3%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Transport                                                                                             2.1%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Poverty                                                                                              14.6%                  23.1%                   0.0%
 Governance                                                                                           15.6%                   5.1%                   20.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                                                       4.2%                   2.6%                   0.0%
 Enhanced business environment for private sector development                                         14.6%                  17.9%                   30.0%
 Energy                                                                                                9.4%                  12.8%                   10.0%
 Agricultural production/Food security                                                                29.2%                  38.5%                   40.0%
 Agri-business                                                                                         3.1%                   2.6%                   0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                                                  1.0%                   2.6%                   0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                                             3.1%                   5.1%                   10.0%
 Public expenditure                                                                                    1.0%                   2.6%                   0.0%
 Public sector performance                                                                             8.3%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Labor markets/job creation                                                                           13.5%                   2.6%                   0.0%
 Financial markets                                                                                     0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Urban/metropolitan development                                                                        4.2%                   5.1%                   0.0%
 Environmental sustainability/natural resources management                                             5.2%                   5.1%                   10.0%
 Improving equality of opportunity                                                                     1.0%                   2.6%                   0.0%
 Rural development                                                                                    13.5%                  20.5%                   30.0%
 Climate change                                                                                        1.0%                   0.0%                   10.0%
 Service sector expansion                                                                              2.1%                   0.0%                   0.0%
 Other                                                                                                 4.2%                   0.0%                   0.0%

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the
Bank work with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                          Banjul               West Coast                  Other
 NGOs                                                                                                 32.6%                  41.0%                   30.0%
 Local Government                                                                                     23.9%                  15.4%                   30.0%
 Beneficiaries                                                                                        33.7%                  23.1%                   40.0%
 Private sector                                                                                       41.3%                  43.6%                   20.0%
 Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                                 32.6%                  38.5%                   50.0%
 Donor community                                                                                      13.0%                  12.8%                   0.0%
 Parliament                                                                                            2.2%                   2.6%                   10.0%
 Media                                                                                                 3.3%                   2.6%                   0.0%
 Faith-based organizations                                                                             0.0%                   5.1%                   0.0%
 Other                                                                                                 6.5%                   2.6%                   0.0%

On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following statements about the
World Bank in The Gambia.
                                                                                       Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                           Banjul                        West Coast                           Other
                                                                     N     Mean     SD            N           Mean      SD           N        Mean           SD
Overall the Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in
                                                                     92     7.36    1.96          34          7.38     2.82          9        6.89           .60
The Gambia
The Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                     88     6.44    2.15          34          6.88     2.78          9        6.44           1.88
development priorities for this country
The Bank’s work reflects its own mission of poverty reduction        85     6.91    2.36          27          6.26     3.02          4        7.50           1.73
The World Bank recommends programs and strategies that are
                                                                     88     6.40    2.25          30          6.70     2.45          5        6.20           2.49
realistic for The Gambia
The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in The Gambia
                                                                     80     7.63    1.93          30          7.73     2.20          10       7.40           1.71
with respect
The World Bank collaborates with other donors here                   80     7.38    2.00          24          7.17     2.91          4        8.75           .96
The World Bank is responsive                                         86     6.86    2.30          29          7.10     2.51          9        6.67           1.94
Overall I like to work/interact with Bank staff                      90     7.86    1.92          28          7.68     2.75          9        7.22           1.79
The Bank is an effective catalyst for discussion on issues
                                                                     86     7.36    2.19          28          7.32     2.84          3        6.33           2.52
related to poverty
In general, the strategies that the Bank recommends are
                                                                     80     6.46    2.17          28          6.93     2.40          3        6.33           2.31
sustainable over time
The World Bank's work promotes country ownership of
                                                                     84     6.37    2.35          28          7.00     2.80          4        7.25           1.71
development strategies
The Bank's work promotes the empowerment of poor people to
                                                                     87     6.38    2.43          31          6.32     3.16          6        7.00           1.67
participate in development
The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending          78     5.85    2.52          28          6.18     2.96          5        6.20           3.03
The Bank gives appropriate priority to growth issues                 87     7.03    1.90          28          6.82     2.79          7        7.86           1.68




                                                                              89
The World Bank                                                            The Gambia                                                     Country Survey 2012


D. The Work of the World Bank
How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in The Gambia?
(Asked on a 5-point effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 5 being Very; converted to a 10-point scale for analysis.)
                                                                                       Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                           Banjul                       West Coast                            Other
                                                                     N     Mean     SD            N       Mean          SD          N         Mean     SD
Helping to reduce poverty                                            93     9.49    1.41          31        9.78        .89         10        9.33    1.52
Helping to strengthen the government's effectiveness                 83     8.67    2.25          27        9.33       1.50         7         8.39    1.70
Helping to increase access and quality of health services,
including the fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable          82     8.68    2.03          32        8.10       2.98         10        9.10    1.57
diseases
Helping to bring about macro-economic growth                         85     9.07    1.40          30        9.03       2.19         9         9.25    1.59
Fighting against corruption                                          84     7.94    2.35          27        8.50       2.57         7         7.43    2.02
Helping to increase access and quality of basic education            85     9.29    1.40          29        9.46       1.30         9         9.25    1.59
Helping to strengthen higher education                               84     8.69    1.68          29        9.30       1.22         9         8.75    1.63
Helping to improve the legal and regulatory systems                  80     8.06    2.02          25        8.47       2.49         8         8.31    1.59
Helping to increase professional skills, employment and
                                                                     86     8.90    1.65          26        9.13       2.21         8         9.16    1.16
income generation, specifically for young people
Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources
                                                                     81     7.94    2.02          27        8.17       2.42         6         8.50    1.16
management
Helping to improve basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)   83     8.92    1.80          29        8.60       2.44         9         9.25    1.13
Helping to improve the investment climate for private sector
                                                                     80     8.65    1.88          29        8.91       1.87         6         10.00    .00
growth and attracting foreign investment
Helping to strengthen the agricultural sector/food security          84     9.20    1.62          31        9.56       1.47         9         9.50     .99
Helping to strengthen the fisheries sector                           83     8.29    1.94          26        8.79       1.93         8         8.59    1.67
Ensuring that attention is paid to gender disparities                83     7.70    2.28          27        7.08       2.85         8         7.19    1.59
Helping to integrate The Gambia into the global and/or sub-
                                                                     85     8.25    1.78          30        8.35       2.28         5         7.75    1.59
regional economy
Helping to improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                   80     7.95    2.35          29        8.06       2.67         7         8.71    1.77
Helping The Gambia adapt to/avert risk of climate change             79     7.92    2.21          27        7.42       2.63         7         7.75    2.25
Helping to strengthen the public financial management and
                                                                     34     8.68    2.22          10        9.33       1.52         1         5.50      .
procurement system
Help strengthening the national statistical system                   85     7.83    2.47          27        8.08       2.55         8         7.47    1.44
Helping to expand internet connectivity                              82     7.80    2.50          27        8.00       3.20         6         9.25    1.84
Helping to strengthen the capacity of civil society and private
                                                                     84     8.07    2.16          31        8.91       1.73         8         9.72     .80
sector organizations
Helping to empower local communities                                 81     8.22    2.27          29        8.45       2.56         8         9.16    1.67
Helping to improve the quality of life in urban areas                79     8.18    2.13          29        8.53       2.27         5         7.75    1.59




                                                                              90
The World Bank                                                            The Gambia                                                     Country Survey 2012


D. The Work of the World Bank (continued)
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of development in The Gambia?
(Asked on a 5-point effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 5 being Very; converted to a 10-point scale for analysis.)
                                                                                       Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                           Banjul                       West Coast                            Other
                                                                     N     Mean     SD            N       Mean          SD          N         Mean     SD
Helping to reduce poverty                                            83     6.58    2.37          28        7.19       2.64         9         7.00    1.59
Helping to strengthen the government's effectiveness                 78     5.93    2.35          25        6.04       2.54         7         6.46    2.20
Helping to increase access and quality of health services,
including the fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable          75     6.70    2.14          28        6.63       2.84         8         7.75    2.08
diseases
Helping to bring about macro-economic growth                         81     7.14    2.11          29        7.13       2.75         7         7.75    2.25
Fighting against corruption                                          77     5.21    2.54          24        5.22       2.60         6         6.25    2.32
Helping to increase access and quality of basic education            80     8.20    1.80          27        8.08       2.77         8         8.59    2.39
Helping to strengthen higher education                               78     6.51    2.34          27        7.08       2.71         8         8.31    1.59
Helping to improve the legal and regulatory systems                  69     5.76    2.36          21        6.04       2.65         8         7.19    2.33
Helping to increase professional skills, employment and
                                                                     78     6.08    2.33          24        6.34       2.72         7         9.04    1.20
income generation, specifically for young people
Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources
                                                                     73     5.84    2.04          23        6.18       2.39         6         8.13     .92
management
Helping to improve basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)   78     6.13    2.43          25        6.22       2.81         8         8.03    1.88
Helping to improve the investment climate for private sector
                                                                     73     6.58    2.28          25        6.58       1.73         6         7.38    2.63
growth and attracting foreign investment
Helping to strengthen the agricultural sector/food security          77     6.73    2.24          25        7.30       2.52         9         7.75    1.95
Helping to strengthen the fisheries sector                           75     5.62    2.15          24        6.53       2.57         7         6.14    2.50
Ensuring that attention is paid to gender disparities                72     6.59    2.42          23        5.50       2.35         8         6.06    1.99
Helping to integrate The Gambia into the global and/or sub-
                                                                     75     5.74    2.14          24        6.16       2.44         3         6.25    3.44
regional economy
Helping to improve nutrition for vulnerable groups                   70     6.01    2.77          24        6.25       2.71         7         8.07    2.02
Helping The Gambia adapt to/avert risk of climate change             70     5.60    2.22          24        5.78       2.23         7         6.46    1.20
Helping to strengthen the public financial management and
                                                                     31     7.10    2.80          8         8.59       1.67         1         5.50      .
procurement system
Help strengthening the national statistical system                   73     6.18    2.14          21        6.68       2.43         7         6.79    1.77
Helping to expand internet connectivity                              67     6.44    2.48          22        6.63       2.84         5         7.75    3.18
Helping to strengthen the capacity of civil society and private
                                                                     72     5.91    2.51          25        6.40       2.60         6         7.38    2.63
sector organizations
Helping to empower local communities                                 71     5.79    2.55          26        6.88       3.06         6         7.38    2.63
Helping to improve the quality of life in urban areas                72     5.94    2.49          26        5.76       3.14         5         7.75    1.59


E. The Way the World Bank does Business

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below using a 1-5 scale, 1 meaning
“Not effective at all”, 5 meaning “Very effective”.
(Asked on a 5-point scale; converted to a 10-point scale for analysis.)
                                                                                       Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                           Banjul                       West Coast                            Other
                                                                     N     Mean     SD            N       Mean          SD          N         Mean     SD
Technical competence                                                 83     8.83    1.77          30        8.43       2.22         9         8.75    1.98
Producing "knowledge" (studies, analyses) that is useful             82     8.33    1.93          27        7.67       2.61         7         9.04    1.77
Making the results of studies and analyses readily available         80     7.38    2.36          30        7.45       2.56         6         8.13    1.69
Sharing knowledge about international best practices                 82     7.80    2.12          27        7.75       2.65         6         7.75    2.01
Ability to adapt its knowledge to your country’s needs               80     6.85    2.31          28        7.43       2.35         5         7.75    2.25
Ensuring its staff is accessible                                     80     6.96    2.56          26        6.97       2.54         8         7.75    1.70
Providing sound policy and economic advice                           79     8.01    2.19          26        7.84       2.34         8         8.03    1.88
Straightforwardness in its dealings with you                         78     7.75    2.38          27        8.17       2.25         6         7.38     .92
Maintaining consistent messages                                      75     7.45    2.32          27        7.33       2.93         4         5.50     .00
Promoting the inclusion of local communities in the
                                                                     74     6.81    2.66          29        6.66       3.04         6         7.38    2.21
development of strategies
Promoting the inclusion of civil society in the development of
                                                                     77     6.73    2.54          27        6.00       3.08         7         6.79    1.77
strategies
Promoting the inclusion of local project experts in the
                                                                     82     7.01    2.58          30        6.48       2.88         6         6.25    1.16
development of strategies
Promoting the inclusion of private sector in the development of
                                                                     82     6.73    2.18          29        6.35       2.44         8         6.91    2.06
strategies
Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction                     81     7.83    2.29          33        7.34       2.72         10        8.43    1.85
Lending in a way that promotes effective development                 75     7.30    2.40          30        7.15       2.43         6         8.13     .92




                                                                              91
The World Bank                                                                The Gambia                                                     Country Survey 2012


F. Project/Program Related Issues
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly
Agree”.
                                                                                           Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                               Banjul                        West Coast                           Other
                                                                         N     Mean     SD            N           Mean      SD           N        Mean           SD
The Bank is flexible in terms of adjusting to changing
                                                                         50     5.52    2.44          16          6.81     2.04          4        5.50           3.00
circumstances
The Bank disburses funds promptly                                        49     5.71    2.85          18          7.06     3.46          5        4.00           3.94
The Bank works efficiently                                               52     6.69    2.33          19          8.05     2.72          4        7.25           1.89
The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                         52     7.10    2.25          17          8.35     2.55          3        4.67           3.21
programs it supports
The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level                  49     6.73    2.41          18          7.28     2.52          4        4.75           2.50
The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials                 50     7.32    1.89          17          7.12     2.42          5        5.80           3.27
The Bank provides strategic advice and helps strengthening
                                                                         50     7.34    1.90          18          7.94     2.41          4        6.00           3.74
country systems
The Bank and partners in government collaborate well together
on Bank supported programs and projects in The Gambia                    51     7.43    1.96          18          7.78     2.53          4        5.50           3.87

The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity                      53     7.62    1.89          18          8.44     1.69          5        5.60           2.70
The Government supports and takes responsibility for
                                                                         53     7.17    2.04          19          8.68     1.73          5        6.00           3.00
development efforts in The Gambia
The Bank’s procurement requirements are reasonable                       49     6.29    2.30          18          8.11     2.08          2        6.50           .71


G. The Future Role of the World Bank in The Gambia
                                                                                           Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                               Banjul                        West Coast                           Other
                                                                         N     Mean     SD            N           Mean      SD           N        Mean           SD
How significant a role do you believe the World Bank should
play in The Gambia’s development over the medium term in the             85     9.08    1.24          36          9.28     1.80          9        9.89           .33
near future?
(Asked on a 10-pt. scale, 1 meaning that the Bank should not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should play a very
significant role)

Which one of the following should the Bank do to make itself of greater value in The Gambia? (Choose only ONE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                              Banjul               West Coast                  Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to The Gambia’s specific challenges                        11.9%                  13.9%                   10.0%
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                                  44.0%                  38.9%                   50.0%
 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                                             7.1%                   0.0%                   10.0%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                          8.3%                  19.4%                   0.0%
 Offer more innovative financial products                                                                 13.1%                   8.3%                   30.0%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                                  9.5%                  11.1%                   0.0%
 Other                                                                                                     6.0%                   8.3%                   0.0%

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to?
(Choose TWO only) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                              Banjul               West Coast                  Other
 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                                                            11.1%                  11.4%                   50.0%
 Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                                                27.8%                  37.1%                   62.5%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                    17.8%                  25.7%                   0.0%
 Poor donor coordination                                                                                  17.8%                  20.0%                   12.5%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in government                                                      43.3%                  40.0%                   12.5%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                                                        25.6%                  17.1%                   25.0%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                          36.7%                  31.4%                   0.0%
 Other                                                                                                     1.1%                   0.0%                   0.0%




                                                                                  92
The World Bank                                                 The Gambia                                             Country Survey 2012


H. Communication and Outreach
From where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in The Gambia? (Choose no more than
TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               Banjul          West Coast            Other
 Local newspapers                                                                        64.1%             73.7%               60.0%
 International newspapers                                                                 3.3%              5.3%               0.0%
 Local radio                                                                              8.7%             21.1%               40.0%
 International radio                                                                      6.5%              5.3%               10.0%
 Local television                                                                        29.3%             31.6%               50.0%
 International television                                                                13.0%             13.2%               0.0%
 Periodicals                                                                             15.2%             13.2%               10.0%
 Internet                                                                                42.4%             28.9%               20.0%
 Social media: Facebook, Twitter, YouTube                                                 1.1%              2.6%               0.0%
 Other                                                                                    5.4%              2.6%               0.0%

From where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development activities in The Gambia? (Choose no more than
TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               Banjul          West Coast            Other
 Local newspapers                                                                        48.4%             55.3%               55.6%
 International newspapers                                                                 1.1%              2.6%               0.0%
 Local radio                                                                              5.5%             26.3%               33.3%
 International radio                                                                      1.1%              5.3%               22.2%
 Local television                                                                        20.9%             18.4%               44.4%
 International television                                                                 1.1%              2.6%               0.0%
 Periodicals                                                                              5.5%              0.0%               0.0%
 Blogs                                                                                    0.0%              2.6%               0.0%
 Internet                                                                                29.7%             23.7%               22.2%
 World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                                             14.3%              5.3%               0.0%
 World Bank publications, materials                                                      14.3%             13.2%               0.0%
 World Bank website                                                                      27.5%             21.1%               11.1%
 Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff                                        12.1%              7.9%               0.0%
 Other                                                                                    3.3%              5.3%               0.0%

How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               Banjul          West Coast            Other
 World Bank website                                                                      63.0%             44.7%               30.0%
 Face to face meetings/discussions                                                       21.7%             23.7%               10.0%
 e-Newsletters                                                                           51.1%             34.2%               20.0%
 Workshops/conferences                                                                   22.8%             36.8%               10.0%
 Mobile phones                                                                            0.0%              5.3%               0.0%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                                7.6%             18.4%               30.0%
 Blogs                                                                                    0.0%              0.0%               0.0%
 Other                                                                                    6.5%             15.8%               30.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession
that is not on a list of exceptions?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               Banjul          West Coast            Other
 Yes                                                                                     18.4%            15.8%                0.0%
 No                                                                                      81.6%            84.2%               100.0%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               Banjul          West Coast            Other
 Yes                                                                                     18.9%            18.4%                0.0%
 No                                                                                      81.1%            81.6%               100.0%

Were you able to obtain this information?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               Banjul          West Coast            Other
 Yes                                                                                     51.9%            41.2%                50.0%
 No                                                                                      48.1%            58.8%                50.0%

Do you have access to the Internet?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                               Banjul          West Coast            Other
 Yes                                                                                     98.8%            86.8%                80.0%
 No                                                                                       1.2%            13.2%                20.0%




                                                                    93
The World Bank                                                          The Gambia                                                     Country Survey 2012


H. Communication and Outreach (continued)
I use/have used the World Bank website:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                        Banjul               West Coast                 Other
 Yes                                                                                              79.7%                 56.8%                     12.5%
 No                                                                                               20.3%                 43.2%                     87.5%

I primarily use:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                        Banjul               West Coast                 Other
 The World Bank's country website                                                                 14.3%                 20.0%                     33.3%
 The World Bank's main website                                                                    85.7%                 80.0%                     66.7%

The Internet connection, I mainly use when visiting a World Bank website :
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                        Banjul               West Coast                  Other
 High speed                                                                                       71.0%                 75.0%                     100.0%
 Dial-up                                                                                          29.0%                 25.0%                      0.0%

When I visit the World Bank website, I am generally looking for:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                        Banjul               West Coast                 Other
 Project information                                                                              28.0%                 45.5%                     50.0%
 Country information                                                                              26.0%                 27.3%                     50.0%
 Data                                                                                             24.0%                 18.2%                     0.0%
 News                                                                                             12.0%                  4.5%                     0.0%
 Other                                                                                            10.0%                  4.5%                     0.0%

I generally use the World Bank's website in:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                        Banjul               West Coast                  Other
 English                                                                                          98.5%                 100.0%                    100.0%
 French                                                                                            1.5%                  0.0%                      0.0%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you
“Strongly Agree”.
                                                                                     Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                         Banjul                       West Coast                            Other
                                                                 Mean      N      SD          Mean         N          SD        Mean         N             SD
The World Bank's Knowledge Space is a valuable source of
                                                                 7.76     66      2.31         8.22        18        1.63        7.50         2            3.54
information related to development in The Gambia
I find the Bank websites easy to navigate                        7.85     71      1.95         7.90        21        1.79
I find the information on the Bank’s websites useful             8.15     71      1.98         8.61        23        1.16        7.50         2            3.54
When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find
                                                                 6.78     73      2.64         7.43        21        2.54
it
The Bank is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                 6.97     58      2.52         6.95        19        2.59        7.00         2            4.24
inquiries




                                                                            94
 The World Bank                                            The Gambia                                              Country Survey 2012


 Appendix D: World Bank Client Survey 2012

              World Bank Client Survey FY12 -- THE GAMBIA
 The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
 development in The Gambia or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The
 following survey is meant to give the Bank’s team that works in The Gambia, more in-depth insight into
 how the Bank’s work is perceived. This is one tool the Bank uses to assess the views of its critical
 stakeholders. With this understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies,
 outreach and programs that support development in The Gambia.

 The World Bank commissioned an independent consultant to oversee the logistics of this effort in The
 Gambia. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the survey ,
 please circle the number that most accurately reflects your answer. If you prefer not to answer a
 question, please leave it blank.

 Section A. BACKGROUND
 A1. Which of the following best describes your current position? (Please mark only one response)
         1.    Office of the President, Prime Minister, Minister,        O        8.       Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web etc.)
 O             Parliamentarian
         2.    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or         O        9.  Independent Government Institution (i.e.,
 O             Implementation Agency                                                  Regulatory Agency, Central Bank)
 O       3.    Local Government Office or Staff                          O        10. Trade Union

 O       4.    Federal/Central Government                                         11. Faith based groups

 O       5.    Bilateral or Multilateral Agency                          O        12. Academia or Research Institute

 O       6.    Private sector                                            O        13. Judiciary

 O       7.    NGOs (including CBOs)                                     O        14. Other (please specify): ___________________


A2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only one response)

O     1.      Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry                    O      7.     Infrastructure (e.g., ransport, Water, Energy,
                                                                                   Telecommunications)
O     2.      Commerce, Trade and Manufacturing                      O      8.     Law, Justice

O     3.      Communications, Information Services                   O      9.     Legislature, Politics

O     4.      Economic Management                                    O      10.    Social Services (e.g., Education, Health)

O     5.      Environment, Natural Resource Management               O      11.    Other (please specify) :        _________________

O     6.      Finance, Banking, Insurance                                              ____________________________________

                                                                         Not familiar                                            Extremely
     A3. How familiar are you with the work of the World                 at all                                                    familiar
         Bank in The Gambia on a scale of 1-10, 1
                                                                             1         2      3     4     5    6      7      8    9      10
         meaning “not familiar at all”, 10 meaning
         “extremely familiar”?                                              O          O O O             O     O O O             O       O
     A4. How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the World Bank’s activities?
     O         1. Less than one year          O     2. One to three years                    O    3. More than three years

      A5. Which best represents your geographic location?
              O 1. Banjul              O 2. Lower River        O 3. Central River
              O 4. North Bank          O 5. Upper River        O 6. West Coast

                                                                95
The World Bank                                        The Gambia                                          Country Survey 2012


Section B. GENERAL ISSUES FACING THE GAMBIA

                                                       Extremely                                            Extremely    Don’t
    B1. On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning                  Pessimistic                                          Optimistic   know
       “extremely pessimistic”, 10 meaning
       “extremely     optimistic”,   please
                                                         1       2     3       4    5      6    7     8      9     10
       indicate your perspective on the
       future of the next generation in The              O       O O O              O     O O O              O     O      O
       Gambia.

     B2. Listed below are a number of                     Most         Second
                                                        Important       Most
         development priorities in The
                                                         Develop     Important
         Gambia. Please identify which one                ment       Developm           B3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that
         of these you consider the first                 priority    ent priority       encompasses work in many different
         most important development                     (Choose       (Choose           areas. Which TWO areas of development
         priority. Then identify which one                ONE)          ONE)
                                                                                        listed below do you believe would
         you consider the second most                                                   contribute most to reducing poverty in The
         important development priority.                                                Gambia. (Choose only TWO)

       1.   Government effectiveness/governance              O             O             2.    Government effectiveness/governance
       3.   Fight against HIV/AIDS and other                 O             O             4.    Fight against HIV/AIDS and other
             communicable diseases                                                              communicable diseases
       5.   Macro-economic growth                            O             O             6.    Macro-economic growth
       7.   Fight against Corruption                         O             O             8.    Fight against Corruption
       9.  Access to basic education, quality of             O             O             10. Access to education, quality of
           basic education                                                                   education
       11. Higher education                                  O             O             12. Higher education
       13. Access to health services, quality of             O             O             14. Access to health services, quality of
            health care                                                                       health care
       15. Improving the effectiveness of the legal          O             O             16. Improving the effectiveness of the legal
            and regulatory system                                                             and regulatory system
       17. Skills development, employment and                O             O             18. Skills development, employment and
            income generating opportunities,                                                  income generating opportunities,
            specifically for young people                                                     specifically for young people
       19. Improving environmental quality and               O             O             20. Improving environmental quality and
            protecting natural resources                                                      protecting natural resources
       21. Improving basic infrastructure (port,             O             O             22. Improving basic infrastructure (port,
            electricity, roads)                                                               electricity, roads)
       14. Enhancing opportunities for private               O             O             14. Enhancing opportunities for private
           sector investment including foreign                                                sector investment including foreign
           investment                                                                         investment
       23. Agriculture development (crop                     O             O             24. Agriculture development (crop
            production, processing) / Food security                                           production, processing) / Food
                                                                                              security
       25. Agriculture development (livestock)               O             O             26. Agriculture development (livestock)
       27. Fishery                                           O             O             28. Fishery
       29. Improving trade and exports                       O             O             30. Improving trade and exports
       31. Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups           O             O             32. Improve nutrition for vulnerable groups
       33. Mitigate gender inequality                        O             O             34. Mitigate gender inequality
       35. Promote regional cooperation                      O             O             36. Promote regional cooperation
       37. Mitigate the effects of climate change            O             O             38. Mitigate the effects of climate change
       39. Improving public financial management             O             O             40. Improving public financial management
            and procurement                                                                   and procurement
       41. Strengthening the national statistical            O             O             42. Strengthening the national statistical
            system                                                                            system
       43. Expanding internet connectivity                   O             O             44. Expanding internet connectivity
       45. Strengthening the capacity of civil               O             O             46. Strengthening the capacity of civil

                                                          96
The World Bank                                       The Gambia                                    Country Survey 2012


            society and private sector                                                    society and private sector
            organizations                                                                 organizations
       47. Empower local communities                                                 48. Empower local communities
       49. Improving the quality of life in urban         O           O              50. Improving the quality of life in urban
            areas                                                                         areas
       51. Other (please specify): ___________            O           O              52. Other (please specify): ___________
             ______________________________


Section B. GENERAL ISSUES FACING THE GAMBIA (continued)

           B4. Sustainable economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
               Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to
               generating faster economic growth in The Gambia (these should be
               tailored to reflect issues in country). (Choose no more than TWO)
             1.    Government effectiveness/governance
             2.    Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases
             3.    Fight against Corruption
             4.     Access to basic education, quality of basic education
             5.    Higher education
             6.    Access to health services, quality of health care
             7.    Improving the effectiveness of the legal and regulatory system
             8.    Skills development, employment/ income generating opportunities, specifically
                   for young people
             9.    Improving environmental quality and protecting natural resources
             10.   Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity, roads)
             11.   Enhancing opportunities for private sector investment including foreign
                   investment

             12.   Agriculture development (crop production, processing) / Food security
             13.   Agriculture development (livestock)
             14.   Fishery
             15.   Improving trade and exports
             16.   Improving nutrition for vulnerable groups
             17.   Mitigate gender inequality
             18.   Promote regional cooperation
             19.   Mitigate the effects of climate change
             20.   Improving public financial management and procurement
             21.   Strengthening the national statistical system
             22.   Expanding internet connectivity
             23.   Strengthening the capacity of civil society and private sector organizations
             24.   Empowering local communities
             25.   Improving the quality of life in urban areas
             26.   Other (please specify): ___________




                                                         97
The World Bank                                 The Gambia                                 Country Survey 2012



 Section C. OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK
                                                            Very                                             Very    Don’t
      C1. Overall, please rate your impression of the       Unfavorable                                 Favorable    know
            World Bank’s effectiveness in The
            Gambia on a scale of 1-10, 1 being “Not           1    2      3   4   5   6       7    8     9      10
            effective at all”, 10 being “Very
            effective.”
                                                             O O O O O O O O O O                                      O




                                                            Very                                             Very    Don’t
       C2. To which extend do the World Bank’s              Unfavorable                                 Favorable    know
             financial instruments meet the needs of
             The Gambia, on a scale of 1-10, 1                1    2      3   4   5   6       7    8     9      10
             meaning “to no degree at all” , 10
             meaning “to a very significant degree”
                                                             O O O O O O O O O O                                      O



                                                            Very                                             Very    Don’t
       C3. To which extend does the World Bank              Unfavorable                                 Favorable    know
             meet the needs of The Gambia for
             knowledge services (e.g. research,
             analysis, technical assistance), on a            1    2      3   4   5   6       7    8     9      10
             scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “to no degree          O O O O O O O O O O                                      O
             at all”, 10 meaning “to a very significant
             degree”




                                                   98
The World Bank                                         The Gambia                     Country Survey 2012


Section C. OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT…)
C4. Based on your observations of the World Bank in The Gambia,
     1. What do you think the Bank considers its top priorities in The Gambia? (Choose no more than
     TWO)
     2. Where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in its support of
     country priorities? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                What do you      Where would it be most
                                                              think the Bank    productive for the Bank to
                                                                considers its        focus most of its
                                                               top priorities?          resources?

                                                                    Choose TWO         CHOOSE TWO
         1.    Government effectiveness/governance                      O                   O
         2.    Fight against HIV/AIDS and other communicable            O                   O
                diseases
         3.    Macro-economic growth                                    O                   O
         4.    Fight against Corruption                                 O                   O
         5.    Access to basic education, quality of basic              O                   O
               education
         6.    Higher education                                         O                   O
         7.    Access to health services, quality of health care        O                   O
         8.    Improving the effectiveness of the legal and             O                   O
                regulatory system
         9.    Skills development, employment and income                O                   O
                generating opportunities, specifically for young
                people
         10.   Improving environmental quality and protecting           O                   O
                natural resources
         11.   Improving basic infrastructure (port, electricity,       O                   O
                roads)
         14.    Enhancing opportunities for private sector              O                   O
                /investment including foreign investment
         12.   Agriculture development (crop production,                O                   O
                processing) / Food security
         13.   Agriculture development (livestock)                      O                   O
         14. Fishery                                                    O                   O
         15. Improving trade and exports                                O                   O
         16. Improving nutrition for vulnerable groups                  O                   O
         17. Mitigate gender inequality                                 O                   O
         18. Promote regional cooperation                               O                   O
         19. Mitigate the effects of climate change                     O                   O
         20. Improving public financial management and                  O                   O
              procurement
         21. Strengthening the national statistical system              O                   O
         22. Expanding internet connectivity                            O                   O
         23. Strengthening the capacity of civil society and            O                   O
              private sector organizations
         24. Empowering local communities
         25. Improving the quality of life in urban areas               O                   O
         26. Other (please specify): ___________                        O                   O



                                                             99
The World Bank                                     The Gambia                Country Survey 2012




       C5. In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the
             World Bank in The Gambia’s development strategies?

       O    1. The Bank should be more involved

       O    2. The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level
       O    3. The Bank should be less involved

       O    4. The Bank shouldn’t be involved at all

       O    5. Don’t know/refused




                                                       100
The World Bank                                          The Gambia                                  Country Survey 2012


Section C. OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT…)

      C6.      In broad terms of economic and social
             development, what is the “greatest” value                   Greatest                  Second
             brought by the World Bank to The Gambia?                      value                Greatest value
             What is the “second greatest” value?                    (Choose only ONE)        (Choose only ONE)
       1.     The Bank’s knowledge (studies and analyses)                      O                     O
       2.     Technical advice                                                 O                     O
       3.     Policy and economic advice                                       O                     O
       4.     Lending when others won’t                                        O                     O
       5.     Convener/facilitator                                             O                     O
       6.     Donor coordination                                               O                     O
       7.     Ability to mobilize resources (from private sector,              O                     O
              government, etc.)
       8.     Ability to build implementation capacity                         O                     O
       9.     Financial resources                                              O                     O
       10. Other (please specify) :                                            O                     O
           _______________________________
       11. None of the above – (The World Bank serves no                       O                     O
           useful purposes)




            C7. Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses
                in its work in The Gambia? (choose no more than TWO)

             O     1. Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities

             O     2. Not exploring alternative policy options

             O     3. Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures

             O     4. Staff too inaccessible

             O     5. Bank management is not accessible

             O     6. Bank staff are arrogant in their approach

             O     7. Not enough public disclosure of its work

             O     8. The Bank is too influenced by the US, or others (pls. specify _____________)

             O     9. World Bank procedures too slow and complex to show results on the ground
                              in reasonable time
             O     10. The interventions of the World Bank are inadequately aligned with country
                       priorities
             O     11. The Bank’s instruments are not flexible enough to respond to country needs

             O     12. Other (please specify) :___________________________________




                                                            101
The World Bank                                           The Gambia                                Country Survey 2012


Section C. OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT..)



C8. The World Bank wants to ensure that the knowledge and studies it produces are relevant. Which
     TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
     efforts on in the next few years in The Gambia: (choose no more than TWO)

                                     8.   Energy
O   1.   Education            O                                           O   15. Financial markets
    2.   Health                      9.   Agricultural production /Food       16. Urban/metropolitan development
O                             O               security
                                                                          O
    3.   Social protection           10. Agri-business                        17. Environmental sustainability/
O                             O                                           O        natural resources management
                                                                              18. Improving equality of opportunity
O   4.   Transport            O      11. Water and sanitation             O
O   5.   Poverty              O      12. Monitoring and Evaluation        O   19. Rural development
O   6.   Governance           O      13. Public expenditure               O   20. Climate change
O   7.   Anti-corruption      O      14. Public sector performance        O   21. Service sector expansion
    8.   Enhanced
                                     15. Labor markets/job creation           22. Other (please specify):
         business
                                                                                   ________________________
O        environment for      O                                           O
         private sector
         development




             C9. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
                 main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
                 Bank work with more in your country to ensure better development
                 results there? (Choose no more than TWO)

              27.    NGOs
              28.    Local Government
              29.    Beneficiaries
              30.    Private Sector
              31.    Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
              32.    Donor community
              33.    Parliament
              34.    Media
              35.    Faith-based organizations
              36.    Other (please specify): ___________




                                                            102
The World Bank                                      The Gambia                       Country Survey 2012


Section C. OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT..)

   On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you
      strongly disagree, 10 meaning you
      strongly agree, please respond to              Strongly                                         Strongly
      the following statements about the             Disagree                                            Agree
      World Bank in The Gambia.
                                                                                                                 Don’t
                                                        1        2   3   4   5   6   7      8     9        10    Know

   C10. Overall the Bank currently plays a
        relevant role in development in The            O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
        Gambia
   C11. The Bank’s work is aligned with what I
        consider the development priorities for        O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
        this country.
   C12. The Bank’s work reflects its own mission
        of poverty reduction                           O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
   C13. The World Bank recommends programs
        and strategies that are realistic for The      O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
        Gambia
   C14. The World Bank treats clients and
        stakeholders in The Gambia with respect.       O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
   C15. The World Bank collaborates with other
        donors here                                    O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
   C16. The World Bank is responsive
                                                       O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
   C17. Overall I like to work/interact with Bank
        staff                                          O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
   C18. The Bank is an effective catalyst for
        discussion on issues related to poverty        O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
   C19. In general, the strategies that the Bank
        recommends are sustainable over time           O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
   C20. The World Bank's work promotes country
        ownership of development strategies            O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
   C21. The Bank's work promotes the
        empowerment of poor people to                  O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
        participate in development
   C22. The World Bank imposes reasonable
        conditions on its lending                      O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O
   C23. The Bank gives appropriate priority to
        growth issues                                  O        O    O   O   O   O   O     O      O        O      O




                                                       103
The World Bank                                         The Gambia                                                                                  Country Survey 2012


  Section D. THE WORK OF THE WORLD BANK
For each item in the following section, please provide two responses: first, importance, meaning, in
your opinion, how important it is for the Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in The
Gambia. Second, effectiveness, meaning, how effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms
of having a positive impact on that area of development in The Gambia.
                                                                Level of IMPORTANCE                                                      Level of EFFECTIVENESS




                                                                                                                                 Not effective
                                                                    unimportant




                                                                                                                    Don’t know




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Don’t know
                                                        important




                                                                                                        important




                                                                                                                                                 ineffective
                                                                                            important




                                                                                                                                                                                     effective
                                                                                  Average




                                                                                                                                                               Average


                                                                                                                                                                         effective
                                                                    Fairly




                                                                                            Fairly




                                                                                                                                                 Fairly




                                                                                                                                                                         Fairly
                                                        at all




                                                                                                                                 at all
                                                                                                        Very




                                                                                                                                                                                     Very
                                                        Not
   D1.    Helping to reduce poverty                       O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
   D2.    Helping to strengthen the government’s
          effectiveness                                   O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
   D3.    Helping to increase access and quality of
          health services, including the fight against    O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
          HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases
   D4.    Helping to bring about macro-economic
          growth                                          O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
   D5.    Fighting against corruption                     O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
   D6.    Helping to increase access and quality of
                                                          O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
          basic education
   D7.    Helping to strengthen higher education          O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
   D8.    Helping to improve the legal and
                                                          O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
          regulatory systems
   D9.    Helping to increase professional skills,
          employment and income generation,               O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
          specifically for young people
   D10.   Helping to strengthen environment and
                                                          O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
          natural resources management
   D11.   Helping to improve basic infrastructure
                                                          O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
          (electricity, roads, port)
   D12.   Helping to improve the investment
          climate for private sector growth and           O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
          attracting foreign investment
   D13.   Helping to strengthen the agricultural
                                                          O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
          sector / food security
   D14.   Helping to strengthen the fisheries sector      O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
   D15. Ensuring that attention is paid to gender
                                                          O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
        disparities
   D16. Helping to integrate The Gambia into the
                                                          O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
        global and/or sub-regional economy
   D17. Helping to improve nutrition for
        vulnerable groups                                 O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
   D18. Helping The Gambia adapt to/avert risk
        of climate change                                 O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
   D19. Helping to strengthen the public financial
        management and procurement system
   D20. Help strengthening the national statistical
                                                          O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
        system
   D21. Helping to expand internet connectivity           O           O           O           O           O         O              O               O           O          O           O          O
   D22. Helping to strengthen the capacity of civil
                                                          O           O           O           O           O         O            O               O             O         O           O           O
        society and private sector organizations
   D23. Helping to empower local communities             O          O             O         O           O           O            O               O             O         O           O           O
   D24. Helping to improve the quality of life in
                                                         O          O             O         O           O           O            O               O             O         O           O           O
        urban areas



                                                           104
The World Bank                                       The Gambia                                                Country Survey 2012


Section E. THE WAY THE WORLD BANK DOES BUSINESS
                                                                                          Level of World Bank Effectiveness
    Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness




                                                                                                 Ineffective
                                                                                     Effective




                                                                                                                                           Effective
    vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below:




                                                                                                                           Effective
                                                                                                                 Average
                                                                                                 Fairly




                                                                                                                           Fairly




                                                                                                                                                         Don’t
                                                                                                                                                         know
                                                                                     at all




                                                                                                                                           Very
                                                                                     Not
    E1.    Technical competence                                                        O           O             O             O            O             O
    E2.    Producing “knowledge” (studies, analyses) that is useful                    O           O             O             O            O             O
    E3.    Making the results of studies and analyses readily available                O           O             O             O            O             O
    E4.    Sharing knowledge about international best practices                        O           O             O             O            O             O
    E5.    Ability to adapt its knowledge to your country’s needs                      O           O             O             O            O             O
    E6.    Ensuring its staff is accessible                                            O           O             O             O            O             O
    E7.    Providing sound policy and economic advice                                  O           O             O             O            O             O
    E8.    Straightforwardness in its dealings with you                                O           O             O             O            O             O
    E9.    Maintaining consistent messages                                             O           O             O             O            O             O
    E10.   Promoting the inclusion of local communities (beneficiaries) in the         O           O             O             O            O             O
           development of strategies
    E11.   Promoting the inclusion of civil society (NGOs, religious groups,           O           O             O             O            O             O
           interest groups) in the development of strategies
    E12.   Promoting the inclusion of local project experts in the development of      O           O             O             O            O             O
           strategies
    E13.   Promoting the inclusion of private sector in the development of             O           O             O             O            O             O
           strategies
    E14.   Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction                            O           O             O             O            O             O
    E15.   Lending in a way that promotes effective development                        O           O             O             O            O             O

  Section F. PROJECT/PROGRAM RELATED ISSUES
  The following section should be filled out only by respondents who have/have had direct experience
  and/or involvement in the implementation of World Bank programs and/or projects.
     Please rate how much you agree with the
                                                                  Disagree
                                                                  Strongly




                                                                                                                                              Strongly
                                                                                                                                               Agree
     following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1




                                                                                                                                                          Don’t Know
     meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning
     you “Strongly Agree”.
                                                                      1      2   3    4      5         6         7         8           9        10
  F1. The Bank is flexible in terms of adjusting to changing
      circumstances                                                  O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O
  F2. The Bank disburses funds promptly                              O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O
  F3. The Bank works efficiently                                     O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O
  F4. The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the
      projects and programs it supports                              O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O
  F5. The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level        O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O
  F6. The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials       O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O
  F7. The Bank provides strategic advice and helps
       strengthening country systems                                 O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O
  F8. The Bank and partners in government collaborate well
       together on Bank supported programs and projects in           O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O
       The Gambia
  F9. The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity.           O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O
  F10. The Government supports and takes responsibility for
       development efforts in The Gambia                             O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O
  F11. The Bank’s procurement requirements are reasonable
                                                                     O       O   O   O      O        O           O         O           O        O         O




                                                         105
The World Bank                                       The Gambia                                     Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN THE GAMBIA

G1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank should play in XXXX’s
development over the medium term in the near future? (1 meaning that the
Bank should not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should
play a very significant role)
        1           2   3      4       5      6      7         8     9          10          
      Not a                                                                     Very        Don't
 s i gni fi ca nt                                                          s i gni fi ca nt Know
 rol e a t a l l                                                                rol e


G2. Which one of the following should the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in
XXXX? (Choose only ONE)
 1 Improve the quality of its experts as related to XXXX’s specific challenges
 2 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues
     Improve the competitiveness of its financing (e.g., cost, timeliness and other terms) compared to
 4
     markets
 5 Offer more innovative financial products
 6 Offer more innovative knowledge services
 7 Other (please specify): ___________________________________


G3. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the
following would you attribute this to? (Choose TWO only)
 1 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly
 2 Government works inefficiently/too slowly
 3 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4 Poor donor coordination
 5 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in government
 6 Political pressures and obstacles
 7 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 8 Other




                                                         106
The World Bank                                  The Gambia                                      Country Survey 2012


Section H. COMMUNICATION AND OUTREACH
     H1. From where do you get most of your information about economic and social development
          issues in The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
     O     1. Local newspapers                  O     6. International television

     O     2. International newspapers          O     7. Periodicals (e.g., journals and magazines)

     O     3. Local radio                       O     8. Internet

     O     4. International radio               O     9. Social media: facebook, twitter, youtube
           5. Local television                        10. Other (please specify):
     O
     H2. From where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development activities in
          The Gambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
     O     1. Local newspapers                      O        8. Blogs

     O     2. International newspapers              O        9. Internet

     O     3. Local radio                           O        10. World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops

     O     4. International radio                   O        11. World Bank publications, materials

     O     5. Local television                      O        12. World Bank website

     O     6. International television              O        13. Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff
           7. Periodicals (e.g., journals and
     O           magazines). Internet               O     14. Other (please specify): ____________________




H3. How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no
more than TWO)
 1 World Bank website
 2 Face to face meetings/discussions
 3 e-newsletters
 4 Workshops/conferences
 5 Mobile phones
 6 Social media (facebook, twitter, youtube)
 7 Blogs
 8 Others (please specify): ______________________________________________



H4. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to information Policy under which the
Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of
 1 Yes
 2 No



H5. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past
year? (If yes please go to Question H6)
 1 Yes
 2 No




                                                    107
The World Bank                                            The Gambia                                        Country Survey 2012



H6. Were you able to obtain this information?
 1 Yes
 2 No


     H3. Do you have access to the internet:    O Yes O No
     H4. I use/have used the World Bank website:    O Yes O No
     H5a. I primarily use:    O The World Bank’s country website [www.worldbank.org/The Gambia]
                              O The World Bank’s main website [www.worldbank.org]
     H5b. The Internet connection I mainly use when visiting a World Bank website is:
           O High speed O Dial-up
     H5c. When I visit the World Bank website, I am generally looking for:
          O 1. Project information O 2. Country information O 3. Data
          O 4. News                   O 5. Other (please specify): _________________________
     H5d. I generally use the World Bank's website in:                 O 1.       English       O 2. French




Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”,
10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.
                                                                             Strongly                            Strongly Don't
                                                                             Disagree                               Agree Know
     The World Bank’s Knowledge Space is a valuable source of
H11. information related to development in XXXX. (Only answer if you have     1     2   3   4   5   6   7    8   9   10    
     used)
     I find the Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only answer if you have
H12.                                                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7    8   9   10    
     used a Bank website)
     I find the information on the Bank’s websites useful. (Only answer if
H13.                                                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7    8   9   10    
     you have used a Bank website)
     When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it
H14.                                                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7    8   9   10    
     (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them, etc.)
H15. The Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries          1     2   3   4   5   6   7    8   9   10    




                                                              108
