88263
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / International Development
Association or
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World
Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of
its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as
full attribution to this work is given.
For permission to reproduce any part of this work for commercial purposes, please send a request with
complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
USA; telephone: 978-750-8400; fax: 978-750-4470; Internet: www.copyright.com.
All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of
the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-
mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Table of Contents

Plain English Summary ............................................................................................................................. 1
Executive summary and key recommendations .................................................................................... 3
List of abbreviations ................................................................................................................................... 5
1      Introduction.......................................................................................................................................... 8
2      Hospital debt in Poland: scope of the problem and attempted solutions................................... 9
    2.1       Anatomy of the “debt problem” ................................................................................................. 9
    2.2       Regulatory efforts to tackle the “debt problem” ................................................................... 11
3      Constraints to financial health: a systemic view .......................................................................... 15
    3.1       Proposing an analysis framework .......................................................................................... 15
    3.2       Health system and service delivery environment ................................................................ 17
    3.3       The governance of hospitals .................................................................................................. 19
    3.4       Regulation ................................................................................................................................. 21
    3.5       Purchasing................................................................................................................................. 22
    3.6       Hospital strategies .................................................................................................................... 24
4      Pathway towards financial sustainability ...................................................................................... 27
    4.1       Changes at the national level ................................................................................................. 27
    4.2       Changes at the sub-national or hospital level ...................................................................... 30
    4.3       A wide-ranging stewardship reform ....................................................................................... 31
Appendix: Additional data on hospital debt: variation by region and ownership status ................ 33
       Regional variations and trends....................................................................................................... 33
       Variations depending on ownership .............................................................................................. 35
List of Figures
Figure 1: Overall debt and arrears as a % of GDP between 2004 and 2012 ................................. 10

Figure 2: Change in the stock of debts and arrears in real terms (2005 prices, million PLN) ...... 10

Figure 3: Factors influencing hospital behavior: a framework and its application to Poland ........ 16

Figure 4: Trends in acute care hospital beds per 100,000 in selected European countries, 2000 -
2011............................................................................................................................................................ 18

Figure 5: Total debt per public bed by region in 2006 and 2012 (PLN) ........................................... 33

Figure 6: Change in the number of beds and the stock of debt in real terms by regions between
2006 and 2012 .......................................................................................................................................... 34

Figure 7: Share of each type of owner in the public hospital sector revenues, deficit, debt and
arrears (2010) ........................................................................................................................................... 36



List of Tables
Table 1: Decision of founders regarding 2012 deficit (as of August 2013) ..................................... 13

Table 2: Indicative breakdown of hospital ownership in Poland ....................................................... 20
List of abbreviations


BGK         Bank Gospodarstwa Krajowego (only state-owned bank in Poland)

DRG         Diagnostic-related groups

EU27        The 27 Member States of the European Union

GDP         Gross domestic product

NFZ         Narodowy Fundusz Zdrowia (National Health Insurance Fund)

OECD        The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

PLN         Polish zloty

SPZOZ       Samodzielny publiczny zakład opieki zdrowotnej – Independent Public health
            care entity (Traditional status of public facilities when not corporatized)
                  Improving the financial sustainability of
         the hospital sector in Poland: towards a systemic approach

                                              Policy Note 1

                                                April 2014

                                      Plain English Summary

It is increasingly recognized that the role of hospitals everywhere must change in order to maximize the
benefits of medical progress and technology and to better respond to the needs of an aging population
for coordinated and integrated care, all the while maintaining health spending at a level society can
afford. Achieving this requires, among other measures, organizing a clear hierarchy between hospitals
so that patient care is provided at the appropriate level, concentrating the delivery of highly specialized
services to ensure quality and safety of patients, increasing the amount of services provided on an
outpatient basis thus avoiding inpatient stays for patients where possible, and coordinating pathways
with primary and social care to ensure patients receive care in the right setting.
In Poland, the deficits and debts of public hospitals have long been a concern, which successive bail-out
plans have failed to resolve. Some argue that this is due to chronic underfunding of the sector or the
role of the health insurance fund. Our analysis here, however, shows large variation in the financial
standing of hospitals. Some regions have made a lot of progress in reducing their debt, while the
situation continues to deteriorate in others. Poor regions or regions with many hospitals are not
systematically more in debt. These results indicate that the problem does not have a simple and single
explanation and that it is possible to perform well, given the resources available. This policy note seeks
to identify the root causes of the problem and suggests that the solution will require a comprehensive
set of reforms.
For historic reasons as well as due to incentives in the current system, the Polish hospital system
remains oversized and hospitals tend to compete - rather than coordinate - with each other,
investments in new services are weighted towards those that appear profitable, in a way which does not
ultimately benefit the patients – or the tax payers. For example, where one department could serve the
needs of the regional population for open-heart surgery, three hospitals compete. In the end, each
department is underutilized, which is potentially detrimental to quality and wastes resources which
could otherwise be better used to address other bottlenecks in the system, e.g. waiting lists.

1
 Prepared by Agnès Couffinhal, Senior Economist at the Word Bank and Kate Mandeville, Public Health Specialist.
The authors are grateful to Anna Koziel who collected valuable information and provided comments as well as
Antonio Duran and the team of Tecsalud who supported the background work in regions which fed into this note.
The team thanks Marcelo Bortman, Christophe Lemiere, April Harding and Daniel Dulitzky who provided insightful
comments and suggestions on an earlier version. Boris Balabanov prepared the cover. The authors are also grateful
for comments received from the Ministry of Health.

                                                       1
Recent regulatory efforts have focused on increasing the pressure on hospital founders to ensure their
hospitals are properly managed by forcing them to cover their deficits, with the ultimate expectation
that this would rationalize the system and that hospitals which are not needed would ultimately close.
This is a welcome move as several case studies in Poland show that capable and committed
management have the capacity to pull their hospitals into good financial standing, whereas poor
management can lead to the accumulation of debt at an unsustainable pace. But the fact remains that a
number of “toxic” hospitals have not been touched, and they will continue to cripple the system until
their situation is effectively dealt with. Moreover, the experience of other developed countries suggests
that moving towards the optimum model described above requires decisive, sustained, and complex
regulatory interventions.
This policy note thus argues that increasing the accountability of hospital founders is only one part of
the reform jigsaw needed to put the system on the right path. An important way to complement these
changes is to introduce “health maps”, which measure the health needs of a local population in order to
plan the most efficient mix of services and to optimize the organization of health care providers,
including hospitals, accordingly. Currently, there is no specific regulation to ensure the right number of
hospitals provides the right mix of services. These health maps would be the tool demonstrating (for
instance) that only one of the open heart surgery unit is needed in a given region. It is immediately
evident from that example that implementation would require choosing which of the three departments
would be strengthened and which would be closed. Translating health maps into reality would thus
require making complex, controversial and politically difficult decisions in all regions, even if there is
enough evidence to show that it would ultimately benefit the public. Health maps, however important,
are only one of an array of incentives and regulations which will need to be modified to ensure that the
many actors who deliver hospital services all work in the same direction and improve the outcomes for
the population. All this will require a bold vision, strong and sustained leadership at the national level.




                                                    2
                     Executive summary and key recommendations

1. Poland has made significant progress in rationalizing its hospital system, but the modernization
agenda remains unfinished as can be seen through the systematic accumulation of liabilities by
publicly owned hospitals. Debt and arrears incurred by health facilities in the Polish health sector have
been a source of concern for more than two decades. At the end of 2012, the total debts of public
hospitals in Poland stood at 10.6 billion zlotys (0.7% GDP), 23% of which was arrears2. These debts have
been a perennial concern for successive Governments and only alleviated temporarily by various debt
relief plans.
2. This policy note outlines a pathway towards improving the financial sustainability of the hospital
sector in Poland. Major obstacles to financial health are systematically reviewed, within the context of
current and historical health reforms. The root causes of these barriers are analyzed from a managerial
as well as a health system perspective, including the role of regulatory and financing constraints. Health
systems are under tremendous pressure to adapt in the face of demographic and technological changes,
a process which is likely to redefine the role of hospitals in the future. Preliminary recommendations are
made distinguishing: (i) system-level changes which will require national-level policy interventions and
(ii) options for local government and facility managers to work better within the existing system and
enhance the chances of selecting “no regret move” investments.
3. Analysis of the debt problem shows that, in real terms, the debt stock has decreased by 17% since
its 2005 peak and the stock of arrears has been reduced by two thirds . Although the overall financial
standing of public hospitals remains worrisome, the situation has somewhat improved since 2004. In
2004 and 2005, the hospital sector’s debt represented more than 1% of GDP and 60% was in the form of
arrears (“matured liabilities). When the amount is adjusted for inflation, the debt stock has decreased
by 17% since its 2005 peak and the stock of arrears has been reduced by two thirds.
4. Differences across regions cannot be easily explained. Some regions have made a lot of progress in
reducing the stock of debt, while the situation continues to deteriorate in others. There is no correlation
between the hospital debt in a region and income for that region. Likewise, there is no relationship
between the density of beds or occupancy ratios for these beds and the level of debt. In other words,
there is no simple explanation of the variation. This picture challenges the idea that the growth of debt
in the hospital sectors has a single and straightforward explanation, for instance the underfunding of the
health sector or the role of the Health insurance fund (NFZ). Some regions are clearly more proficient at
managing the problem than others, including some which started-off in a very bad position.
5. A wave of reforms, initiated in 2009, promoted the corporatization of hospitals as a permanent
way out of the debt crisis. Public hospitals benefited from a series of bail-out programs over time with
no lasting effect. In 2009, the Government adopted a new strategy which aims to transform hospitals
into commercial code companies. The logic behind this proposal is that the corporatization ensures that
the facilities’ arrears and debts are treated as those of any commercial enterprise which faces the
possibility of bankruptcy if it cannot pay its bills. The expectation is that the increased accountability
creates powerful incentives to restructure, improve management, and transform hospital into financially
sustainable entities. Overall, the uptake of the corporatization program initiated in 2009 has been
slower than anticipated. There is little evidence so far that corporatization per se has helped improve

2
  Technically, this figure reflects the stock of debt of SPZOZs (Independent public health care entities). SPZOZ is the
traditional legal status of public hospitals. Not all SPZOZ are hospitals, and some hospitals, owned by public
entities, now are commercial code companies. Their debt is not included in this number.

                                                           3
the financial standing of facilities. Further, the hospitals with the highest stock of debt have not typically
benefitted from this reform.
6. These reforms have nevertheless brought about a welcome increase in the accountability of most
public hospital owners. Indeed, the 2011 Law on therapeutic services, which was part of the
corporatization program, also critically created an obligation for all hospital owners to cover the
hospitals’ deficits. Hospitals owners now have to face the financial consequences of allowing hospital to
run chronic deficits. This could turn out to be a powerful and lasting incentive for them to become more
proactive in the supervision and management of hospitals. The law in its current form however cannot
meaningfully be translated to all public facilities, including university hospitals and institutes, some of
which are among the most indebted facilities in Poland. The Ministry should rapidly take the necessary
steps to ensure that the responsibility and the authority for undertaking and financing the
reorganization of these facilities or for paying the price of not doing the needful are fully aligned for the
long run.
7. Whilst the reform of hospital legal status is one approach to the hospital debt problem, this note
argues that a number of external factors continue to undermine the financial sustainability of
hospitals in Poland and that more comprehensive reforms would be needed in order to bring about
long-lasting changes.
8. The Ministry of Health and many stakeholders are largely cognizant of the problems and the
possible solutions. The document groups the factors which influence a given hospital’s behavior in four
domains: governance, regulation, purchasing of health services, and the interface with other health
service providers. In each domain, it highlights some reforms which could create an environment more
conducive to improving the financial sustainability of the system. Key reforms include:
     Develop and implement service planning mechanisms. Although previous attempts at
      introducing such regulation have failed, there is an increasing demand from local governments
      for the Ministry of Health to provide a framework which would allow/facilitate and even
      incentivize national or regional coordination of service planning as well as the creation of
      hospital networks at the regional level, irrespective of ownership status. The new planning
      mechanisms should aim to adapt service delivery to better meet current and future population
      health needs in the most efficient way. They should also promote modern principles for
      organizing service delivery, including the definition of well delineated levels of care and the
      concentration of specialized services that will help ensure quality of services and the safety of
      patients. These plans, generally known as maps in Poland, should also guide and help prioritize
      much-needed investments in the sector’s infrastructure and the purchase of medical equipment
      to ensure better, more efficient and ultimately more sustainable investment.
        This planning exercise first requires setting some strategic directions and ambitious but
        achievable objectives based on present and future population needs. Second, and perhaps even
        more importantly, the frameworks and tools need to be developed which will ensure that local
        solutions emerge to meet these objectives. In a highly pluralistic system, the negotiation and
        implementation of these solutions is a very complex undertaking. Putting this in plain terms, and
        as an example, if it were rigorously and undisputedly established that only one hospital in a
        given regional capital should provide cardio-thoracic surgery, when currently three departments
        have a contract with the NFZ for these services in facilities owned by three different founders,
        how will the plan be operationalized? Who will be accountable for reaching the target? At what
        pace? How will the decision be taken of which department will remain open? In 2013, the
        Ministry of Health initiated the development of regional health maps, which is very encouraging


                                                      4
       step in the right direction, but the debate has yet to start on how these maps would be
       translated into reality.
    Improve the Diagnostic Related Group (DRG) costing base. The long term financial
     sustainability of the sector requires devising a robust and sustained costing system. Hospitals in
     Poland are paid on the basis of DRGs, which are essentially flat payments per hospital stay for
     categories of patients whose diagnostic and other characteristics suggest they should require
     similar services. In theory, DRGs generate incentives to deliver services efficiently and reduce
     unnecessary procedures but distortions in service delivery can occur if the relative weights of
     DRGs do not reflect the resources required to produce the right amount of care. Changes
     between the relative prices of different DRGs are currently made on an ad hoc basis and
     distortions generate incentives for hospitals to “invest” in some profitable DRGs and select the
     location of care (in versus outpatient) based on price rather than on principles of good medical
     practice combined with an eye for economic efficiency. Overall, the payment system should
     better (i) ensure that hospitals who end up taking care of more complex cases are not at a
     disadvantage, (ii) promote more efficient patterns of care and (iii) promote quality standards.
     Specific legislation drafted in 2010 to create a “tariff agency” was temporarily put aside by the
     Ministry which aims to include this in a broader reform package, still under discussion.
    While retaining a purchaser-provider separation, the purchasing framework should encourage
     longer-term relationships and integrated decision-making between providers and the NFZ. As
     more stringent planning mechanisms are introduced, purchasing practices will need to be
     adapted to ensure they are consistent with and even support service reorganization. This might
     require for instance limiting the number of facilities which can be selected to provide specialized
     services in one area or limiting the scope of services some categories of establishments can
     apply for. Providers should have enough certainty about strategic directions which will be
     pursued in the mid-term to be able to make rational investment decisions. Reducing the
     uncertainty – perceived or actual – in the facilities revenue stream should further help them
     access financing for these investments.
    The promotion of modern, high quality service delivery should become a more explicit part of
     the NFZ mandate. The NFZ should be empowered to use pricing and contracting to pursue
     system-level objectives such as the promotion of outpatient surgery or the coordination of care.
     All in all, the NFZ will need to become a much more selective and proactive purchaser of
     services. The Government has been considering draft legislation to decentralize the NFZ. If the
     process goes ahead, it would be important to articulate how the new system would contribute
     to resolving the problems laid out above and help strengthening strategic purchasing along the
     above lines.
    In parallel, a modernization of the quality assurance system is required. It should move away
     from – and possibly remove - some detailed input-oriented regulations, and veer towards a
     greater focus on processes, output, and outcomes. A new model of clinical governance will
     require - among other - developing guidelines and protocols (linking with provider payments)
     and strengthening data collection and analysis. Ultimately, the payer (NFZ) should be able to link
     payments to the quality of care. A law had been drafted in 2010 to strengthen clinical
     governance but was not presented to the Parliament. The Ministry currently envisages starting
     this process in oncology.
9. Even in the absence of systemic and regulatory changes, options are already available to the
hospitals and local governments, some of which are already being used. As highlighted earlier,
however, even within the complex system they operate in, the performance of different regions appears

                                                  5
to vary greatly. This means that at least some founders and hospitals have become better at overcoming
the existing constraints. Unpacking this, and taking some examples from good performers, have led to
the following recommendations, which could be taken on board by local governments even in the
absence of major systemic reforms:
        Invest in developing and producing hospital indicator dashboards. A minimum level of data
         reporting is mandated for all facilities across Poland. Most founders receive the data but seldom
         analyze it systematically or make comparisons with other facilities. Voivodships, which typically
         own a large number of facilities, would be in a good position to impose higher standards of data
         collection and benchmark facilities among themselves but the vast majority of them lack tools,
         time, and/or capacity. From a business perspective, it would make sense for founders and/or
         hospitals to individually or even jointly invest in developing and producing hospital indicators
         dashboards to monitor the costs, quality, efficiency and impact of delivered services. The
         systematic documentation and publication of comparative performance data might further
         generate leverage to impose politically difficult changes.
        Increase management capacity and oversight. Several case studies and policy dialogue
         conducted between 2012 and 2014 in Poland illustrate the extent to which management makes
         a difference to facilities’ performance. Many hospitals remain under-managed, a problem
         hospital owners should be in a position to address. Political pressure to maintain the status quo
         remains a powerful deterrent. Successful restructurings have usually been driven by innovative
         managers (either in facilities or in the local government) with strong and sustained political
         support.
        Develop systematic evaluations and joint-learning. Successful examples of innovative
         management approaches are not systematically documented or shared in learning fora.
         Voivodships and other local Governments could clearly benefit from collecting and sharing
         lessons learned and assessing the impact innovative approaches have had on various
         performance criteria.
        Develop mid to long term strategic frameworks and cooperate with other hospital owners.
         Health maps and planning tool may eventually be introduced but at the end of the day, adapting
         them will be a matter of negotiating solutions and finding compromises locally. In other words,
         reorganizations will ultimately be designed and negotiated within and sometimes across
         regional boundaries. To date, many local structuring and investment decisions remain tactical in
         nature. They focus on short term financial opportunities and constraints and fail to incorporate
         best practice knowledge and evidence on changing patterns of care, population health etc. As an
         illustration, Voivodships, despite the fact that they own many facilities in any given region,
         continue to see their hospitals as separate (and competing) entities and as far as we know, none
         ever developed “network-level” strategic reorganization plans. The 2011 law provides
         opportunities to merge facilities owned by single or different local Governments but thus far, it
         does not appear that these options have been exerted3. The unstable regulatory environment
         and the lack of clear directions may in part account for that, but the current environment
         nevertheless provides plenty of opportunities for “no-regret” moves. Regions and local
         governments could greatly enhance their strategic planning capacity. Ideally, this strategic
         planning at the regional level should not limit itself to health but should include the social sector
         which contributes to meeting the needs of the aging population.


3
    A group of hospitals in Dolnaslaskie is apparently considering such a merger.

                                                            6
10. The analysis suggests that Poland still has a solid hospital reform agenda to tackle. There is a fair
amount of technical and expert agreement on what the problems are as well as on many of the
“blocks” which are needed to build a sustainable solution.
11. To summarize and conclude, the experience of other countries points to the need to strengthen
system-level stewardship in Poland4.
12. Well–performing pluralistic and market-oriented systems rely on complex regulation and strong
institutions. Health systems across the world rely more or less on market forces and competition to
achieve the outcomes they set for themselves in terms of access to quality services and efficiency in the
use of public resources. Countries with well-performing pluralistic systems and which put more
emphasis on market-based incentives, such as the Netherlands, Germany or Estonia, also have
developed over time strong regulation, monitoring mechanisms, and institutions which typically aim to
enable collaborative solutions in order to ensure that the system is moving towards system-level
targets.
13. These tools and institutions are underdeveloped in Poland. Poland has a highly pluralistic hospital
system and - for instance through the most recent corporatization reforms - has generally sought to
increase the space for market forces to reshape the sector. Yet, as highlighted in this paper, competition
between hospitals as it is currently taking place in Poland has probably had detrimental effect on the
targeting of investments, the fragmentation of the system, and even quality. In Poland, no explicit
strategy is set out for the hospital (or generally the service delivery) system. There is no common
framework to analyze the performance of individual hospitals or of regional networks, and to provide
this information to decisions-makers or the public. There are no formal systematic and organized
discussions between hospital founders, either nationally or in regions. More broadly, when fundamental
trends in medical progress, population health and expectations as well as financial constraints call for a
better organization and coordination of service providers, no entity has taken the responsibility to steer
the system in this direction.
14. Strengthening stewardship will take efforts to build consensus, sustained political will and a
measure of investment. Transforming and modernizing the system to improve its capacity to meet the
needs of the population may require building a consensus on a comprehensive diagnostic about the root
causes of the problem and the objectives of the reform. Considerations about the financial health of
individual hospitals, although important, cannot be the only area of focus, especially since there are
potential conflicts between short-term hospital level decisions and system-wide sustainability
objectives. In addition to a broader-based agreement that improving the hospital system sustainability
will require complex and concerted interventions over a period of time, a strong political commitment
to reforming the system will be needed. These changes will require that more resources be spent to
lead, organize and manage the hospital system as well as to monitor its contribution to health system
outcomes.
15. The comprehensive reform should probably start with the development of a strategy for service
delivery. Once key parameters are set and main options are identified, the pathway to building the
institutions and accountability mechanisms which are required to manage the pluralistic system of
Poland will need to be designed at country level, taking into account institutional, technical and political
factors. This pathway should be designed collaboratively and a dialogue platform should be put in place
to involve the wide range of stakeholders which would be affected by a reform to enhance the system’s
stewardship.

4
 Stewardship is understood here as the overall leadership of the (hospital) system to ensure it contributes to
achieving better outcomes.

                                                         7
    Improving the financial sustainability of the hospital sector in Poland:
                       towards a systemic approach

                                                 Policy Note


1 Introduction
1. Over the past twenty years, the Polish health system has undergone several deep systemic
changes. In many respects, and in comparison with countries which joined the EU in the past decade,
the health system performs quite effectively and delivers services at a reasonable cost. Health
outcomes such as life expectancy are increasing steadily. At the same time, substantial scope remains
for improvements in resource allocation and service delivery.
2. Poland spends more of its healthcare budget on inpatient hospital care than comparable
countries, signaling an area of inefficiency that requires reform ahead of demographic trends.
Expenditure on inpatient hospital care as a proportion of total health expenditures is the fifth highest in
the OECD, behind Australia, Austria, the Netherlands and Japan5. There are high admission rates for
conditions and surgical procedures that can be treated equally well without inpatient care. This
overreliance on hospital care is unlikely to be sustainable in light of demographic trends: the fertility
rate in Poland is one of the lowest among the EU27, and the effective old-age dependency ratio in 2060
will be the highest in Europe at over 100%.6
3. Ownership of public hospital facilities7 is fragmented between different levels of government,
leading to multiple stakeholders and a lack of accountability. As in many Eastern Europe countries,
when territorial governments were created, they were given the ownership of hospitals which serve the
population in their territory. In Poland8, Voivodships and Powiats manage regional and local hospitals
respectively, with universities and a vast array of other public units managing additional facilities. Thus
in any given region, powiat, Voivodship, university and other publicly-owned hospitals coexist. As this
note will develop, the system is organized in such a way that this creates competition among levels of
Government rather than the coordination necessary for efficiency and quality gains. In addition, as until
recently they had no direct stake in the financial sustainability of service delivery facilities, the vast
majority of entities which owned public hospitals took limited interest in the monitoring of their
performance and their management.




5
  Boulhol, H., et al. (2012), "Improving the Health-Care System in Poland", OECD Economics Department Working
Papers, No. 957, OECD Publishing.
6
  European Union, 2009
7
  The relevance of the distinction between private and public hospitals has decreased since the passing of the 2011
Law on Therapeutic Activities. The term “public facility” is used in this note to describe hospitals whose f ounding
body – or main owner - is a public entity. The health facility itself could be a commercial code company.
8
  There are 3 levels of local governments in Poland: Voivodships (Regions) of which there are 16 since the 1999
administrative reform, with a population between 1 and 5 million, Powiats (districts) and Gminas (municipalities).
Local government leaders are elected and manage independent budgets, financed partly from the center and
partly from their own resources. Poland moved quite rapidly towards decentralization in many sectors, including
health. Local governments own the vast majority of public hospitals (services are funded by a health insurance
scheme as explained later).

                                                         8
4. Poland has made significant progress in rationalizing its hospital system and reducing the number
of beds, but the reform agenda remains unfinished as evidenced by the continuing debt issue. A key
manifestation of this has been the systematic and inordinate accumulation of liabilities by publicly
owned hospitals. These debts9 have been a perennial concern for successive Governments and only
alleviated temporarily by various debt relief plans.
5. Over time, the government has implemented reforms to increase the accountability of hospital
owners to tackle the debt issue, but additional measures are required to help address the causes of the
problem in addition to the symptom.
6. This note outlines a path to improving the financial sustainability of the hospital sector in Poland.
The “anatomy” of the debt problem is examined and major obstacles to financial health are
systematically reviewed. The root causes of these barriers are analyzed from a managerial as well as a
health system perspective, including the role of regulatory and financing constraints. In making the
“case for change”, the report also discusses how secular trends, for instance in population health and
service delivery, need to be taken into account as plans to reshape the hospital system are being
formulated. Preliminary recommendations are made distinguishing: (i) system-level changes which will
require national-level policy interventions and (ii) options for Voivodships and facility managers to work
better within the existing system and enhance the chances of selecting “no regret move” investments.


2    Hospital debt in Poland: scope of the problem and attempted solutions

2.1 Anatomy of the “debt problem”
7. Debt and arrears incurred by health facilities in the Polish health sector have been a source of
concern for more than two decades. At the end of 2012, the total debts of public hospitals in Poland
stood at 10.6 billion PLN (0.7% GDP), 23% of which was arrears (“matured liabilities”). Although the
overall financial standing of the public hospitals remains worrisome, the situation has somewhat
improved since 2004 (Figure 1 and 2). In 2004 and 2005, the hospital sector’s debt represented more
than 1% of GDP and 60% was in the form of arrears. Over time, in real terms, the debt stock has
decreased by 17% since its 2005 peak and the stock of arrears has been reduced by two thirds. A debt
forgiveness plan implemented by the central government in 2005 and 2006 may be a factor in this
decline, although it has been argued this only restructured the debt.




9
  Various terms and translations are used to describe “debts”. The convention in this document is that generally
the term debt refers to all the liabilities of the hospitals. “Arrears” are all the overdue liabilities, and are thus
included in the debt. A deficit is the excess of hospital expenditures over revenue in one financial year i.e. the
increase in debt over that time period.

                                                           9
 Figure 1: Overall debt and arrears as a % of GDP                                                                      Figure 2: Change in the stock of debts and arrears in
 between 2004 and 2012                                                                                                 real terms (2005 prices, million PLN)
                                            1.2%



                                                                                      Arrears as % GDP
                                            1.0%
                                                                                      Debt as % GDP
     Percentage of gross domestic product




                                            0.8%




                                            0.6%




                                            0.4%




                                            0.2%




                                            0.0%
                                                   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008     2009   2010      2011   2012
                                                                               Year


 Source: Ministry of Health

8. The analysis of publicly available data on debt and arrears challenges the idea that the debt in the
hospital sectors has a single and straightforward explanation. It is a widely held view that hospital
debts arise from the chronic underfunding of the health sector or the role of the Narodowy Fundusz
Zdrowia (NFZ) - the national health insurance fund. In order to investigate this, an analysis was carried
out of aggregate information about hospital debts and arrears by regions published by the Ministry of
Health. The data is insufficient to analyze the determinants of hospital debt, yet the following
conclusions can be made (see Annex for additional details):
 Debt levels vary greatly among regions. The average stock of debt per hospital bed in 2012 is
  around PLN 68,000, but levels range by region in a ratio of one to three around this figure. The debt
  per bed is over PLN 85,000 in Mazowieckie, Pomorskie, and over PLN 100,000 in Kujawsko-
  Pomorskie and Lubuskie). At the other hand of the spectrum, in Opolskie, Zachodniopomorskie and
  Warmińsko-Mazurskie, the debt per hospital bed is below PLN 40,000.
 Progress in managing the debt is very unequal. For instance, Dolnośląskie, which had the second
  highest debt burden per bed in 2006, is at the average for Poland in 2012. The debt was also
  reduced by more than 45% in real terms in Łódzkie, Pomorskie and Lubuskie. In contrast, the
  situation in Lubelskie, Kujawsko-Pomorskie and Mazowieckie continues to deteriorate.
 No simple explanation can account for regional differences. First, the very existence of such
  variations challenges the commonly accepted idea that hospital debts arise from chronic
  underfunding or the role of the NFZ. Further, debt is not more prevalent in poor than rich regions or
  in regions that have large infrastructure. Analyses nevertheless suggest that regions which have
  made significant strides in reducing the stock of debt are also regions where the number of beds has
  decreased more rapidly than elsewhere.
 Similarly, not one single category of hospital owner appears to perform systematically worse than
  the others. In fact, the Ministry of Health reports that around 67% of all SPZOZ10 are free from debt
  and that 10% of these entities account for 80% of the stock. In other words, not all hospitals in
  Poland are facing financial problems or high levels of debt, and the majority is in reasonable
  financial standing.

10
     SPZOZ (Samodzielny publiczny zakład opieki zdrowotnej) is the default legal status of public health care entities.

                                                                                                                       10
2.2 Regulatory efforts to tackle the “debt problem”
9. There have been repeated attempts at resolving hospital debt issues. After a series of debt
forgiveness plans by the central government in 2005 and 2006, hospital debt rapidly accumulated again,
leading a newly elected government in 2007 to search for an alternative plan to improve hospital
financial sustainability.

10. The most recent efforts focus on corporatization as a means of achieving sustainability . In 2008, a
proposal was put forward by the government for the mandatory transformation of all publicly owned
hospitals into commercial companies. The logic behind this proposal is that the transformation of a
hospital into a commercial entity ensures that its arrears are treated as those of any commercial
enterprise which is required to follow commercial financial reporting requirements and thus face the
possibility of bankruptcy if it cannot pay its bills. The expectation is that ultimately, the increased
accountability of hospital owners creates powerful incentives to restructure, improve management, and
transform hospital into financially sustainable entities.

11. Corporatization (in the legal
sense) was encouraged under the                  Box 1: The impact of a hospital restructuring on a Powiat’s
“Plan B” reforms of 2009. Whilst an              finances: A concrete illustration
initial proposal to corporatize all
                                                 In 2003, the Powiat council of Kluczborski (Opolskie) decided to
hospitals was vetoed by the then-
                                                 corporatize the local hospital. At that time, the hospital debt was equal to
president, a subsequent proposal
                                                 45% of the powiat’s revenues, and the Powiat’s own debt represented
nicknamed Plan B was put forward in
                                                 25% of its revenues. The new hospital started off with no debt but
2009. This offered state assistance to           became responsible for funding its own investments. A 2008 case study
local governments that transformed               details the managerial decisions which were taken and the transformation
hospitals under their ownership into             of the hospital which was able to undertake capital investments starting in
commercial companies. Critically,                2005 and pay dividends to the Powiat in 2008. The cost of tackling the
transformation was undertaken on a               hospital restructuring was very high for the Powiat: its operating deficit
voluntary basis – in other words,                dipped to 16% of its revenues in 2005 and its liabilities to revenues ratio
hospital owners self-selected into the           reached 57% in 2007. In 2011, the debt to revenue ratio of the Powiat was
scheme. Overall, the take-up of Plan B           close to 70%. In 2012, the Powiat’s operating deficit was still 4% of its
was limited, with 24 hospitals                   revenues. Its debt to revenue ratio formally decreased to 56%, in part as a
transformed into commercial entities             consequence of the sale by the Powiat to the hospital of a building it is
by its conclusion in December 2011               operating in. However, at the end of 2012, the Powiat took out a loan to
(Source: Ministry of Health)11.                  finance investment in schools which further increased the ratio to nearly
                                                 80%. Clearly, six years after having taken on the hospital’s restructuring,
                                                 the Powiat’s finances remain unbalanced and the bailing out of the
12. The 2011 Law on Therapeutic                  hospital has undermined the Powiats capacity to undertake other
Activities built on the principles of            investments.
Plan B but critically now forces
                                          Source: Malinowska-Misiag E, Misiag W, Tomalak M (2008) The use of
hospital owners to be liable for
                                          Public Resources in hospitals, Case study of Poland, Gdansk institute of
hospital deficits. The law obliges all Market Economics and public data.
hospital owners to cover any deficit
incurred within three months of the end of the fiscal year (starting in 2013 for 2012 financial results).
Founders that choose to not address these liquidity issues are required, by this law, to initiate, and
complete within 12 months, a corporatization or a liquidation process during which the existing debt of
the facility will be absorbed and/or restructured. More specifically, if the facility is corporatized, the


11
     Over the same period, 30 additional hospitals changed their status but not under plan B.

                                                            11
newly created entity’s initial debt cannot exceed 50% of its expected revenues. In order to encourage
speedy adoption, the law provided for a 1.7 billion PLN public debt relief program to which hospitals
needed to apply before the end of 2013, otherwise their debt would not be assumed by the
government12.
13. The impact of the 2011 law on local governments’ finances is likely to be significant. Simulations
were undertaken using 2010 public information on local governments’ public finances and data
obtained from the Ministry of Health on hospital finances. Only aggregate data was available by region
and by type of local government. On average, data showed that Voivodships’ deficits represented
around 8% of their revenues. If the 2010 deficit of Voivodship-owned hospitals was added to this result,
the Voivodships’ deficits increased by 3 percentage points on average (and by more than 5 percentage
points in 6 Voivodships)13. This analysis put into perspective the debt of the local governments and that
of the hospitals they owned. Local governments’ debt, excluding hospitals, represented around 3.9% of
GDP in 2010. If the debt of the local-government owned hospitals was included, this figure increased to
4.4% of GDP. If Voivodship hospitals’ debt was added to the Voivodship governments’ debt, their ratio
of debt to revenue would nearly double, from 30 to 58 percent14. The increase appears smaller for
Powiats (11 percentage points) and Gminas (one percentage point) but this average masks the fact that
many local governments do not own hospitals15. In sum, although hospitals debt are not formally part of
the local governments’ debts, the stakes are quite high for them and it is likely that the law will create a
strong incentive for local government to become much more diligent in their management of hospitals.




12
   Not all debt was eligible and additional criteria had to be met.
13
   This is an underestimate. The data availed by the Ministry of Health only includes, by level of government, the
sum of all revenues of hospitals and all expenditures of hospitals, not the actual result of each hospital. So for
instance, if a Voivodship owns two hospitals with a deficit of 50 and one hospital with a surplus of 100, the
aggregate result is shown as zero, and the law may appear to have no impact on the deficit of the Voivodship,
when in fact at the end of the year, the Voivodship would have to cover the deficit of the two hospitals (100). A
similar simulation shows that powiats’ deficits increase by one percentage point. However, the result is not as
meaningful as, in this case, the ‘net’ deficit of hospitals is split among all Powiats, not ju st those who own
hospitals, which further underestimates the result.
14
   Until 2014 there was a uniform ceiling on local governments’ debt of 60 percent of revenues. The ceiling is now
replaced by a different fiscal rule for local governments which also aims to ensure debt sustainability at the local
level.
15
   There are 314 Powiats and 65 Powiat cities. The number of hospitals jointly owned by these two categories of
local governments is 230. In other words, 60% of Powiat and Powiat cities or less own a hospital (some Powiat
cities, like Warsaw, own more than one).

                                                         12
Table 1: Decision of founders regarding 2012 deficit (as of August 2013)

                                                                                   Decision of Founder
                         Number of                                     Facility covers
                                          Deficit       Founder                                           Closing      No
          Region         SPZOZ with                                       the deficit
                                          (total)        Covers                          Transformation      of      decision
                          a deficit                                     from its own
                                                         Deficit                                          facility    taken
                                                                           sources
Dolnośląskie                      32     15,651,637                5                7                2           3             4
Kujawsko-Pomorskie                14      6,806,480                0                9                2           0             1
Lubelskie                          4      9,741,817                4                0                0           0             0
Lubuskie                           2        458,655                1                0                1           0             0
Łódzkie                           25     14,563,481                5                6                8           0             0
Małopolskie                       10      3,088,954                8                0                1           1             0
Mazowieckie                       40   101,802,751                 3                5                4           2             0
Opolskie                           4      1,655,007                1                2                1           0             0
Podkarpackie                      12      7,054,050            11                   0                0           1          0
Podlaskie                          5      1,959,237                0                1                0           0             4
Pomorskie                          5      4,993,922                1                0                1           2             1
Śląskie                           25     56,716,100            11                   0                3           0         11
Świętokrzyskie                    13     10,666,882                3               10                0           0             0
Warmińsko-Mazurskie               10      3,927,080                1                4                1           1             3
Wielkopolskie                      5     13,129,452                2                0                1           0             2
Zachodniopomorskie                 6      3,124,464                2                0                2           0             2
TOTAL:                           212   255,339,969             58                  44               27          10         28



14. In 2012, the deficit vast majority of SPZOZ in the red was eventually covered, either from their
own resources or by their founders. The 2011 law implementation effectively started in 2013, when
founders had to decide what to do about the 2012 deficits. Table 1 shows that in 2012, 212 public
hospitals incurred a deficit (around a quarter of public facilities). The deficit accumulated across these
facilities was 255 million PLN16. As of August 2013, founders has decided to transform 27 of these
hospitals, applying for around 100 million PLN worth of support (less than 10% of the sum availed under
the law) 17. The decision had also been made to close ten facilities. In around half the hospitals with a
deficit, a decision was made to cover the deficit, either from founder or hospital resources.




16
   The 2010 data discussed earlier showed a deficit of 1 billion PLN for public hospitals that year. Although it is too
early to identify a trend, it will be interesting to find out if this significant reduction in deficit and promising sign of
greater financial discipline is sustained.
17
   By December 2013, 43 hospitals were slated for transformation and applications covered 25% of the funds.

                                                             13
15. The recent reform program has over time led to the transformation of around 20% of SPZOZ into
commercial code companies. In total, 168 public hospitals (around 20% of public hospitals) now operate
as corporatized entities under commercial law. Out of these, 71 (less than half) were transformed
between 1999 and 2008, prior to the introduction of incentives by the government. From 2009 to 2011,
a further 54 hospitals were transformed, out of which 24 were under „Plan B”. A PLN 1.38 million
envelope was available to support transformations under plan B, of which around 55% was eventually
used, mainly to pay-off the transformed hospitals’ arrears on public debt. On average, local
Governments which used plan B were able to obtain a subsidy of around half of the transformed
hospitals’ debt they had to cover. Overall, uptake of corporatization has been slower than anticipated by
the promoters of the reform and the absorption of the available subsidies mediocre.
16. Another question is whether the reform program initiated in 2009 has helped tackle the debt
problem. According to the Ministry, over the last 14 years, around PLN 3 billion has been spent from the
state budget for debt forgiveness and corporatization initiatives. In addition, the BGK Bank has provided
PLN 2 billion loans to local governments for health, out of which 70% was written off. Yet, as shown
earlier, the stock of debt of public hospitals has been roughly stable in nominal terms over the last few
years. Comparing with previous periods, achieving this stabilization of the debt is certainly a positive
result. A separate question is whether the reform program can help reduce the stock of debt. A gradual
decrease can certainly be expected, as transformations and liquidations – which typically require that
the facility’s debt be renegotiated and at least partly paid-off, will happen over time. However,
discussions with stakeholders suggest that the worse-off hospitals (in terms of debt ratio) have for the
most part been unable to benefit from the new generation of debt relief programs because their
founders cannot absorb the share of the debt that is theirs to pay-off. In other words, even if they
wanted to transform the hospitals to benefit from the subsidies or to limit their responsibility in the
hospitals’ financial stake in the long run, some founders are simply unable to take advantage of the
opportunity. Given that the debt is concentrated among a small number of hospitals, it may be the case
that the most indebted hospitals will require specific support to extinguish the debt.
17. A systematic evaluation of the impact of the transformation on hospital performance would be
beneficial. The Ministry of Health reports that it monitors the financial standing of transformed
hospitals, but no systematic evaluation of the impact of these transformations is available. A 2013
report from the Supreme Audit Office18 examined 15 cases of corporatization and reviewed the
adequacy of the use of public funds as well as the impact on the transformed entities. For 12 of the 15
entities, the decision to transform was motivated by their very poor financial standing. Recognizing that
it was too early to draw firm conclusions, the report showed that:
 Four of the facilities had rapidly turned the financial situation around through improvements in
  management, a reorganization of services to meet population needs and an adjustment of the
  capacity to the actual size of the NFZ contract which translated into significant reduction in staff;
 In most other cases, the transformed hospitals were still generating losses. In general, in these
  cases, no action had been taken to improve management, restructure activities, and the number of
  employees had not changed much;
 A number of local governments were shown to not have paid close attention to the rules governing
  the process and a number of irregularities were detected.




18
     Najwyzsza Izba Kontroli –NIK

                                                   14
18. Good quality management, rather than corporatization per se, appears to be a key driver for
success. The report of the Audit Office as well as the 2008 case studies19 provided a number of examples
which contrasted success and failure; the former appeared to be systematically characterized by
proactive and strategic management and the latter by lack of decisive action which led to a downward
spiral. These studies further found no evidence that corporatization systematically brought good
management about or that good management and the restructuring of a facility was not possible in the
context of an SPZOZ. Case studies of successful and unsuccessful restructuring all pointed towards
staffing levels as a major lever to reduce cost, without necessarily decreasing activity. In other words,
productivity gains. Other success factors included a strong coordination between the local governments
and the hospital managers.
19. Over the last few years, the accountability of hospital founders has substantially increased.
Repeated bailing out of hospitals in financial difficulty by the central government in the past has
undermined a culture of “sink or swim”. The new wave of reform may have helped reverse the trend. It
has led to some hospital restructurings, including outside of formal debt relief programs. Some local
governments are also developing innovative solutions, such as leasing hospitals to private management
firms and generally it appears that they pay more attention to the management of hospitals. The
incentives put in place by the 2011 law have the potential to keep a check on the level of debts incurred
by hospitals and avoid further ballooning. It is important to recognize that corporatization per se does
not alleviate the pressure governments are under to maintain facilities open. Hospital closure, whether
of a newly privatized entity or a publicly owned facility, will still face public and political resistance.
Further, so far, many of the most indebted hospitals have remained out of the reform realm. The
credibility of the entire program hinges on the government’s ability to manage the resulting political
pressure.
20. Is this enough? Whilst the reforms to legal liability are one approach to the hospital debt problem,
there are a number of continuing external constraints to the financial sustainability of hospitals in
Poland. These are discussed in detail in the next section, followed by recommendations for more
comprehensive reforms in order to bring about long-lasting changes.


3 Constraints to financial health: a systemic view
3.1 Proposing an analysis framework
21. No hospital works in isolation. Each facility is part of a complex health system, interacting with many
other entities and actors at different levels of the health system as part of the daily “business” of
providing healthcare. Each of these exerts an influence on the behavior of hospitals, shaped by the
broader national context and international trends20. The following lays out a framework which organizes
the factors which influence hospital behavior. The framework is presented and applied to Poland.




19
   Malinowska-Misiag E, Misiag W, Tomalak M (2008) The use of Public Resources in hospitals, Case study of
Poland, Gdansk institute of Market Economics
20
  Hospitals in a Changing Europe, Editors Martin McKee and Judith Healy, European Observatory 2002


                                                       15
            Figure 3: Factors influencing hospital behavior: a framework and its application to Poland




                                                                                 21
                                       Source: Adapted from Jakab et al (2002)

22. Figure 3 groups the factors which influence a given hospitals’ behavior in four domains . The first
domain is governance, understood here as the active exercise of ownership, incorporating oversight and
accountability of both corporate and clinical processes. In Poland, as noted in the previous section,
hospitals are owned by a very diverse group of hospital owners/founders. Secondly, regulation, which in
Poland is primarily issued and enforced by the Ministry of Health and third, purchasing, which is
conducted by the NFZ. The fourth set of factors which influence hospital behavior is the hospital’s
interface with other service providers: other (neighboring) hospitals, as well as primary, community,
and potentially social care providers.
23. The framework focuses on mezzo-level governance. The four-domain framework presented here
focuses on a “meso”-level analysis, but it is important acknowledge two additional “macro” and “micro”
issues. First, on the “macro” level, the characteristics of each domain are, in large part, organized by the
Government (or the Ministry of Health). Indeed, the Government insofar as it is in charge of organizing
the health system and improving its overall performance, selects the laws and regulations which define
the boundaries and rules of the games for governance, purchasing, regulation. It can also influence the
organization of service delivery. In other words, the Ministry of Health or more broadly the Government
is meant to exercise overall stewardship for the hospital sector, irrespective of hospital ownership.



21
  Jakab, M. Preker, A. Harding, A., Hawkins, L. (2002). The introduction of market forces in the public hospital
sector: from new public sector management to organizational reform.

                                                         16
24. On the “micro” level, it is important to acknowledge that hospitals, at the core of the framework
and represented here in the center, are implicitly identified with their managers. In the process of
running the facilities, managers must manage the interface with other providers, adhere to regulation,
be accountable to the entities that govern them and respond to the incentives set by those who
purchase services. In reality, and in addition to the institutional and external influences described above,
managers also face other forms of direct internal pressure, for instance from their staff. More than half
of hospital income is spent on its employees in the form of salaries, and they hold considerable sway in
the running of their facility. In particular, physicians form an especially powerful lobby group that hold
significant influence over service provision, staffing and equipment decisions.
25. The following sections will look in turn at the four quadrants, starting with a brief description of the
service delivery system. The intention here is not to be comprehensive but rather to highlight the
problems and main bottlenecks in each area that help explain the situation of Polish hospitals.

3.2 Health system and service delivery environment
26. Health systems in Europe are under tremendous pressure to adapt in the face of well-known
challenges, a process which is likely to redefine service delivery and the role of hospitals. The first of
this constraint is the economic situation which puts pressure on the public and private resources
available to finance health care and creates pressure for more efficiency. The second is aging: the
proportion of people aged over 65 years old in Poland is expected to double by 2035, and this older
population may require more medical and social care22. At the same time, innovations in medical care
and technology have the potential to reshape the hospital landscape. Developments in minimally
invasive surgery and anesthesia have led to a greater proportion of surgery undertaken as day cases,
reducing lengthy pre- and post-operative stays. Many conditions are now fully managed in primary care
and outpatient care, allowing patients to avoid disruptive inpatient stays. There is also a need to
concentrate specialized services to provide access to the best quality of care and complex treatment in
facilities that can deal with increasingly polypathological patients. These trends in technology and
innovation contribute further pressure to changing the role of hospitals to optimally meet population
health needs ahead of demographic trends23.
27. The required adaptation is perhaps more difficult to achieve in health systems which, like in
Poland, remain shaped by a Semashko legacy. Health systems in Eastern Europe were modeled on the
Soviet “Semashko” system with highly centralized planning and considerable investment into physical
and human resources. Inpatient care was seen as the gold standard, with the main function of primary
care being to identify and refer cases up to secondary care. Many monoprofile hospitals were
established to concentrate specialist services, which are increasingly ill-adapted for a patient population
with multiple co-existing diseases. This has led to a legacy of hospital overcapacity, combined with
sentimental attachment by the population to their local hospitals with fierce resistance to closure.
Conversely, primary and outpatient care are typically underdeveloped.


22
   The complexity of health problems tends to increase as populations age, with more people suffering from
multiple comorbidities and chronic diseases, whilst receiving a wide range of treatments that could potentially
interact with each other. Adapting to this requires: i) emphasis on health and wellness and disease prevention
programs that target the main causes of morbidity and premature mortality, ii) coordination of care across health
and social services, as well as across different levels of the health care system; and iii) recognition of the important
role played by primary care providers in helping patients optimize their medical care.
23
   The influence of population trends, the economic situation and innovations goes beyond “service delivery and
impact the entire health system – which is why they are represented in an “outer circle”.

                                                          17
28. There is evidence that service provision is disproportionately focused towards inpatient care.
Poland has high admission rates compared to other OECD countries for ambulatory care-sensitive
conditions like diabetes and asthma for which treatment approaches are available that avoid costly
inpatient stays when implemented correctly. In addition, surgical procedures are contracted in such a
way that hospitals are reimbursed more for inpatient admission, discouraging the development of
ambulatory surgery facilities. For example, cataract surgery performed without hospital admission
accounts for more than 97% of cases in Sweden, Finland and the Netherlands, whereas it is below 35%
in Poland. 24 This signals an overuse of inpatient care, to the detriment of primary and ambulatory care.


Figure 4: Trends in acute care hospital beds per 100,000 in selected European countries, 2000 - 2011




29. Poland has made substantial progress in re-organizing the hospital system but some problems
remain. In 2009, there were 754 general hospitals, of which 70% were public and 52 psychiatric
hospitals in Poland. The proportion of private hospitals has increased from 5% in 2000 to 30% in 2009.
Overall, analysis shows:
 There is still overcapacity in comparison with other EU members (Figure 4). At 429 acute hospital
    beds per 100,000 population in 2011, this was still significantly higher than the average for the EU15
    of 343 per 100,000.
 The distribution of beds across regions within Poland shows substantial regional differences, which
    is historical and does not reflect current or future population health needs (Lubelskie has 60% more
    beds per population than Pomorskie).
 The number of monoprofile institutions also has substantially decreased.




24
  Boulhol, H. et al. (2012), “Improving the Health-Care System in Poland”, OECD Economics Department Working
Papers, No. 957, OECD Publishing.

                                                       18
    A large number of hospitals in Poland are rather small. Fifty percent of all hospitals in Poland have
     fewer than 150 beds25 and private facilities tend to be smaller. While the evidence that economies
     of scale can be achieved beyond a certain hospital size is limited, there is evidence that quality of
     care increases with volume in many surgical and some medical specialties. Also, larger but fewer
     hospitals might be easier to staff to optimal levels. A degree of further consolidation of
     infrastructure would certainly be warranted in Poland on these two grounds.
30. Hospital infrastructure is ageing and requires significant investment. One of the results of
sustained overcapacity in a context of limited public resources was chronic underinvestment and poor
maintenance of hospital infrastructure: a problem which is now coming to the fore. According to a 2006
survey by the Ministry of Health, the average age of hospital buildings was 42 years. Some public
hospitals use buildings constructed before the Second World War, whereas the majority of private
facilities have been built after 1999 and tend to have better infrastructure. Although funding for health
services from the NFZ should also enable hospitals to pay for maintenance and renovations, there is
rarely sufficient funding remaining for upkeep of infrastructure after current expenditures26. Capital
investment, on the other hand, is financed by hospital owners. Many facilities will require significant
upgrading in the next few years if current patterns of service provision are to be maintained.
31. Poland has received considerable investment for hospital infrastructure from the European Union
under the current Operational Programme 2007-201312. Whilst further funding for infrastructure and
modernization may be available under the next Operational Programme, sustained funding for the
health system under the next Operational Programme is not yet certain. Combined with hesitant
economic growth in the context of the continuing international financial crisis that may lead to
decreased government health expenditures and household disposable income, this uncertainty of
funding makes the economy a key shaper of the health system environment that influences the actions
of all the key agencies connected to hospitals.

3.3 The governance of hospitals
32. Ownership of public hospital facilities is fragmented between different levels of government. As
often happened in transition economies, existing hospitals were devolved to different levels of
Government based on their level of complexity. When territorial governments were created, they were
given the ownership of hospitals which serve the population in their territory, with regional
governments (Voivodships) managing regional hospitals and lower level government – Powiats (districts)
and Gminas (municipalities) – typically managing local hospitals. In Poland, ownership is particularly
fragmented: hospitals can also be owned by the central government either directly (Ministry of Health
but also Ministry of Interior and Defense) or more indirectly (clinical hospitals are owned by universities
but supervised by the Ministry of Health). In any given region, thus Powiat, Voivodship, university and
other public hospitals coexist. Table 2 provides an overview of the role of various categories of hospital
founders.


25
   “… hospital bed is not the physical structure, but shorthand for a comprehensive package of nursing care,
supporting staff and monitoring equipment. It can encompass one of 20 long-stay beds in a rehabilitation ward
staffed by a single nurse to a high-technology bed with one-to-one care in an intensive care unit. With this
variation, bed numbers as a hospital indicator reveals less and less about the capacity or expense of a hospital and
it is difficult to make valid comparisons” (Hospitals in a Changing Europe, Editors Martin McKee and Judith Healy,
European Observatory 2002). Additionally, as the criteria used for classifying beds in Poland are often unclear, if
not ambiguous, these numbers should be interpreted with caution.
26
   Poland: Health System in Review. Health Systems in Transition series, 2011, European Observatory

                                                         19
Table 2: Indicative breakdown of hospital ownership in Poland

                                                                               Number of            Total number of
                                                                               hospitals            beds
University Hospitals                                                           40                   21,290
Voivodship Hospitals                                                           175                  69,231
Powiat-owned hospitals                                                         186                  47,172
Gminas and Powiat Cities hospitals                                             43                   11,933
Hospitals accountable to the Ministry of Health (including research            48                   14,507
institutes) and other Ministries
Private hospitals                                                                  605                 43,923
Total                                                                              1,097               208,056
 Source: Ministry of Health.
Note: There are various official registries of hospitals which do not all provide the same numbers, and the definition
of what constitutes a hospital is not standardized. All types of facilities are included here, including specialized
hospitals and facilities which would not quality as hospital (e.g. less than 5 beds – many of these are in the private
sector). The Ministry estimates that there are around 800 hospitals in Poland of which 500 are general hospitals.

33. Voivodships in this context play an important role but have a complex mandate to fulfill. In any
given region, the Voivodship governments are typically the largest single owner of hospitals.
Voivodships are also legally responsible for ensuring access to quality health services to the population
in the region. This mandate should not, strictly speaking, be interpreted as implying that Voivodships
need to provide in their facilities all the services their population might need, but many struggle with
this distinction. On the other hand, and despite the lack of a legal framework to enforce any
coordination, this obligation provides Voivodships with some legitimacy in taking the leadership for
elaborating and implementing regional-level action plans.
34. As previously discussed, until 2011, hospital founders had limited incentives to effectively manage
the hospitals and ensure their sustainability. Elected local officials typically have strong incentives to
maintain or even develop hospitals which employ large numbers of staff. Hospitals are also valued by
citizens who equate access to services and the existence of a local facility. Conversely, the restructuring
of hospital services and the closing of facilities are politically very difficult and unlikely to be promoted
by elected officials in the absence of counter-incentives. In Poland, local governments and other hospital
founders do not directly finance service delivery and were until recently not accountable for their
performance. For the most part, they limited their effort to mobilizing funding for investments and
renovations – irrespective of whether these were actually sustainable. By making them accountable for
hospitals’ deficits and (to an extent) debt, the 2011 law aimed to change this situation.
35. It will take time for many hospital founders to develop their capacity to actively manage the
facilities they own. The capacity and drive to manage hospitals varies greatly across regions and local
governments. Background work and in depth interviews in more than 6 regions suggests that local
governments are overall insufficiently equipped to deal with their mandate. For instance, a review of a
number of strategic documents produced by local governments for health showed limitations in their
capacity to translate populations’ needs assessment into service delivery strategies and to incorporate
innovative trends in service delivery. A rapid assessment of the information base available to decision
makers in two Voivodships highlighted that they have limited themselves to collecting mandatory data
and carried out few analyses and comparisons. Some Voivodship have taken more innovative steps but
their experience is not widely documented and peer to peer learning appears limited.




                                                         20
   3.4 Regulation
   36. Hospital regulation generally focuses on two domains: i) safety and quality of care and ii) ensuring
   the “market” meets population health needs i.e. planning. In Poland, regulation of quality is limited in
   scope and strategic planning is non-existent.
   37. Quality regulation is primarily focused on inputs. The focus is generally on compliance with
   minimum input standards. A first set of standards is used for licensing. They generally pertain to the
   characteristics of the buildings in which services are delivered. These requirements were first issued in
   1991 and updated in 2012, but so far full compliance has not been enforced. Many facilities use old
   buildings simply cannot meet these criteria, but in a large number of cases, the hospitals cannot afford
   to undertake the necessary investments to meet the standards. Although closing some facilities and
   rebuilding modern ones might in many cases be the best option, it rarely happens. As it stands, all
   hospitals are supposed to comply by all standards in 2016. A second set of standards applies to the
   basket of services covered and contracted by the NFZ. These standards are also very detailed and focus
   on other types of inputs, such as staff and equipment. While minimum standards can help ensure
   patient safety, discussions with a number of hospital experts suggest that the Polish “minimum
   standards” are unnecessarily detailed27. The minimum personnel and equipment standards put many
   binding constraints to the search for cost-efficient solutions within hospitals, in particular because they
   overlook the possibility of sharing and managing resources across departments.
   38. Interviews in hospitals provided examples of how such regulation leads to inefficiencies and
   unnecessary or at least poorly prioritized investments. Examples included:
         the need to purchase duplicate equipment rather than sharing across departments, even if one
            unit would be enough for combined patient needs;
         the requirement to have helipads (when evidence on the effectiveness and cost benefit of
            helicopter medical services is weak28)
         the requirement that an anesthesiologist cannot assist more than one procedure at the same
            time (for instance two epidurals), when this is common practice elsewhere
         the requirement for all facilities providing delivery care to have at least one obstetrician, a
            midwife plus an anesthesiologist on duty at all times (as opposed to on call for instance – and in
            facilities with very few deliveries).
39. At the same time, observations and interviews in facilities suggested that the actual details of the rules
    are effectively rarely known to key health staff and managers and that their interpretation and
    application is not uniform across facilities or even departments. It was also suggested that these
    regulations can be selectively used or manipulated to enforce decisions supported by vested interests
    (e.g. to close a department, to prioritize the purchase a piece of equipment) or serve specific interest
    groups (eg staff or unions). This obviously raises questions about the capacity to enforce such standards
    and monitor compliance. More generally, the attention paid to inputs is disproportionate to the
    detriment of the assessment of the quality of processes, outputs, and outcomes.


   27
      This was also highlighted in a June 2013 PWC report: Ustawa o dzialalności leczniczej - podsumowanie dwóch lat
   funkcjonowania
   28
      Galvagno, et al. (2013). "Helicopter emergency medical services for adults with major trauma." Cochrane
   database of systematic reviews . Taylor, C. B., M. Stevenson, et al. (2010). "A systematic review of the costs and
   benefits of helicopter emergency medical services." Injury 41(1): 10-20.



                                                           21
40. Strategic planning of service delivery at the territorial level is inexistent, a regulatory gap which
until now has proved insurmountable. In Poland, market entry is free (as long as licensing requirements
are met) and each facility is free to decide what services they offer. There is no certification of needs,
either for new facilities or purchasing of equipment. Despite an expert consensus that a master plan or
other strong coordination mechanisms would be required for hospital services, several attempts at
introducing such regulations have failed (the last one vetoed by the President at the time). Such a
regulatory framework would encourage service consolidation and networking, limit duplication of
services and help prioritize and concentrate strategic investments. It would require that many
stakeholders (including local governments and hospitals) formally relinquish some prerogatives in
deciding what health services they offer, a major stumbling block for elected governments and service
providers.
41. This vacuum of the strategic service planning leads to poorly coordinated care that risks being of
low quality. In many health systems, low-volume high-complexity care (for example, trauma care or
neurosurgery) is concentrated into a few, geographically dispersed facilities in order to maintain clinical
excellence and provide access for the whole population. Moreover, many routine procedures such as
angiography or deliveries require a minimum patient throughput per year in order to maintain clinical
skills. The consolidation of hospitals into networks would allow these services to be provided on one site
of the network, rather than duplicated in several neighboring facilities.
42. The Ministry is currently developing legislation and tools to support more systematic planning in
the health system. A 2012 draft law still under elaboration aims, among many other reforms, to
introduce some planning tools and the Ministry of Health is currently developing “health maps”.

3.5 Purchasing
43. Poland, during transition introduced a purchaser provider split. Many countries of Eastern Europe,
in the transition process, introduced a purchaser-provider split in order to enhance the accountability of
providers by building incentives into the contractual relationship to improve service delivery, and
increase cost containment, efficiency, organizational flexibility, quality and responsiveness of services to
patient needs. The incentives were also meant to be strengthened by a degree of competition between
providers. Achieving these results has proven difficult, and Poland is no exception. Strategic purchasing
of services requires interventions on the many components of the purchasing function, including the
choice of services to be covered based on assessment of population needs, the active management of
contracting arrangements and payment methods to achieve coverage and influence service delivery,
and decisions on role and scope for competition among providers29. Assessing strategic purchasing in
Poland goes beyond the scope of this paper, but this section highlight some of the key issues
surrounding the purchasing of hospital services.
44. The NFZ was created in 2003 following the merger of the 16 regional health insurance funds. It is
responsible for purchasing services to meet the population’s needs within the available resources.
Sixteen regional branches contract with selected providers and have some autonomy to respond to local
needs assessment. The public resources available to hospitals ultimately depend on decisions by the NFZ
on service price and volumes, and hospitals compete with each other to obtain contracts and thus
funding. For the most part, the relationship between NFZ branches and hospitals is strained, with the
NFZ on one side arguing that it is legally bound to apply rules and operate within strict financial


29
 Figueras, J., E. Jakubowski and R. Robinson, eds. 2005. Purchasing to Improve Health Systems Performance.
Maidenhead: Open University Press.

                                                      22
parameters and providers on the other criticizing the apparent arbitrary nature of NFZ decisions. Clearly,
improvement of the purchasing framework is required, with the most salient issues pertaining to:
 The fragmentation of contracts. The NFZ branches puts out tenders and all providers which meet
  the criteria for providing services are allowed to compete to provide a given type of service. Once
  the valid bids are identified, closed negotiations take place with the bidder (or bidders) which
  submits the best offer in terms of price and other criteria. During this process, volumes and prices
  are negotiated with each provider. In practice, this appears to result in the distribution of the
  available volume between all eligible providers. For high cost, low frequency procedures, this
  fragmentation increases the risk that patients receive complex services from professionals who are
  not adequately skilled and/or do not perform enough specialized services to maintain these skills.
  Given the lack of information and emphasis on quality outcomes, the consequences cannot be
  properly assessed. Yet, field visits and interviews highlighted the case of some large hospitals which
  only carry complex surgeries infrequently, contrary to the principle that low volume, high
  complexity services should be concentrated to encourage and maintain clinical excellence. At the
  other end of the spectrum, high volume, low complexity procedures are often in large part
  contracted to private providers, leading to “cherry-picking” of less complex patients and lack of
  training opportunities for physicians in the public sector.
 The limited term of contracts. Contracts between providers and the NFZ have a maximum duration
  of 3 years, and even in this case, the maximum amount which the NFZ will pay for a type of service
  can only be defined over one fiscal year. This considerably limits the capacity of facilities to plan (as
  well as their access to financing, cf. next section).
 A largely passive purchasing strategy. There is little evidence that the NFZ or its regional branches
  take a proactive and long term approach to shaping the market or adapting the contracts to the
  populations needs. In practice, contract volumes mostly reflect past trends and none of the
  stakeholders interviewed could point to either a national strategy or regional multiyear plans to
  shape service delivery. When changes are made in terms of the types and amounts of services that
  will be contracted, they are often perceived by providers as arbitrary and sometimes inconsistent
  over time. Similarly, there are no visible efforts to lever the contractual relationship to encourage
  the modernization of practices or efficiency gains. For instance, minimally invasive surgical
  processes that can usually be treated in ambulatory settings (eg., cataracts or hernia repairs) are
  contracted in such a way that hospitals are reimbursed more for inpatient admission, discouraging
  the development of ambulatory surgery facilities. Overall, both contracting and service planning
  need to be strengthened and better coordinated.
 Service pricing. In 2008, Poland introduced Diagnosis Related Groups-based payments (DRGs) for
  secondary and tertiary care financing30. DRGs, as long as they are economically homogenous and
  fair, create powerful incentives for providers to combine resources efficiently. To date, however,
  high-quality cost information is not available in Poland to calibrate payments with the actual cost of
  resources consumed. This may create distortions and incentives to select between over and
  underpaid services. Although this is not systematically documented, there is a widespread claim that
  private providers have entered profitable market segments, focusing on patients without complex
  disease, thereby further reducing the volumes of contracts available for public facilities and their
  capacity to cross-subsidize among simple and complex cases.

30
  DRGs are a payment method that relates the type of patients a hospital treats with the resources they consume.
Hospitals receive payments based on an “average” episode of care for a group of patients, taking into account
demographic and clinical characteristics.

                                                       23
3.6 Hospital strategies
45. Given the environment described in the previous sections, what strategies have public hospitals and
their founders employed to meet their day to day challenges? The following highlights some typical
responses which help explain the current situation of the hospital sector in Poland.
46. In Poland, the degree of actual autonomy granted to public hospital managers is significant. In the
past decade, many countries have moved to increase the autonomy of public hospital managers and
allow them to respond to the incentives put in place in the system. In former transition economies, this
process has often been slow and in many cases chaotic. Quite often, the rules (for instance on staffing,
salaries, input norms, budget reallocation etc.) are such that managers are in reality unable to do exert
their responsibilities. It is not so much the case in Poland. Hospitals are independent entities. Their
founders can decide to transform the legal status of the entities they own, and they can merge, liquidate
or reorganize them. They can decide which services to offer or not (provided they meet the input
requirements discussed earlier). Hospital founders typically own the buildings in which the facilities are
set and can thus manage the real estate (in case of commercial code companies local Governments
typically lease the buildings to the facility). They make decisions on investments. Staff are contracted by
the facilities, either as salaried employees or self-employed (this status is advantageous for higher
income staff). Around 40% of physicians are self-employed, the rest are salaried as well as the majority
of nurses. Salaries are not regulated. In other words, there is space to take a large number of strategic
and managerial decisions.
47. In reality, the management of public hospitals is not always effective or efficient, for three main
reasons. First, as highlighted earlier, incentives and accountability mechanisms are not strong. Until
recently, founders did not really have a stake in the financial standing of the facilities they owned, the
interest or the capacity to manage them. This has changed recently and therefore it is early to assess the
consequences of such changes. Secondly, ward heads31 traditionally have a substantial amount of
authority and managers are in a relatively weaker position. This is particularly the case in University
hospitals, and many studies (Boulhol et al. 2012, op. cit.) have identified this as a barrier to hospital
management and rationalization32. Last, skills in hospital management need strengthening.
48. Anecdotal evidence collected in facilities highlight at least two areas where weak management
impacts efficiency. One is excessive staffing patterns. They may be partly driven by regulation and
staffing norms mentioned earlier, but case studies suggest that employment is not systematically
adapted to efficient service delivery. For instance, the 3 cases studies of successful restructuring
presented in Malinowska-Misiag et al (2008) mentioned a reduction of 36% in staff for Oploskie regional
hospital, 40% for Powiat Hospital in Kluczbork and 37% the Zakopane Powiat Hospital – without
significant reduction in the volume of services provided33. The second area is financial management,
particularly loans taken out on commercial terms in order to meet debt servicing. Many hospitals facing
liquidity constraints turned over time to financial intermediaries providing loans on very expensive
terms and imposing conditions such as a clause of immediate repayment of liabilities prior to any debt
restructuring. Over time, hospitals financial expenditure on debt servicing has increased dramatically
and further compounded the financial constraints. A 2013 report commissioned by the Government
following extensive media coverage of the near bankruptcy of the prestigious Children’s Hospital in


31
   The head of the various departments
32
   OECD, op.cit.
33
   Similar patterns were described as key to restructuring in interviews conducted by the team with hospital
founders.

                                                        24
Warsaw provides a stark illustration of how these two factors contributed to hospital debt levels. In the
case of the Children’s Hospital, financial intermediaries own more than half of the debt (see Box 2).

 Box 2: Highlights from the Children Hospitals’ Diagnostic and recommendations report (2013)

 January 2013, a report was commissioned to independent experts by the Ministry of Health to examine the situation
 of the Children’s Memorial Health Institute (Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka- IPCZD), the largest specialist pediatric
 hospital in Poland, which is also a research institute. The IPCZD has 23 hospital departments open around the clock,
 4 day-care departments, 33 outpatient clinics and 8 diagnostic departments. All together there are 554 beds in
 hospital departments and the occupancy rate in 2012 was 74%.

 In 2012, the institute’s financial situation became so dire that it was effectively bankrupt, which drew a lot of media
 attention and generated widespread public outrage. The institute’s debt amounted to around PLN 240 million
 (around PLN 433,000 per bed, more than 7 times more the average for Poland and more than the facility’s revenue
 for that year) and it ran a deficit of PLN 42 million (by September).

 The experts report listed several of the system-level issues mentioned in the present document as factors
 contributing to the institutes situation including: the NFZ contracting practices, the under-pricing of specialized
 services, and the fact that the Ministry of Health does not appear to have monitored the situation closely and taken
 remedial action which were within its authority to make. The experts’ main message however was abundantly clear:
 the Institute has been grossly mismanaged.

 The experts provided many examples of inefficiencies, among which:
 •    Excessive staffing, particularly for non-health staff. An index relating their number to hospital capacity gave the
      institute a ratio of 3.62 when in two comparable hospitals the ratio was around 1.8. This was true despite the
      fact that the services of cleaning, orderlies and laboratories were outsourced. Further, overtime was frequent,
      including for non-health staff. Labor costs kept increasing as a percentage of NFZ contract from year to year
      and were reaching 78% of NFZ revenues in 2012;
 •    Only 5/27 departments and 7/33 clinics were not generating an operating deficit. In many departments,
      staffing cost had been exceeding the value of the NFZ contract for years and in the outpatient department
      headed by the Director of the institute, staffing cost represented 170% of revenues generated by the NFZ
      contract;
 •    Several equipment and facilities were used at about a third of their capacity;
 •    Meal costs for a day was about PLN 31 (vs less than 13 in two comparable hospitals), a third of which was
      interests paid for renovating the kitchen;
 •    Expenditure on IT was PLN 34 million, compared with 9 in a comparable hospital, which had a better system
      and 70% of IT hardware was obsolete;
 •    The institute had made no effort over time to negotiate with creditors and instead transferred claims to
      “secondary creditors” which owned half of the hospitals’ debt.

 The report also highlighted that no apparent effort had been made to address these problem and provided a range
 of recommendations, noting that the restructuring of the debt would probably require a public subsidy.

 Source: Opinia zespołu roboczego do przeprowadzenia postępowania przygotowawczego mającego na celu ocenę
 potrzeby oraz warunków reorganizacji instytutu „pomnik – centrum zdrowia dziecka”, prepared by P. Pobrotyn, K.
 Warzocha and M. Ilnicka-Mądry, 2013.




49. Taking a more systemic view, the focus on competition for NFZ contracts led over the years to a
significant amount of “unhealthy competition”, as for instance highlighted in a recent Price
Waterhouse Cooper report. “District (poviat) hospitals, which for many years were focused on the four
basic medical areas (internal diseases, pediatrics, gynecology and obstetrics, and general surgery), in
view of relatively low pricing of those services by the National Health Fund have been seeking other

                                                               25
developmental opportunities in more profitable fields, such as invasive cardiology or orthopedics, for
example. The same is true of regional (voivodship) hospitals, which more and more frequently offer
services at the highest reference level, including highly specialized services which for many years had
remained in the domain of university hospitals. Moreover, there have been cases when medical entities
of the same founding organ, e.g. regional or university hospitals, have been competing against other
entities owned by the same body, e.g. by opening hospital departments of identical profile or by
competing for qualified personnel or investments of similar profile from external sources” .
50. Many health facilities over-invested in new technology and capacity in an attempt to attract larger
market shares, regardless of whether these could be sustained in the long run. Investment decisions
rarely reflect the fact that these investments often represent contingent liabilities and that an economic
analysis of the efficiency of the investment at the facility - if not the system level - should be part of the
decision process.
51. This arms-race was to
                                                  Box 3: The hospital sector of a typical Voivodship
an extent facilitated by the
availability     of    capital   The example of this Voivodship is used to illustrate the overcapacity and duplication of
funding and the lack of          services that exist throughout the hospital sector in Poland, with little regard to
coordination                of   population needs or service quality.
investments. Investments         In this Voivodship, 39 facilities serve a population of 1.2 million people. Twenty-one of
are funded by a multitude        these facilities are in the capital city of the Voivodship, with the rest spread throughout
of actors, including the         the rural areas. There are three “regional” hospitals; 15 “general” hospitals; two
                                 “teaching” hospitals; 4 “psychiatric and addiction therapy” facilities (including a 900 bed
Ministry of Health, the          psychiatric hospital); and 15 “specialty” hospitals. The size of the facilities varies
local Government budgets,        dramatically, with only eight facilities having more than 250 beds and seven offering
and structural funds from        between 11 and 40 beds.
the European Union. This         Many hospitals which are close to one another provide an almost identical basket of
fragmentation of funding         services (e.g. general surgery; cardiology; obstetrics and gynaecology; orthopaedics;
with     no      coordinated     paediatrics; neonatology etc). Specific examples of sub-optimal organization include:
investment strategy lead to               Gynecological and obstetric services which are available in 19 facilities. All
duplications and gaps in                   facilities, except the psychiatric and monoprofile hospitals, offer delivery
services, with little regard               services. However, as the number of births in the Voivodship in 2011 was
for    population      health              11,199, many of the facilities had less than 300 deliveries/ year -this means less
                                           than one delivery/ day even without discounting complicated deliveries which
needs and future operating                 by definition are referred to higher level institutions. International standards
costs. The same is true for                (Maier, 1977 for Germany; MSPS Ministerio de Sanidad y Política Social, 2009
highly             specialized             for Spain) suggest that in order to optimize the use of staff and technical
equipment,        such      as             equipment in delivery wards, a minimum of 600 deliveries per year (ideally
                                           1,000 to 2,000) is required.
scanners, which are mainly
                                          Two large hospitals located in close proximity of each other both have state of
funded       through       the             the art interventional cardiology suites devoted to angiography techniques and
Ministry of Health with EU                 pacemaker implantation. English NHS standards (Hackett D, 2003) suggest that
funds following requests                   diagnostic cardiac catheterization and angiography laboratory should not serve
from local government (see                 less than 450,000 to 600,000 population, and that dedicated pacemaker and
                                           defibrillator implantation laboratory should at least serve 1.3 to 1.5 million
Box 3 for an illustration).                population per unit. Both hospitals also contain fully equipped intensive care
52. Unfortunately,                         units.
                                          The same two hospitals both have state of the art accident and emergency
investments are often not                  departments, complete with helicopter landing pads. However, each of them is
coordinated with the NFZ,                  only open every other day. In other words, both are utilized at half capacity
or more specifically, there                which means that large investments are inadequately amortized, when in the
can be no guarantee that                   same hospitals, other areas are in need of repair.
the NFZ contract will be


                                                         26
awarded to the facility or that its size would be sufficient to provide a positive return on investment.
Anecdotal evidence again suggests that some equipment goes unused or underused as the NFZ’s ability
to contract services for which equipment is financed is de facto restricted34. Field visits showed,
sometimes within the same hospitals, glaring needs and underutilized investments which were not
adapted to the range of services the hospital could provide and duplications of investments across
facilities which are close to one another and could not be justified by the need to improve territorial
coverage. Ultimately, given the fragmentation of funding mentioned earlier, even departments
providing high quality services and whose existence could be justified based on population needs can fail
to capture a large enough share of the NFZ contract to break even.


4 Pathway towards financial sustainability
53. The previous sections systematically explored the reasons why the hospital sector continues to
generate deficits, inefficiencies and patient dissatisfaction. The nature, size and complexity of the issues
and problems affecting the health system in Poland vary, yet mostly lie in the sphere of service
production; other issues (linked to financing and stewardship) are somewhat more systemic in nature
and define the environment in which the stakeholders operate. This limits the system’s capacity to face
the health needs of the population under new demographic and epidemiological circumstances as well
as expectations from patients and citizens.
54. The Ministry of Health and many stakeholders are largely cognizant of the problems and the
possible solutions, yet decisive and concerted action has been slow to materialize. The following section
highlights how the Ministry of Health and other institutions at the central level could create an
environment more conducive to improving the financial sustainability of the system and modernizing
service delivery. As highlighted earlier, however, the performance of hospitals appears to vary greatly
despite the complex health system environment. This means that at least some founders and hospitals
have become better at overcoming the existing constraints. The section also highlights some options
that could help other founders and hospitals towards better financial health.

4.1 Changes at the national level
55. The first set of recommendations pertains to reforms which should be promoted by the Ministry of
Health.
56. Continue to support the orderly and systematic resolution of the current debt problem and the
strengthening of accountability frameworks. As mentioned earlier, the situation of some of the most
indebted facilities is such that the existing options offered by the 2011 law on Therapeutic services may
not apply to them. In some of these cases, and setting aside political considerations which will
undoubtedly come into play, their liquidation may not be a sensible option from a health systems’
perspective. It is therefore reasonable to assume that the Government will have to step in and help
resolve the issue, as some founding institutions, like universities for teaching hospitals cannot be
expected to pay off the debt of teaching hospitals, some of which are among the most indebted facilities
in Poland. The challenge will be to devise a system which does not induce the moral hazard which has
characterized previous attempts. Clearer lines of authority and accountability will need to be put in
place to ensure that the responsibility and the authority for undertaking and financing the
reorganization of these facilities or for paying the price of not doing the needful are fully aligned for the
long term.

34
     Poland: Health System in Review. Health Systems in Transition series, 2011, European Observatory

                                                         27
57. Develop and implement service planning mechanisms. Although previous attempts at introducing
such regulation have failed, there is an increasing demand from local governments for the Ministry of
Health to provide a framework which would allow/facilitate and even incentivize national or regional
coordination of service planning as well as the creation of hospital networks at the regional level,
irrespective of ownership status. This reform has also been supported by health sector experts for a long
time. The new planning mechanisms should first aim to adapt service delivery to better meet current
and future population health needs in the most efficient way. They should also promote modern
principles for organizing service delivery, including the definition of well delineated levels of care and
the concentration of specialized services that will help ensure quality of services and the safety of
patients. Planning would also support a coherent strategy for much-needed investments in the sector’s
infrastructure and guide the purchase of medical equipment to ensure better, more efficient and
ultimately more sustainable investments. This planning exercise thus first requires setting some
strategic directions and ambitious but achievable objectives based on present and future population
needs.
58. In addition to setting norms, the introduction of a planning system will require identifying which
incentives or regulation are required to ensure that stakeholders, and in particular founders, work
together towards the stated objectives. In a highly pluralistic system, the negotiation and
implementation of these solutions is a very complex undertaking. Putting this in plain terms, and as an
example, if it were rigorously and undisputedly established that only one hospital in a given the regional
capital should provide invasive cardiac surgery, when currently three departments have a contract with
the NFZ for these services in facilities owned by three different founders, how will the system go from
here to there? Who will be accountable for reaching the target? At what pace? How will the decision be
taken?
59. The Ministry of Health has taken steps to design “health maps”. The maps will state some norms in
terms of access to service, but ultimately, the adaptation of the existing infrastructure will have to be
decided at the local level taking into account an array of constraints, including current patterns of use,
service delivery and recent investments. Pathways towards meeting these “normative” objectives will
need to be negotiated at the local level.
60. Improve the DRG costing base. The long term financial sustainability of the sector requires devising
a robust and sustained costing system. Changes between the relative prices of different DRGs are
currently made on an ad-hoc basis and distortions generate incentives for hospitals to “invest” in some
profitable DRGs and select the location of care (in versus outpatient) based on price rather than on
principles of good medical practice combined with an eye for economic efficiency. A law introducing a
tariff agency was first drafted in 2010 and later revised but has yet to be presented to parliament.
Overall, the payment system should better (i) ensure that hospitals who end up taking care of more
complex cases are not at a disadvantage, (ii) promote more efficient patterns of care and (iii) quality
standards.
61. Modernize, in parallel, the quality assurance system is required. It should move away from, and in
fact remove some detailed input-oriented regulations, and veer towards a greater focus on processes
output and outcomes. A new model of clinical governance will require – among other - developing
guidelines and protocols (linking with provider payments) and strengthening data collection and
analysis. Ultimately, the payer (NFZ) should be able to link payments to the quality of care. A law had
been drafted in 2010 to strengthen clinical governance but was not presented to the parliament.




                                                   28
62. A second set of interventions pertains to the purchasing function, currently undertaken by the
NFZ though its regional branches.
     As more stringent planning mechanisms are introduced, purchasing practices will need to adapt.
      If for instance the objective to concentrate specialized services is pursed, contracting practices
      will need to promote and support the required transitions and incorporate agreed norms into the
      contracting framework. This might require for instance limiting the number of facilities which can
      be selected to provide specialized services in one area or limiting the scope of services some
      categories of establishments can apply for.
     While retaining a purchaser-provider separation, the purchasing framework should encourage
      longer-term relationships and integrated decision-making between providers and the NFZ.
      Providers should have enough certainty about strategic directions which will be pursued in the
      mid-term to be able to make rational investment decisions. Reducing the uncertainty – perceived
      or actual – in the facilities revenue stream should help them access financing for these
      investments.
     The promotion of modern service delivery should become a more explicit part of the NFZ
      mandate. The NFZ should be empowered to use pricing and contracting to pursue system-level
      objectives such as the promotion of outpatient surgery or the coordination of care. Along these
      lines, the Ministry of Health and NFZ have been considering a pilot project which, by integrating
      financing across levels, would provide networks of facilities opportunities to reorganize and
      improve service delivery.
     As mentioned earlier, quality should play a greater role in NFZ’s purchasing decisions.
63. All in all, the NFZ will need to become a much more selective and proactive purchaser of services .
The Government has been considering draft legislation to decentralize the NFZ. If the process goes
ahead, it would be important to articulate how the new system would contribute to resolving the
problems laid out above and help strengthening strategic purchasing along the above lines.
64. Ultimately, hospital reforms are only one piece of service delivery reforms . The lack of
coordination of care across primary, specialized outpatient, and hospital care generates inefficiencies in
a system geared towards hospital-based curative care. These translate, among other into high admission
rates for ambulatory care-sensitive conditions. Although primary and outpatient care are not within the
scope of this note, it is important to recognize that the promotion of efficiency and quality in the health
system needs to happen coherently across levels of care. It will require strengthening the capacity,
incentives and accountability of outpatient providers and may involve coordination with the social
sector. A starting point for this discussion could be an analysis of the care pathways for categories of
patients who cost a lot to the system and/or represent a large share of the burden of disease and audit
of the quality of care provided to them.




                                                    29
4.2 Changes at the sub-national or hospital level
65. Overall, founders and public hospitals need to modernize their management style. Unpacking this
and taking some examples from good performers, suggest the following priorities. For the most part,
these changes could be implemented even in the absence of significant changes at the national level.
66. Intelligence gathering and utilization. Field visits in 6 different regions highlighted that very few
local governments collect and analyze data on the performance of the facilities they own. A minimum
level of data reporting is mandated for all facilities across Poland. Most founders receive these data but
seldom analyze it systematically or make comparisons with other facilities. At best, they monitor
hospital-level financial data, data on inputs, and basic output data (days, discharges etc.), but do not
routinely combine these data to measure performance in more complex ways (eg cost per bed, per day,
per department, output measure per input level…) or benchmark hospitals.
67. Among encouraging initiatives, the team identified:
     A number of Voivodships have mandated common accounting standards across the facilities
      they own. Combined with output data, this could help identify facilities or department which do
      business more or less efficiently and guide restructuring decisions;
        A private company in Poland is proposing two products which respectively aim to provide to
        hospitals/founders (i) intelligence about their environment and the market they operate in and
        (ii) benchmarking information (hospitals purchasing the service and providing data are
        compared with their peers).
68. Health authorities and hospital managers, by and large, have very low capacity to understand which
data to collect and routinely use in order to monitor performance and hold service producers
accountable for it. Voivodships, which typically own a large number of facilities, would be in a good
position to impose higher standards of data collection and benchmark facilities among themselves but
the vast majority of them lack tools, time, and/or capacity. From a business perspective, it would make
sense for founders and/or hospitals to invest in developing and producing hospital indicators
dashboards to monitor the costs, quality, efficiency and impact of the services delivered.
69. Investment in management capacity. Despite a fairly high level of autonomy, the actual exercise of
management authority at facility level appears to have traditionally been insufficient encouraged by a
limited accountability, and impeded by tradition (e.g. the role of ward heads), capacity, as well as - to an
extent- by the regulatory environment. The previous sections highlighted how changes in the rules of
the game already have increased accountability and how further changes could potentially facilitate the
reorganization of hospitals towards more sustainable models. The range of experiences across regions
suggests that progress can be achieved, even in the absence of system-level change. Examples collected
over the past year have highlighted some interesting strategies:
     A number of local Governments, primarily Powiats have “contracted out” the management of
      the facilities they own. This represents an interesting model of public private partnership. It
      would be interesting and useful to many self-government entities to (i) evaluate the actual
      impact of these transactions on the local governments’ finances and (ii) assess the effectiveness
      of these contractual arrangement in improving the outcomes of interest to them.
     A Voivodship was able to leverage infrastructure investment to negotiate significant
      organizational changes, more specifically, the merger of three hospitals into one to be set in an
      entirely new building;



                                                    30
     More often than not, it seemed that successful transformations were negotiated one by one
      rather than in a “big-bang” approach. Interviews also suggested that a key success factor was
      the sustained support from the “founder”- and in particular in the case of the local
      governments, the Marshall and the Council.
70. As encouraging as these few examples are, they have not been systematically documented or
evaluated. Voivodships and other local Governments could clearly benefit from collecting and sharing
lessons learned and assessing the impact that innovative approaches have had on various performance
criteria.
71. Development of mid to long term strategic frameworks. In conclusion, even the most successful
hospitals and local governments encountered in the context of this work will need to adapt their
practice. A lot of the structuring and investment decisions remain tactical in nature, and focus on short
term financial opportunities and constraints. Voivodships, despite the fact that they own many facilities
in given regions have not developed “network-level” reorganization and continue to see their hospitals
as separate (and competing) entities. The 2011 law provided opportunities to merge facilities owned by
single or different local Governments but thus far, it does not appear that these opportunities have
been seized. The unstable regulatory environment and the lack of clear directions in part account for
that, but ultimately, the modernization of the hospital system will require a better common
understanding of the ways the health system needs to evolve to meet the needs of the aging
population.

4.3 A wide-ranging stewardship reform
72. The above analysis suggests that Poland still has a solid hospital reform agenda to tackle. There is
a fair amount of technical and expert agreement on what the problems are as well as on many of the
“blocks” which are needed to build a sustainable solution. Taking a broader perspective, and
contrasting Poland with other countries in the region, the final hypothesis of this review is that the
current status quo, focus of the recent reforms, and slow of progress in adding new building blocks,
point to a deficit of stewardship in the hospital sector. In other words, there is no evidence of a
concerted effort to organize governance, regulation, purchasing, and the overall coordination between
health and social service providers with the objective to ensure that global health systems goals are met,
given the available resources. Poland suffers from a gap in system-level stewardship.
73. Well–performing pluralistic and market-oriented systems rely on complex regulation and
sophisticated institutions. Health systems across the world rely more or less on market forces and
competition to achieve the outcomes they set for themselves. Countries with well-performing pluralistic
systems and which put more emphasis on market-based incentives, such as the Netherlands, Germany
or Estonia, also have developed over time strong regulation, monitoring mechanisms, and institutions
which typically aim to enable collaborative solutions in order to ensure that the system is moving
towards system-level targets in terms of access to quality services and efficiency in the use of public
resources.
74. These tools and institutions are underdeveloped in Poland. Poland has a highly pluralistic hospital
system and - for instance through the most recent corporatization reforms - has generally favored the
creation of more space for market forces to reshape the sector. Yet, as highlighted in this paper,
competition between hospitals as it is currently taking place in Poland has probably had detrimental
effect on the targeting of investments, the fragmentation of the system and even quality. In Poland, no
explicit strategy is set out for the hospital (or generally the service delivery) system. There is no common
framework to analyze the performance of individual hospitals or of regional networks, and to provide


                                                    31
this information to decisions makers or the public. There are no formal systematic and organized
discussions between hospital founders, either nationally or in regions. More broadly, when fundamental
trends in medical progress, population health and expectations as well as financial constraints call for a
better organization and coordination of service providers, no entity has the responsibility, mandate or
authority to steer the system in this direction.
75. Strengthening stewardship will take efforts to build consensus, sustained political will and a
measure of investment. Transforming and modernizing the system to improve its capacity to meet the
needs of the population may require building a consensus on a comprehensive diagnostic about the root
causes of the problem and the objectives of the reform. Considerations about the financial health of
individual hospitals, although important, cannot be the only area of focus, especially since there are
potential conflicts between short-term hospital level decisions and system-wide sustainability
objectives. In addition to a broader-based agreement that improving the hospital system sustainability
will require complex and concerted interventions over a period of time, a strong political commitment
to reforming the system will be needed.
76. There are no pre-set recipes for developing the tools and institutions for overall hospital
stewardship in a given country. One possible pathway could start with the creation of regional hospital
or service delivery observatories, which would be jointly funded and operated by the MoH, NFZ and
founders. These observatories could collect, analyze and disseminate clinical, management and financial
data and benchmark hospitals. Alternatively, these functions could be built into the existing regional
Public Health centers. In that case however, modalities would need to be defined to ensure collegiality
of the process and joint ownership of the results. In a subsequent stage, these observatories could be
turned into Voivodship-level hospital agencies (combining planning and purchasing functions). France,
which initiated a similar journey 15 years ago, now has created “Regional Health Agencies” which are in
charge of directing the entire social and health services network of a given region. The regional branches
of the Health Insurance Fund no longer exist. These regional agencies are also responsible for organizing
democratic and consultative fora in which the interests of all stakeholders, including patients, are
represented. The pathway to building the institutions and accountability mechanisms which are
required to manage the pluralistic system of Poland will need to be designed at country level, taking into
account institutional, technical and political factors.
77. The comprehensive reform we believe is needed in Poland should probably start with the
development of a strategy for service delivery and, once key parameters are set and main options are
identified, a dialogue platform should be put in place to involve the wide range of stakeholders which
would be affected in the design a Poland-specific solution.




                                                   32
Appendix: Additional data on hospital debt: variation by region and
ownership status


Regional variations and trends


1. The level of debt varies widely between geographical regions . As expected, each region’s stock of
debt is commensurate with the size of its hospital sector. To correct for size, Figure 3 shows the level of
debt per public hospital bed in Poland in 2006 and 201235. The average stock of debt per hospital bed
in 2012 is around PLN 68,000, but levels range by region from one to three times this figure. The debt
per bed is over PLN 85,000 in Mazowieckie, Pomorskie, and over PLN 100,000 in Kujawsko-Pomorskie
and Lubuskie.). At the other hand of the spectrum, in Opolskie, Zachodniopomorskie and Warmińsko -
Mazurskie, the debt per hospital bed is below PLN 40,000. The proportion of debt which is overdue (i.e.
arrears) ranges from 9 percent in Opolskie to nearly 36 percent in Mazowieckie, and the higher the debt
per bed in a region the higher the proportion of arrears tends to be (not shown).


                       Figure 5: Total debt per public bed by region in 2006 and 2012 (PLN)




2. The regions ability to control the level of their debt stock is also variable . Figure 3 also shows very
different trends in the stock of debt per bed across regions over time: in some regions, hospitals overall
have cut debt significantly (e.g. Lubuskie) and in other, liabilities have continued accumulating at a rapid
pace (e.g. Mazowieckie). Figure 4 first confirms that whilst the total stock of hospital debt has decreased
by 17% in real terms in Poland between 2006 and 2012, this varied significantly by regions. The position
of a region on the horizontal axis denotes the variation in stock of debt of the region and the five regions

35
 Debt is for 2012, the number of public beds is the latest available (2011).

                                                         33
in bold have the highest debt per bed in 2012 (the position on the vertical axis shows whether the
number of beds in the region has increased or decreased – see following paragraph for a discussion).
Focusing on the horizontal axis shows that the debt decreased in real terms in ten regions (situated in
the two quadrants on the left side of the graph) but increased in six (left side). Four regions have made
particularly impressive strides towards reducing hospital debt. For example, Dolnośląskie, which had the
second highest debt burden per bed in 2006, is now at the average for Poland (per Figure 3). The debt
was also reduced by more than 45% in real terms in Łódzkie, Pomorskie and Lubuskie but debt per bed
of the latter two remains among the highest in Poland (bold dots). Some of the regions which have seen
their debt increase in real terms remain below the average debt per bed for Poland, but the situation of
Lubelskie, Kujawsko-Pomorskie and Mazowieckie has been rapidly deteriorating and they respectively
now have the first, second and fourth highest ratio of debt per bed in the country (per Fig 3).
3. No single or simple reason can explain differences across regions once the size of their hospital
sector is taken into account36. In particular, there is no correlation between the hospital debt in a region
and income for that region. In other words, hospitals in regions at an overall socio-economic
disadvantage are not less able of managing hospital debts. Likewise, there is no relationship between
the density of beds or occupancy ratios for these beds and the level of debt in that region, meaning that
regions with large infrastructure or in which beds are not used to their full potential are not
systematically accumulating more debt. In other words, there is no simple explanation of the variation.

                          Figure 6: Change in the number of beds and the stock of debt
                                 in real terms by regions between 2006 and 2012




                               Note: The five regions with the highest debt burden in 2012
                                         (as measured by debt/bed)are in bold.

4. An interesting question is whether regions which more actively try to right-size the hospital sector
are also more successful in managing the debt (and vice versa). Although it does not provide hard

36
  In absolute terms, regions with larger populations have – almost by definition - more hospitals and hospital beds
and thus larger stocks of debts. A meaningful comparison needs to look at standardized figures that take account
of this scale factor.

                                                          34
evidence, Figure 6 suggests that this could be the case. The vertical axis of Figure 4 ranks regions based
on how the number of beds changed over time (number of beds being a crude proxy for size of their
hospital infrastructure). The eight regions above the horizontal axis have seen an increase in the number
of beds and those below a decrease. Overall, the number of beds in Poland has decreased by around 6
percent between 2006 and 2012. The dotted axes separate the regions in 4 groups around Poland
average. The top right quadrant denotes regions in which the number of beds has decreased less than
the average (or even increased) and the debt has decreased less than the average for Poland (or
increased). The bottom left quadrant around Poland includes the regions which have significantly
reduced both their stock of debt and beds more than the average. The four regions which have most
reduced their debt are in that quadrant. Conversely, regions of Poland where the debt has not
decreased much are also for the most part those in which the number of beds has not decreased much
(Mazowieckie is a notable exception: the increase in debts has come despites significant progress in
reducing the number of beds). Overall, decreases in the stock of debt and in the number of beds appear
to have gone hand in hand over the last few years (and increases in both as well).
5. In sum, this analysis challenges the idea that the debt in the hospital sectors has a single and
straightforward explanation, for instance the chronic underfunding of the health sector or the role of
the Narodowy Fundusz Zdrowia (NFZ) the national health insurance fund. On the contrary, it shows that
some regions are clearly more proficient at managing the problem than others, including those which
started off in a worse position.

Variations depending on ownership
6. The share of public hospital debt by owner is proportional to their share of hospital turnover, and
Voivodships account for the largest share of the public hospital debt stock. Figure 7 describes the
share of each category of owner in total public hospital revenues in 2010. Given that acute care
hospitals are primarily paid based on their activity though diagnostic-related groups (DRGs), the
breakdown of revenues provides a visualization of the “size” of each type of actor’s share in the Polish
market of hospital services37. Voivodships are the largest operators in the market (40%), followed by
powiats (24%) and universities (17%)38. The share of each type of founder in the deficit of public
hospitals is roughly in proportion to its share in the turnover. In other words, in aggregate terms, all
categories of owners on average incurred similar levels of deficits in 2010 (except university hospitals
which had a lower one). The share of each type of provider in the stock of debt is also roughly in line
with its shares in hospital revenues. The only difference appears to be on arrears which represent a
higher share of university hospitals’ debt (34%) and Ministry of Health owned facilities (33%) than for
other types of owners (not shown).
7. Data suggest that there is a tremendous variation across hospitals . Efforts to obtain (anonymous)
hospital-level data and provide a better view of the variations in their financial standing have not been
successful. The Ministry of Health reports that around 67% of all SPZOZ39 are free from debt and that

37
   DRG-based revenues are correlated with the volume and complexity of care (so for instance a specialized
hospital with the same number of beds and patients as a non-specialized one would earn more revenue due to the
complexity of its caseload. As the bulk of hospital revenues comes from the NFZ through DRGs and as a reasonable
degree of correlation between complexity and price can be assumed, the breakdown of revenues by type of owner
thus gives a sense of their respective ‘share’ in the market of hospital services. One caveat is that the data only
includes public hospitals. Private facilities represent around 10% of beds and tend not to provide complex services
and would probably account for less than 10% of the overall market.
38
   See Table 2 Table 2 for a discussion of the data on hospitals.
39
   SPZOZ (Samodzielny publiczny zakład opieki zdrowotnej) is the default legal status of public health care entities.

                                                         35
10% of these entities account for 80% of the stock. In other words, not all hospitals in Poland are facing
financial problems or high levels of debt, and the majority is in reasonable financial standing.


                     Figure 7: Share of each type of owner in the public hospital sector
                                 revenues, deficit, debt and arrears (2010)




                                                     36
