                                                                    88272


        H N P        D i   s   c u s     s   i   o   n      P a p   e   R




HEALTH IN ALL POLICIES AS A STRATEGIC POLICY
RESPONSE TO NCDs



Vivian Lin, Catherine Jones, Shiyong Wang, and Enis Bariş




February 2014
Health in All Policies as a Strategic Policy Response to
                          NCDs




 Vivian Lin, Catherine Jones, Shiyong Wang, and Enis Bariş




                      February 2014
       Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Family of the
World Bank's Human Development Network (HDN). The papers in this series aim to
provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the
World Bank, to its affiliated organizations, or to members of its Board of Executive
Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this
series should take into account this provisional character.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor,
Martin Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                              i
     Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

           Health in All Policies as a Strategic Policy Response to NCDs

             Vivian Lin,a Catherine Jones, b Shiyong Wang,c and Enis Barışd
a
  La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia
b
  University of Montreal, Canada
c
  Health, Nutrition, and Population, Human Development Network, the World Bank
d
  Health, Nutrition, and Population, Human Development, Middle East and North Africa
Region, the World Bank


Paper prepared as one of the background papers for the Non-communicable Disease
Report for the Middle East and North Africa Region, World Bank.

This work was funded by the MENA Knowledge and Learning Committee

Abstract: The aim of HiAP is to bring diverse sectors together to find shared solutions;
it focuses on identifying “win-win” or “cobenefits” such that policy measures contribute
not only to improved health outcomes but also to outcomes desired by other sectors, such
as education, environment, welfare, agriculture, and transportation. HiAP can be applied
to NCD prevention and control from three different entry points: risk factors or
conditions, population groups (including life course), and sectors. Health in All Policies
(HiAP) is a relatively new concept and policy practice that attempts to incorporate
consideration into the policy decision-making process of how public policies and
programs affect community health and well-being. It represents a way of working across
sectors that aims to find solutions for complex, interrelated, and persistent problems.
With the global epidemic in non-communicable diseases (NCDs), HiAP offers a potential
approach and a pathway to secure coordinated action on social determinants of health that
relate to NCDs and result in health inequalities. Promising examples can be seen globally
for action on both specific NCD risk factors as well as in a more systemic approach to
policy decision making.

Keywords: Non-communicable diseases, Health in All Policies, Mutisectroal Approach

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in the paper are
entirely those of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its
Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.

Correspondence Details: Shiyong Wang, 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC,
USA; telephone: 1-202-473-4532; fax: 1-202-522-3234; e-mail: swang1@worldbank.org.




                                            ii
                                               Table of Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ............................................................................................... V

PREFACE ........................................................................................................................ VI

INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1

WHAT IS HIAP? .............................................................................................................. 2

APPLYING HIAP TO NCD PREVENTION AND CONTROL .................................. 4
   HIAP ACTION ON SDH RELEVANT TO NCDS .................................................................... 6
HOW HIAP IS OPERATIONALIZED .......................................................................... 8
   GOVERNANCE .................................................................................................................. 9
   PROCESSES AND TOOLS .................................................................................................. 11
IMPLEMENTING HIAP: INTERNATIONAL CASE EXAMPLES....................... 14

LESSONS FROM HIAP EXPERIENCES ................................................................... 18

MOVING FORWARD ................................................................................................... 23

CONCLUSIONS ............................................................................................................. 25

REFERENCES ................................................................................................................ 27

ANNEX 1: CASE STUDIES ......................................................................................... 32

ANNEX 2: EZ DOCUMENTATION TOOL TEMPLATE ........................................ 39

ANNEX 3: HEALTH IN ALL POLICIES FOR NCD PREVENTION AND
CONTROL-COUNTRY ASSESSMENT TOOL ......................................................... 45




                                                                iii
List of Tables
TABLE 1 LIFE-COURSE APPROACH FOR NCD PREVENTION ........................................................... 6
TABLE 2 EXAMPLES OF HIAP FOR NCD PREVENTION AND CONTROL ........................................... 8
TABLE 3 OVERVIEW OF HOW STRUCTURES MAY ADDRESS ACTION TO SUPPORT HEALTH IN ALL
POLICIES ........................................................................................................................................ 11
TABLE 4 GLOBAL EXAMPLES OF HIAP ......................................................................................... 16
TABLE 5 MODELS OF INTER-SECTORAL INTERACTION .................................................................. 21
TABLE 6 COST AND FEASIBILITY OF NCD BEST BUYS ................................................................. 23
TABLE 7 ALLOCATION OF RESPONSIBILITIES UNDER HIAP FOR NCD PREVENTION AND CONTROL
....................................................................................................................................................... 24


List of Boxes
BOX 1 DEFINITION OF HIAP......................................................................................................... 3
BOX 2 NCD BEST BUYS ............................................................................................................... 5
BOX 3 WHAT GOVERNMENT ACTIONS ARE NEEDED.................................................................... 22




                                                                           iv
                            ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP
Discussion Paper. We are indebted to the following World Bank colleagues for their
valuable comments: Anne M. Pierre-Louis (Lead Health Specialist, HDNHE), Eugenia
Bonilla-Chacin (Senior Health Economist, LCSHH), Sameh El-Saharty (Senior Health
Specialist, SASHN) and Aakanksha Pande (Health Economist, MNSHH). We sincerely
appreciate the support of the MENA Knowledge and Learning Committee in funding this
review. The authors wish to express their gratitude to Martin Lutalo (Operation Officer,
HDNHE) and Melanie Ann Mayhew (Communication Officer, HDNHE) for their advice
on possible dissemination mechanisms for this report. The team is indebted to Dr. Ibtihal
Fadhil, the NCD Advisor, East Mediterranean Region, World Health Organization for the
valuable comments. Research assistance by Bronwyn Carter, La Trobe University, in
relation to Annex 1 is also acknowledged.




                                           v
                                      PREFACE


According to the Global Burden of Disease Study (GBD 2010), between 1990 and 2010,
in terms of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), non-communicable diseases increased
and caused increasing disabilities in most of the countries in the Middle East and North
Africa Region. For instance, the share of disease burden caused by NCDs in Egypt rose
from 46.2 percent in 1990 to 72.5 percent in 2010. On the other hand, despite improved
awareness and political commitment, countries in the region are still searching for ways
to implement effective responses to the escalating scourge from NCDs.

To facilitate this pursuit, the World Bank (the Middle East and North Africa Region —
MENA) and the World Health Organization (the Regional Office for the Eastern
Mediterranean — EMRO) agreed to develop a joint report on NCDs in the region. The
objectives of the joint report are (a) to document NCD epidemiology and country
responses in the region, (b) to canvass policy options available for NCD prevention and
control based on global experiences, (c) to further improve political commitment to
actionable national NCD plans/programs for the implementation of the UN Declaration
on NCDs, and (d) to suggest a roadmap for advancing an NCD prevention and control
agenda in the region.

To prepare the report, six background papers have been commissioned. They include the
following:
    • Social Economic Impacts of NCDs in EMRO/MENA Region
    • Epidemiological Analysis of NCDs in EMRO/MENA
    • Assessment on Health in All Policies for NCDs in EMRO/MENA
    • Development of Sub-Account for NCDs in Selected Countries
    • Toward Harmonization of Generic Drugs Policy in EMRO/MENA
    • Development of Pro-Health Workforce Development in EMRO/MENA

This review is one of the six background papers for the joint World Bank and WHO
regional report on NCDs. Health in All Policies (HiAP) represents the up-to-date
philosophy and practice of pro-health development. Similar approaches include multi-
sectoral action for health, healthy public policies, and the whole-of-government approach.
HiAP requires development policies and practices to be assessed for their impact on
people’s health. In case they cause negative impact, be it in the short or long term,
mitigation measures must be designed and implemented. HiAP has been mandated by the
European Community and increasingly practiced around the World. However, HiAP-
related practices have not been systematically analyzed and documented in the MENA
Region.

This paper reviews recent developments in the global understanding of HiAP recognizing
that the literature is still limited. It also proposes tools to document HiAP experiences in
addressing NCD prevention and control (Annex 2) and to collect information related to
policy initiatives and intersectoral mechanisms and partnerships that address the key risk
factors and social determinants of NCD prevalence (Annex 3), building on existing tools
that WHO (EMRO) has developed to assess health promotion projects and gauge

                                            vi
intersectoral action capacity in ministries of health. It is hoped by the authors that this
document can improve the understanding among the relevant policy makers and
academics in the region of HiAP approaches for better health outcomes and help generate
more evidence on HiAP for NCDs through structured assessments by the member states.




                                            vii
                                  INTRODUCTION

1.      Many determinants of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) lie outside the service
delivery remit of the health care system. The theory and practice of health promotion, as
articulated in the Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion (WHO 1986), point to the
importance of action on public policy and environmental influences as well as of action to
support change at community and individual levels. Prevention of NCDs, therefore,
requires collaboration from multiple sectors, at both the policy level and the community
levels. The clustering of key NCD risk factors in lower socioeconomic groups further
suggests that the determinants of NCDs are similar to the determinants of social and
health inequities in general. This further reinforces the importance of intersectoral
collaboration as a strategy to achieve health gain and to close the health equity gap
(McQueen et al. 2012). The role of those within the health sector is often to provide
analytical and evidential support for defining potential interventions.

2.       The term Health in All Policies (HiAP) was coined in the late 1990s, although its
roots can be traced back to the early history of public health when the importance of
social determinants of health was recognized by the Greeks and Romans (Ibid.). During
the Finnish EU presidency in 2006, this approach to policy making was explored through
a resolution that called for member states to undertake health impact assessment (HIA) of
major policy initiatives, with specific attention to policy impact on equity and to consider
the added value of cooperation between government sectors, social partners, private
sector, and non-government organizations in formulating and implementing national
policies (Council of the European Union 2006). More recently, Finland hosted the
WHO’s 8th Global Conference on Health Promotion, which took stock of global lessons
to date.

3.      HiAP has been applied to a myriad of public health concerns to address the non-
health sector influences on health outcomes. The purpose of this paper is to consider how
HiAP may be adopted as a strategy for addressing NCDs. This paper will not review
evidence about the relationship between social determinants of health and NCDs, or
health equity. This paper will define HiAP, discuss how it works and how it applies to
NCDs, review case studies that have been documented across the world, and consider key
lessons for adoption of the HiAP approach as part of a national response to NCDs.




                                             1
                                  WHAT IS HIAP?

4.      The early European interest in HiAP was formulated by experiences with
intersectoral collaboration from a number of large-scale NCD prevention and control
projects, notably Heartbeat Wales in the United Kingdom and the North Karelia Project
in Finland (Kickbusch and Buckett 2010). As these projects demonstrated the value of
intersectoral collaboration, the challenge was to go beyond projects and create systemic
change. The Finnish government led the way with integration of optimal population
health and its fair distribution as targets of public policy when it recognized health as a
basic contributor to the welfare of the country. As the EU president in 2006, Finland
called upon governments across Europe to ensure that health considerations were
included in all government policies.

5.      Simply put, HiAP is a collaborative approach to improving the health of all people
by incorporating health considerations into policy decision making across sectors
(Rudolph et al. 2013). From the public policy perspective, it has variously been linked to
other terms such as joined-up government, horizontal governance, policy coherence,
partnerships, and whole-of-government, as well as whole-of-society approach. From a
public health perspective, it also reflects the “one health” approach, which addresses
diseases arising from the human and animal interface, and requires close cooperation
between the health, animal, and agricultural sectors. From a health-promotion
perspective, the HiAP concept and practice builds on earlier and closely related concepts
of healthy public policy and intersectoral action.

6.      There have been a variety of definitions of HiAP. The 2006 European
Observatory publication considers HiAP “a horizontal, complementary policy-related
strategy with a high potential to contributing to population health. The core of HiAP is to
examine determinants of health, which can be influenced to improve health but are
mainly controlled by policies of sectors other than health” (Sihto, Ollia, and Koivusalo,
2006). By 2010, the Adelaide Statement on Health in All Policies described HiAP as
another approach to governance, highlighting such features as systematic engagement
across government to address the health and well-being dimensions of the activities of
various sectors, the need for institutionalized processes that value cross-sector problem
solving, providing leadership, mandates, incentives, budgetary commitments, and
sustainable mechanisms to support government agencies to work collaboratively on
integrated solutions (WHO 2010 b). Reflecting on these discourses, the 2012 European
Observatory study considered HiAP a policy principle as well as a policy practice that
includes, integrates, or internalizes health in other policies that shape or influence the
social determinants of health (Lin et al. 2012).



                                            2
                                  Box 1 DEFINITION of HiAP

         Health in All Policies is an inter-sectoral approach to public policies that
         systematically takes into account the health and health systems implications of
         decisions, seeks synergies, and avoids harmful health impacts to improve
         population and health equity.

        Source: WHO 2013c.

7.      As the aim of HiAP is to bring diverse sectors together to find shared solutions, it
has a focus on identifying “win-win” or “cobenefits” such that policy measures contribute
not only to improved health outcomes but also to outcomes desired by other sectors, such
as education, environment, welfare, agriculture, and transportation. As such, HiAP has
been suggested as an approach to addressing ‘wicked’ problems; that is, policy problems
that are complex or intractable, where cause and effect have not been clear, and may
require solutions of an interdependent effort (Kickbusch and Buckett 2010). The call for,
and attempt to implement, joined-up government in the United Kingdom and Scandinavia
in the 1990s was motivated by the need for new strategies to address persistent social and
health challenges. In the WHO Asia-Pacific Region (Rani et al. 2012), more utilitarian
frameworks informed the establishment of intersectoral commissions for public health (in
Mongolia), health- promoting environment (in Malaysia), and NCDs (in Fiji and the
Philippines).

8.      By 2010, these whole-of-government HiAP approaches have been reported from
16 countries and regions around the world, including developing countries: Australia,
Brazil, Cuba, England, Finland, Iran, Malaysia, New Zealand, Northern Ireland, Norway,
Quebec, Scotland, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Thailand, and Wales. In each instance, the formal
adoption of HiAP was preceded by the emergence of ad hoc intersectoral initiatives to
address health equity — informed by a government vision for health, which was broader
than health care delivery and recognized the role of social determinants. Nearly all
countries undertook a mixture of universal and targeted approaches in their attempt to
improve health for all and to address the health equity and needs of vulnerable population
groups.




                                             3
      APPLYING HIAP TO NCD PREVENTION AND CONTROL

9.      The importance of public policy measures to control NCD risk factors has been
well established and forms the basis of the WHO's recommended "NCD's Best Buys"
(WHO 2011a). The most advanced practices are in tobacco control, with lessons
increasingly applied to alcohol, nutrition, physical activity, and mental health. Exemplar
elements of tobacco control include banning of advertising, enlargement of tobacco
warning labels and use of graphic warnings, and banning of cigarette sales to minors
(WHO 2005). While these policy measures are specifically directed to reduce tobacco
consumption, they have also brought shared benefits (or co-benefits) to the health sector
and other areas of public policy. For instance, increased tax on tobacco products raised
both the price signal for smokers as well as revenue for the government, while the
smoking ban in worksites and public spaces helps to prevent exposure to second-hand
smoke as well as to enhance productivity and amenities.

10.    Adopting the HiAP approach for NCD prevention was recognized at the UN
High-Level Meeting on NCDs in New York in October 2011, following from the First
Global Ministerial Conference on Healthy Lifestyles and NCDs Control in Moscow in
2011, which identified the potential impact for fiscal policies and various regulatory
measures.




                                            4
11.    HiAP can be applied to NCD prevention and control from three different entry
points: risk factors or conditions, population groups (including life course), and sectors.
The WHO’s Best Buys for NCD prevention are largely policy measures, as seen in the
box below, and are directed at the major risk factors.

                                  Box 2 NCD BEST BUYS

     Tobacco use
        - Tobacco tax increase
        - Legislation for smoke-free indoor worksites and for smoke-free public places
        - Health information and warnings on packets
        - Bans on tobacco advertising, promotion, and sponsorship

     Harmful alcohol use
        - Increase taxes on alcohol
        - Restrict access to retailed alcohol
        - Bans on alcohol advertising

     Unhealthy diet and physical inactivity
        - Reduce salt content of manufactured and prepared foods
        - Replace trans fat with polyunsaturated fat
        - Mass media campaign to raise awareness on diet and physical activity

          Source: WHO 2011a.

12.     There are a number of public policy measures, which are in place in many
countries related to nutrition (for example, labeling of ingredients) and to alcohol (blood
alcohol limits for drivers, banning of advertising, limited hours for bars) (ANPHA 2012;
WHO 2012). While the evidence is still accumulating, incentives that increase the
availability and affordability of fruits and vegetables, and other economic interventions to
promote availability and access to healthy foods, have been recognized as important
policy issues. Targeting disadvantaged communities or vulnerable population groups can
be part and parcel of these approaches.

13.     As NCDs often have their origins in intrauterine and early childhood
environments, adopting a life-course approach is important for NCD prevention.
Opportunities also exist across the lifespan for lifestyle modification, but reorienting risk
factors at the population level is more feasible within a conducive economic and legal
environment. Policy opportunities through the life course can be seen in the table below.




                                                5
                 Table 1   Life-Course Approach for NCD Prevention
       Stage of life                          Policy opportunities
  Foetal development       Subsidy for healthy food, targeted at women of low social
  and          maternal    economic segments
  environment
  Infancy and early       Subsidy for healthy food, targeted at low SES families
  childhood               Early childhood development programs
                          Policies to support exclusive breastfeeding (e.g.,
                          breastfeeding rooms)
  Adolescence             Regulating food advertising
                          School lunch programs
                          Banning of alcohol and tobacco sales to minors
  Adulthood               Health insurance incentives for keeping physically active
                          Active transport
  Aging and         older Age-friendly cities
  people
  All stages                Safe communities
                            Banning smoking in public spaces and worksites
       Source: World Bank 2011.

14.    Population-based early childhood development programs have been demonstrated
to be particularly important in reducing social and health inequities in the long term
(WHO 2008). Given the vulnerability of children, controls on advertising — of tobacco,
unhealthy food, alcohol — aimed at children has become another priority for NCD
prevention.

HIAP ACTION ON SDH RELEVANT TO NCDS
15.    As public policy measures intervene at the population level, their impact is bigger
than individual-level interventions. When targeted, they can also be effective in reducing
social and health inequities through action on broader social determinants of health.
Areas that have been identified as promising interventions for NCD prevention that can
also address broader social determinants of health are urban planning, taxation (incentives
or disincentives), pricing and subsidies (incentives or disincentives), production and
marketing of goods, health-promotion financing, and legislative mandates (UN 2011;
World Bank 2011).

16.     Urban development polices (such as targeting housing density, public
transportation, green space) can encourage active transport and walkable cities.
Availability of safe environments for walking and recreational activities can be important
in influencing individual behavior. Economic incentives can be used to increase use of
public transportation and, hence, incidental physical activity. All these policies can be
targeted to favor disadvantaged localities or vulnerable population groups.



                                            6
17.     Regulatory and fiscal measures are increasingly used in many countries, states,
and cities. Former New York mayor Michael Bloomberg’s track record is most notable in
adopting such measures for smoking, restaurants, food supply, and cars, for instance.
While evidence in a well-established area such as smoking is strong, there is limited
experience and therefore evidence for the effectiveness of such measures for tackling
more complex issues such as obesity.

18.     Regulatory and fiscal policies are not necessarily sufficient for prevention. Policy
intent is achieved through a combination of legislative enforcement, community
education, policies at micro settings, and the development of alternative products.
Healthy settings, created through intersectoral collaboration, can create policy
environments at the micro-level that reinforce healthy living. For instance, policies can
offer incentives for health-promotion programs at the worksite. Health-promoting schools
can also be adopted on a system wide basis. Incentives and subsidies can be used to
target settings in particular localities or specific population groups. Partnerships between
government agencies, civil society, and the private sector at local and national levels are
integral to the NCD prevention effort and complement government policies. Such
partnerships create enabling environments for individuals to exercise choice in managing
potential risks to health.

19.    In an analysis of the NCD challenges for China, the World Bank suggested a
range of public policy interventions for NCD prevention and control, as seen in the table
below. These are relevant to developed and developing countries alike (Table 2).

20.    While there are numerous possibilities for policy alignment to address the NCD
challenge, the starting point is often identifying the co-benefits for the different sectors.
For instance, improving scholastic outcomes while improving health of children, or
increased production of fruits and vegetables with improved consumption of fruits and
vegetables in populations, or having green cities that are attractive to tourism while
encouraging greater physical activity.




                                             7
                  Table 2 Examples of HiAP for NCD Prevention and Control
     Sector                                         Policy opportunity
Finance                •   Subsidy for healthy food production
                       •   Increasing prices for tobacco, alcohol, oils
                       •   Removal of subsidies for harmful products, such as tobacco and sugar
Agriculture, food      •   Salt reduction in processed food
                       •   Reduction of trans fats in food
                       •   Crop substitution for tobacco
                       •   Maintaining adequate land for agriculture and local food system
                           development
Environment            •   Enforcement of environmental pollution standards
                       •   Green spaces and physical activity facilities as part of housing
                           development
Infrastructure,        •   Better public transportation
transportation         •   Road planning to facilitate cycling and walking
                       •   Safe communities
Education              •   School breakfast/lunch programs
                       •   Sun protection measures
Social protection      •   Single payer system
                       •   Funding for care planning and coordination
Law enforcement        •   Penalties for violating smoke-free environment, excessive drinking, and
                           occupational and environmental pollution
Media                  •   Ban inclusion of smoking and alcohol in TV and films
                       •   Ban advertising of cigarettes and alcohol
Private sector         •   Incentives for worksite-based programs
Source: World Bank 2011.



                        HOW HIAP IS OPERATIONALIZED

21.     While the concept of intersectoral action for health gain is well recognized, the
challenge for many governments is how best to operationalize it. Some of the practical
challenges experienced by European governments have included lack of simple solutions,
limited understanding of causal pathways, lack of available stratified and small area data,
length of time needed to achieve results, need for multiple sectors to work in concert,
levers at different levels of government, and competing policy agendas (Exworthy and
Hunter 2011). Nonetheless, the experiences around the world to date identify a variety of
tools being used to implement the HiAP approach. Notably, these include (European
Observatory on Health Systems and Policies 2006, Government of South Australia 2010;
Shankardass et al. 2011; McQueen et al. 2012):
      i.   Governance structures (such as inter-ministerial and interdepartmental
           committees, cross-sector action teams, partnership forums, integrated budgets
           and accounting)


                                                 8
     ii.   Shared activities (joint workforce development, information and evaluation
           systems, community consultations, integrated reporting)
    iii.   Analytical tools (health lens, health impact assessment)

GOVERNANCE
22.     Governance structures provide a practical mechanism and reflect the mandate for
joint work across sectors of government, and for engagement with stakeholders in the
policy process. Such structures can be established at the political level, the bureaucratic
level, and through partnership arrangements with non-state actors. Case studies reviewed
by the European Observatory found such mechanisms as (McQueen et al. 2012):
    • Parliament (for example, inquiry, committee)
    • Government (cabinet committee, coordinating minister)
    • Ministry (interdepartmental committee, joint task force)
    • Statutory agency (delegated financing, service delivery, regulation)
    • Civil society (consultative forum, funded project)
    • Public-private partnership (joint venture, consultation)

23.     The European case studies found these governance structures were used for a wide
range of governance actions and through different phases of the policy cycle. Commonly,
these structures accomplished the following:
    • Provided evidence in support of HiAP
    • Advocated for HiAP
    • Helped set policy goals and targets
    • Coordinated policy development and implementation
    • Offered policy guidance
    • Negotiated or provided financial support
    • Provided a legal mandate
    • Oversaw implementation and management of programs
    • Ensured monitoring and evaluation

24.     While governments ultimately take responsibility for policy decision making,
there were also case studies that demonstrated the importance of engagement with non-
state actors, both with civil society and private sector organizations. Participatory
processes have been important for policy agenda setting as well as for generating and
testing acceptability of various policy options.

25.     These European case studies showed that different governance structures were
useful for different purposes. Many were important for agenda setting and selection of
policy options as much as for negotiating policy goals, engaging stakeholders, monitoring


                                            9
implementation, and evaluating policy impacts. Table 1.3 summarizes the main
governance actions associated with particular governance structures.




                                    10
  Table 3 Overview of How Structures May Address Action to Support Health in All
                                     Policies

                                                                                                                                         Governance actions




                                                                                                Setting goals & targets




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Implementation &
                                                                                                                                                                                      Financial support
                                                                             Evidence support




                                                                                                                                                                    Policy guidance



                                                                                                                                                                                                          Providing legal
                                                                                                                                                     Monitoring &
                                                                                                                          Coordination




                                                                                                                                                                                                          management
                                                                                                                                                     evaluation
                                                                                                                                          Advocacy




                                                                                                                                                                                                          mandate
                                                         Ministerial                            √                          √                             √                                                √
                                                         linkages
                                       Government
                                                         Cabinet
Inter-sectoral governance structures




                                       level
                                                         committees and                         √                          √               √
                                                         secretaries
                                       Parliament        Parliamentary          √                                                          √             √             √                                  √
                                       level             committees
                                                         Interdepartmental
                                       Bureaucratic      committees and         √                                          √               √             √             √                                            √
                                       level /           units
                                       (civil service)   Mega ministries                                                   √                                                                                        √
                                                         and mergers
                                       Managing          Joint budgeting                                                   √                                                             √                          √
                                       funding           Delegated                                                         √               √                                             √                √         √
                                       arrangements      financing
                                                         Public                 √               √                                          √                           √
                                                         engagement
                                       Engagement
                                       beyond
                                                         Stakeholder
                                                                                                                                           √                           √                 √                √
                                                         engagement
                                       government
                                                         Industry                                                          √                                                             √
                                                         engagement
Source: Lin et al. 2012.



PROCESSES AND TOOLS
26.     Immediate success is not always assured, however. Any type of partnership takes
time to establish — to develop workable business rules, to understand the other’s
imperatives, and to agree on common goals and strategies. In all instances of HiAP, a
particular problem was identified and acted upon through one or more interventions.
These entry points for HiAP point to the specific sector to be involved as well as
demonstrate the role that the health sector plays. Having shared activities that mutually
satisfy each other’s core business needs is one way to foster strong partnerships.
Analytical and capacity building work are good starting points for dialogue and
cooperation between different sectors.



                                                                                                11
27.     Using shared analytical tools helps to reach common understanding of the policy
problem to be addressed. Health impact assessments (HIAs) have been recognized as one
of the most promising tools and are increasingly used to bring communities and
government agencies together around proposed development (Kemm et al. 2004). HIA is
defined as “a systematic process that uses an array of data sources and analytic methods
and considers input from stakeholders to determine the potential effects of a proposed
policy, plan, program, or project on the health of a population and the distribution of
those effects within the population” (National Research Council 2011). Wales has
adopted the use of health equity impact assessment as a rapid policy analysis tool, which
includes community participation. In Norway, HIAP is used as a policy instrument to
promote intersectoral action.

28.     The core stages of an HIA include (1) screening to determine whether an HIA is
warranted and would be useful in the decision-making process; (2) scoping to determine
which health impacts to evaluate, the methods for analysis, and the work plan for
undertaking the assessment; (3) assessment through gathering data on existing conditions
and predicting future health impacts; (4) making recommendations to reduce negative
health outcomes while promoting positive health outcomes; (5) communicating findings;
and (6) monitoring and evaluating the impact of the HIA on the decision and on process
outcomes (Rudolph et al. 2013).

29.     Engagement is a process, although informed by analytical work. The South
Australia Health Lens process is a five-step approach that particularly stresses the
application in early stages of the policy-development process: (1) engage (for example,
joint working group to agree on policy focus); (2) gather evidence (quantitative and
qualitative research, critical appraisal); (3) generate advice (report and recommendations);
(4) navigate policy decision making (output approved by lead agency and health sector);
and (5) evaluate (process and impact). Having the central agency (that is, Department of
the Premier and Cabinet) as coordinator of interdepartmental processes can be important
in providing a strong authorizing environment.

30.     The South Australian approach is comparable to the health-promotion lens
developed by Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), which attempts to incorporate
an understanding of the social, cultural, political, environmental, and economic
conditions and structures that affect the lives and health of individuals and communities
(PAHO 2008). The aim is to build on the strengths and assets of the communities and
their institutions, and incorporate them into all aspects of program planning.




                                            12
31.    While these tools have different names, they have similar aims: (1) provide a
method for considering health issues related to policies in other sectors, and (2) point to
the importance of analytical work as well as engagement with stakeholders.

32.     With structures and processes in place, the sharing of quantitative and qualitative
data across sectors provides another mechanism for developing a common understanding
of the problems and potential solutions. Experiences suggest the importance of using
data from a variety of sectors to expand the collective understanding of the relationship
between health and physical, social, and economic environments (Rudolph et al. 2013).




                                            13
  IMPLEMENTING HIAP: INTERNATIONAL CASE EXAMPLES

33.     Although HiAP is a relatively new development in public policy, there are
experiences of HiAP in both developed and developing countries, and these examples are
applied to specific issues of relevance to NCDs and to a systems approach to policy
development. They are also applied at national and subnational levels. The most notable
example of an HiAP approach applied internationally for NCD prevention and control is
the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC), which is being implemented in
both developed and developing countries. These policy measures have brought shared
benefits (or co-benefits) to the health sector as well as to other arenas of public policy,
such as raising government revenue and enhancing worksite productivity and public
space amenities. Increasingly, HiAP is being adopted to address other NCD risk factors
such as alcohol use and obesity (for example, food, physical activity, active transport).

34.     In terms of a system-wide approach, healthy cities have been exemplary in
adopting an HiAP approach at the local level. Since the late 1980s, in both developed
and developing countries, a variety of models have evolved that bring together municipal
decision making with citizen participation that address locally identified priority actions
to improve health for the community. The focus and form of healthy cities vary widely
depending on the framework for local municipal administration, but healthy cities have
been widely established in Europe, Latin America, and Asia. Variously, these efforts
have tackled public transportation, safe drinking water, food supply, affordable housing,
quality recreational environments, social services and educational opportunities, physical
activity facilities, cultural amenities, crime and violence, pollution, and traffic safety.
They are conceived more as social movements than as public health interventions. For
instance, in Asia, the Alliance for Healthy Cities is a network of mayors who promote the
approach and facilitate mutual learning. The challenge in moving from these local efforts
to a national approach is the complexity of issues and the number of actors at the national
level.

35.     While Michael Bloomberg was the mayor of New York City, comprehensive
regulatory measures were adopted to reduce exposure to NCD risk factors and to promote
health, but the actions were not enunciated as part of a “healthy cities” framework.
Although the now infamous attempt to ban large-size soda bottles ultimately failed, the
ban on trans fats affected the industry well beyond the city, given the size of the New
York market. The threat of bans also had a larger community impact in stimulating
debates across the country, if not globally.




                                            14
36.     The Pan American Health Organization has suggested some criteria that can be
used to determine whether a policy activity can be classified as HiAP. These are (1)
political support at the highest level, (2) formal intersectoral structure, (3) a specific
budget allocation, (4) explicit commitment from other sectors, (5) explicit commitment to
reduce inequity in health, (6) scientific evidence on the impact, and (7) mechanisms for
participation and empowerment that enhance ownership and sustainability of programs
(PAHO 2013). Some notable examples are illustrated in the table below.




                                           15
                            Table 4 Global Examples of HiAP
                          Developed countries                  Developing countries
                   FCTC                               FCTC
                   Health-promotion foundations —     Health-promotion foundations/ boards
                   Victoria                           — Thailand (see case study),
                   Alcohol control policy —           Singapore
                   Australia                          Conditional cash transfer for maternal
                   Healthy Transportation Compact     child health (MCH) — Mexico (see
                   in Massachusetts                   case study)
 NCD risk
                   Comprehensive         regulatory   National Agreement for Healthy Food
 factors
                   measures — New York (see case      — Mexico
                   study)                             Alcohol policy — Thailand, Chile
                                                      Sao Paulo Green and Healthy
                                                      Environment Program
                                                      Argentine “Less Salt, More Life”
                                                      Intersectoral commissions for NCDs
                                                      — Philippines, Fiji
                   Healthy cities                     Healthy cities
                   King County Equity and Social      Inter-American Faces, Voices, and
                   Justice Ordinance                  Places (FVP)
                   Quebec Strategic Meeting on        Ecuador National Plan for Good
                   Health                             Living (see case study)
                   South Australia HiAP               El Salvador Intersectoral Health
 System-wide
                   California HiAP Task Force (see    Commission
 policy strategy
                   case study)                        First Wealth is Health in Bihar, India
                   US National Prevention, Health     Thai National Health Assembly
                   Promotion, and Public Health       Thailand Health Impact Assessment
                   Council                            Mongolia Intersectoral Commission
                   Finland HiAP (see case study)      for Public Health
                   Health Targets in Austria
       Source: Authors assessment

37.    For the policies and programs that focus on key NCD risk factors, whether at the
national or subnational level, there is a general approach of adopting multilevel and
multi-sectoral interventions, consistent with the Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion
(WHO 1986). Typically, there would be policy interventions to regulate unhealthy
products or create environments that support behavior change, alongside the targeting of
population groups (such as children) or particular communities for communication,
education, and action. This has been seen in the Argentine salt-reduction program, the
Mexican national agreement for food health, and alcohol control in Thailand and Chile.

38.    The adoption of an intersectoral governance mechanism to work across a wide
range of social determinants is a newer application of the HiAP approach. Finland has
the most established and longstanding approach dated to the 1970s, when it was
recognized that the health of the population was closely connected with the social and


                                            16
economic well-being of the nation (Leppo et al. 2013). Targets were set for health
improvement and have been successively updated, with legislative requirement for
reporting since the 1990s. Constitutional reform placed responsibility for health
promotion with public authorities, and health impact assessment has contributed to
improved understanding of health by other sectors. More recently, a pragmatic approach
has been adopted in South Australia (SA) (Government of South Australia 2010). With
the State Strategic Plan providing the entry point, joint policy initiatives were identified
for relevant sectors based on the intersection of interest between health and other sectors.
Health lens was used as the analytical tool to identify these co-benefits, while policy
coordination was facilitated from the Department of the Premier and Cabinet. Like
Finland, SA used targets, administrative structures, and analytical tools. Unlike Finland,
SA did not take a comprehensive approach, but worked selectively as priorities and
opportunities emerged.

39.     Similar strategies are being adopted in developing countries. The National Plan
for Good Living in Ecuador is a program that flows from the National Development Plan,
which aims to reduce economic and social inequality gaps and address basic needs of
communities. It resulted from a constitutional reform and is coordinated by the National
Secretariat for Planning and Development, with the participation of all sectors and levels
of government. Between 2006 and 2011, social investments were more than doubled,
credits for agriculture were doubled, rural homes with access to waste collection
increased from 22 to 37 percent, and access to public health services also increased
(PAHO 2013).

40.     A more comprehensive approach has been adopted in Thailand in terms of
creating sustainable financing and institutions. Since the early 2000s, Thailand has seen
the implementation of a surcharge on tobacco and alcohol sales to establish the Thai
Health Promotion Foundation (ThaiHealth) that works with different sectors and
communities to tackle a variety of health issues, with NCD risk factors as a priority. By
the mid-2000s, HIAs were constitutionally required, and public hearings were established
to allow views of interested parties to be aired. At the same time, a National Health
Assembly has been legislated as an instrument as well as part of a learning process at
local and national levels to develop participatory public policies on health. Examples of
issues considered in the 2012 National Health Assembly include food safety, air
pollution, systems to support walking and cycling, children and IT, health workforce
education, among others.




                                            17
41.     The Thai approach is also distinctive in creating an autonomous statutory body in
the form of ThaiHealth, building on state-level development in Australia with the creation
of the Victorian Health Promotion Foundation (VicHealth). As both organizations are
outside the Ministry and Department of Health, they are able to work across sectors with
greater ease, including in building partnerships, mobilizing community organizations, and
advocating for healthy public policies. The funding of such organizations from tobacco
and alcohol tax has now been replicated in a number of countries, prompted in part by the
FCTC — including Mongolia, Malaysia, Tonga, Vietnam, and the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic — although some have funding via a budget allocation as well.

42.      In all instances, the entry points for HiAP and the structures for intersectoral
governance were different. The level at which action was taken also varied, with state-
level policy action more important in federalist systems. This speaks to the context-
specific nature of policy making as well as to the complexities of a country's constitution.
It is thus difficult for a country to replicate exactly the model in another country, but it is
possible for countries to consider the conditions under which different models were
adopted.

43.     In many countries, the HiAP approach has been embedded in the national
strategies for HIV prevention and control as well as in strategies for road safety. While
they have not been labeled as “HiAP,” countries can learn lessons from their HIV- and
injury-prevention work and apply them to NCD prevention and control efforts.


                   LESSONS FROM HIAP EXPERIENCES

44.     Joined-up government can be effected in different ways (Mulgan 2010). Top-
down reliance on government authority is effective but dependent on the commitment of
leaders. Cooperation between departments and agencies based on shared conviction for
the need to change may be more sustainable, but requires a supportive, authorizing
environment. Bottom-up collaboration from the community can focus on real problem-
solving, but scaling-up can be more difficult. Legislative provision for cross-cutting ways
of working is an effective approach to embed new governance practices, but its form and
achievement are dependent on the political climate.

45.     There have been limited evaluations of horizontal governance. Earlier studies in
intersectoral action suggest that there are pre-conditions for effective collaboration
(Kickbusch and Buckett 2010). These include a need to work together to achieve shared
goals, opportunities to work together, organizational capacity (resources, skills,
knowledge to take action), well-conceived plans, and a relationship between the parties.


                                              18
More recent case studies collected by the European Observatory on Health Systems and
Policies noted that several building blocks were needed for success in HiAP (Lin et al.
2012). These include the following:
    • Leadership
    • Political commitment/government mandate
    • Human resources
    • Financial resources
    • Information and research
    • Policy analysis tools
    • Partnership management
    • Stakeholder engagement

46.     Once governance structures are established (that is, building blocks are in place),
certain features in the governance process help create and sustain trust in the partnership
and provide for accountability and transparency. Key among these are the following:
    • Clear terms of reference
    • A process for identifying shared priorities
    • Transparency in decision making, including resolution of disagreements
    • A process for engaging multiple stakeholders within and outside government
    • Available multisectoral policy and action plan
    • A budget or funding mechanisms for joint programs and activities
    • A budget or funding mechanisms for relevant programs for each ministry
    • Monitoring and evaluation mechanism or tools
    • Regular communication and reporting tools or mechanism with the general public
        (for example, TV, journals, radio, special communiqué)

47.    Finally, lessons from the European case studies point to some key factors for
success (Lin et al. 2012):
    • Political will — presence of political support or interest
    • Partnership and constituents’ interests — support from stakeholders outside
       government as well as across portfolios or departments
    • Political importance of the specific health issues identified — expectation that a
       policy solution will be found
    • Immediacy of the problem — time-limited response expected
    • Leadership — political or bureaucratic
    • Context appropriate — suitable to the situational and political landscape
    • Resources available — governance structures and actions require human and
       financial resources



                                            19
   •   Implementation practicalities — solutions must be feasible and workable


48.     While these general lessons are important, the key to getting started — even when
there is political will to establish a coordinating structure and drive cross-sectoral
cooperation — is finding the appropriate entry points. Structures and policy statements
are not necessarily effective in themselves. Taking action may be a matter of being
opportunistic. For instance, piggybacking on existing political imperatives to deliver
results (such as tobacco control in China for the 2008 Olympics and 2010 Shanghai
Expo), or building on shared interests (such as early childhood education to deliver
outcomes for both education and health sectors in South Australia).

49.     These lessons about preconditions for collaboration, effective governance
structures, and successful intersectoral policy making reinforce the four key actions stated
at the 2011 Rio Political Declaration on Social Determinants of Health, which are also
observed in the recent review of Australian case studies on action on social determinants
of health (Lin 2013):
    • Governance — the importance of interagency partnerships (for policy alignment,
        program funding), engagement of cabinet committees, use of intergovernmental
        agreements, and value of legislation
    • Participation — civil society coalitions play critical roles, and stakeholder
        engagement accompanies ongoing consultative mechanisms
    • Health sector role — health departments provide analytical support for other
        sectors, advocate for policy development on the basis of evidence, and ensure the
        health sector also delivers related health programs
    • Monitoring and evaluation — ongoing accountability reporting is crucial, being
        able to commission evaluation is even more helpful in generating evidence of
        effectiveness

50.     These conditions must be present regardless of the nature of political
administration or health system. They can be applied across a range of partnership
models. A variety of models for interaction between health and other sectors have been
seen in countries that implement the HiAP approach. These range across a continuum of
relationships, from strong partnerships to softer forms of cooperation, as seen in the table
below.




                                            20
                        Table 5 Models of Inter-sectoral Interaction

                                  Cooperation                           Coordination
Information     Cooperation            and             Coordination          and       Integration
                                  coordination                           integration
Many            Brazil           England               Malaysia        Cuba            Iran,
countries       New Zealand      Sri Lanka             N. Ireland      Finland         Islamic
                                 Wales                 Quebec          Thailand        Rep.
                                                       Scotland                        Norway
                                                       S. Australia
                                                       Sweden
   Source: National Collaborating Centre for Determinants of Health 2012.

51.     All models rely on building strong relationships between individuals and agencies.
Trust, reciprocity, and mutuality are the three essential elements of collaborative
relationships (Rudolph et al. 2013). They require participants in the HiAP process to
understand the political and organizational contexts for various partners, to share
information and ideas, to take a long-term strategic view, and to be flexible and pragmatic
in the short term.

52.    Experiences in diverse countries suggest that the health sector has multiple roles
to play to facilitate HiAP — depending on context — which can result in different
models of intersectoral interaction. These roles can include the following:
    • Provide health and population data
    • Provide research and analysis of health impact
    • Advocate for policy attention
    • Propose policy strategies
    • Draft policy documents
    • Negotiate budgets
    • Provide technical guidance on policy implementation
    • Develop performance-monitoring indicators
    • Provide monitoring and evaluation data
    • Provide capacity building for other sectors

53.     The global experiences suggest that HiAP involves the articulation of a strategy or
intervention as well as a process for effective relationship management. They also
reinforce the need to take a longer-term perspective in assessing possible health and
social outcomes. This is likely to require the adoption of an action-learning orientation to
ensure the process stays on track and the interventions are adapted to the changing
environment. As such, capacity building within government, and a reorientation of public
administration, may well be required.


                                                  21
54.    The challenges and failures of HiAP attempts are not well documented, but can be
assumed to be the converse of the success factors. Industry resistance can be anticipated
when its interests might be adversely affected by regulatory and fiscal measures. Strong
policy analysis skills are therefore needed. Some investments are inevitably required
even if policy measures are not costly. Decentralized systems may pose structural
challenges if policy levers rest at different levels of government.

55.     The biggest challenge for horizontal governance, however, is likely in its ongoing
implementation, so that policy practice and program delivery all reflect joined-up
thinking (Hyde 2008). While governments and ministers have responsibilities for
strategies, it is the senior level of public service that must support policy and program
development, the mid-level bureaucrats who implement protocols and guidelines, and the
service managers who ensure local service delivery. This reflects whole-of-government
outcomes. Thus policy coherence has to work not only across agencies, but also across
all levels of the system. St. Pierre and Gauvin (2010) suggest that organizational culture
is also a key condition for effective intersectoral governance, and the mechanisms and
strategies needed for culture change include collective learning, reshaping of values, and
capacity building.

56.     The 2013 WHO 8th Global Conference on Health Promotion in Helsinki
identified a range of actions needed by governments to progress to the HiAP approach, as
seen in the box below.

                         Box 3 What Government Actions Are Needed

          •     Health and health equity as political priority — adopt HiAP principles and
                act on SDH
          •     Effective structures, processes, and resources to enable implementation
          •     Capacity of the Ministry of Health (MOH) to engage other sectors of
                government through leadership, partnership, advocacy, and mediation
          •     Institutional capacity and skills for implementation and evidence on
                determinants and responses
          •     Transparent audit and accountability mechanisms for health and equity
                impact
          •     Conflict-of-interest measures as safeguards against distortion by vested
                interests
          •     Involvement of communities, social movements, and civil society

              Source: WHO 2013C.




                                               22
                                   MOVING FORWARD

57.     Being clear about possible effective action may be a prelude to establishing a
multisectoral structure or plan. The WHO’s Best Buys is a useful starting point for
assessing a realistic entry point for HiAP. The global evidence, as seen in the table below,
suggests the policy interventions are not costly and are feasible. However, the specific
contexts and costs for each country need to be assessed. The choice of entry points would
determine which ministries should be at the intersectoral policy table.

                        Table 6 Cost and Feasibility of NCD Best Buys
      Intervention            Cost-effectiveness          Implementation cost        Feasibility

Tobacco                       Very cost-effective         Very low cost         Highly feasible, with
                                                                                FCTC as framework
- Taxation

-            Smoke-free
environments

- Warning labels

- Advertising ban

Other:                                                                          Primary care
                              Quite cost-effective        Quite low cost
Counseling

Alcohol                       Very cost-effective         Very low cost         Highly feasible

- Taxation

- Restrict access

- Advertising ban

Other:                        Quite cost-effective        Quite low cost

Breath testing                                                                  Police

Counseling                                                                      Primary care

Diet     and        physical Very cost-effective          Very low cost         Highly feasible
activity

- Reduce salt

- Replace trans fats



                                                     23
          Intervention           Cost-effectiveness          Implementation cost             Feasibility

     - Promote awareness

     Other:

     Counseling

     Worksite and schools        Quite cost-effective        Higher cost               Primary care

                                 Less cost-effective         Higher cost               Settings

         Source: Adapted from NCD Roadmap Report. 2014.

     58.     The multisectoral structure, if it is result-oriented, is likely to be dependent on
     priority areas for action. The assignment of responsibilities should be clear; table 1.7
     suggests issues for further consideration in context.

     Table 7 Allocation of Responsibilities under HiAP for NCD Prevention and Control
    Ministry         Proposed           Intended             Likely cost /      Feasibility and          Political
   responsible        action           benefit in              revenue           obstacles to          implications
                                     reducing NCD            implications      implementation         (e.g., winners
                                                                                                        and losers)
Prime Minister's   Establish and     Oversee policy      Low           cost,   Easily feasible but    Some industry
Office             chair             adoption     and    potential revenue     implementation         opposition can
                   multisectoral     implementation      increase through      needs monitoring       be expected
                   taskforce on                          taxation;
                   NCDs                                  potential
                                                         administrative
                                                         efficiencies
Ministry of        Increase          Reduce              Increase revenue,     Requires        good   Resistance from
Finance            excise duty on    consumption of      with         some     analysis,        and   industry
                   tobacco and       harmful products    administrative        taxation collection
                   alcohol                               costs                 and       monitoring
                                                                               systems
Attorney-General   Coordinate        Policy coherence    Avoid legal and       Easily feasible        Credibility   of
                   legislation       facilitates         compensation                                 government
                   reform            implementation      costs if laws are
                                                         sound
Ministry of        Scale up core     Early detection,    Increase funding      Requires good data     Improved health
Health             service           improved            for primary and       and      workforce     and productivity
                   package      of   management,         secondary             training
                   essential NCD     decrease            prevention
                   (PEN)             hospitalization
                   interventions
                   to     national
                   coverage




                                                        24
Ministry of        Ban or restrict   Promote            Some costs to         Need to monitor        Reduced
Communication      advertising       knowledge;         monitor               alternative            revenue      for
                                     counter            compliance;           advertising vehicles   advertising
                                     marketing     of   some       revenue                           industry;
                                     unhealthy          from          fines                          opposition from
                                     products           related          to                          industries with
                                                        breaches                                     bans
Ministries of      Promote           Expand access to   Some costs to         Requires       good    Support from
Industry and       production of     healthy products   support farmers       negotiations     and   local producers;
Agriculture        healthy                              and industry to       possible technical     resistance from
                   products                             transition            support                manufacturers
Ministry of        Plan for active   Reduce exposure    Low cost for          Coordination           Community
Planning           transport,        to    obesogenic   planning;             across jurisdictions   support      for
                   recreational      environments       infrastructure        and private sector     improved urban
                   spaces                               investment may        can mean delays        environment;
                                                        be public or                                 some resistance
                                                        private                                      from developers
Ministries of      Institute         Support behavior   Set up costs          Need         good      Community
Education and      programs     in   change                                   communications         support
Labor              settings                                                   and       reliable
                                                                              suppliers
     Source:Authors adaptation from NCD Roadmap Report 2014.

                                          CONCLUSIONS

     59.     The evidence base pointing to the importance of policy interventions for NCD
     prevention and control, along with the global experiences with HiAP to date, create an
     imperative for governments to take an inter-sectoral approach to address the social
     determinants of health underlying the high prevalence of NCDs and associated health
     inequalities. HiAP can be applied to NCD prevention and control from three different
     entry points: risk factors or conditions, population groups (including life course), and
     sectors.

     60.     Governments may start with intersectoral governance structures that tackle the key
     risk factor, where the evidence and business case are well established and are supported
     by social norms. In some countries, tobacco may be such an entry point, with the FCTC
     as an accepted international framework and clarity that the tobacco industry is the clear
     target for policy development. In other countries, with rapid urbanization and
     government attention focused on planning, reducing exposure to an obesogenic
     environment may be both an urgent public health concern as well as an issue aligned with
     government priorities. In any case, civil society support and priority attention to the
     health agenda are important.

     61.    A focus on health inequalities can be built in through efforts to target vulnerable
     groups, through extra resources or incentives, or through appropriate adaptation of



                                                    25
strategies for the general population. Such intersectoral structures may evolve into a
more systematic approach to policy making across other risk factors, and may address
health equity concerns more generally.

62.      Although HiAP is a relatively new form of policy practice, to date, in all instances
around the world, the entry points for HiAP and the structures for intersectoral
governance were different. Nonetheless, there are some shared lessons. The recent guide
to Health in All Policies published by the American Public Health Association (Rudolph
et al. 2013) summarizes the key elements of HiAP: (1) promotes health equity and
sustainability in specific policies, programs, and processes, and embeds these
considerations into government decision-making processes; (2) supports inter-sectoral
collaboration with partners who shape the economic, physical, and social environments;
(3) simultaneously addresses the policy and programmatic goals of public health and
other agencies by finding co-benefits, or win-wins, for multiple partners; (4) engages
stakeholders at all levels in identifying policy and systems changes necessary to create
health improvements and to ensure work is responsive to community needs; and (5)
institutionalizes the approach by making changes in the structures for intersectoral
collaboration in government, and in mechanisms to ensure a health lens is applied in
decision-making processes. Capacity building and analytical work are useful starting
points for cooperation across sectors.

63.     There is a need to understand better how to effect and secure HiAP. There are
lessons to be learned internationally about how the public agenda for health is set, how
policies are formulated, how HiAP is effectively implemented and appropriately
evaluated, and what policy interventions have been effective. The variety and
effectiveness of governance actions, and their relationship to the variety and effectiveness
of governance structures and processes, are at the core of knowledge gaps.




                                             26
                                  REFERENCES

ANPHA (Australia National Preventive Health Agency). 2012. Submission to House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Social Policy and Legal Affairs, Inquiry into
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. Australia National Preventive Health Agency, Canberra.

Arora, M., K. Chauhan, S. John, and A. Mukhopadhyay. 2011. “Multi-Sectoral Action for
Addressing Social Determinants of Noncommunicable Diseases and Mainstreaming
Health Promotion in National Health Programmes in India.” Indian Journal of
Community Medicine. 36(Suppl1): S43–S49. doi: 10.4103/0970-0218.94708

California, Department of Public Health, and University of California, San Francisco.
2010. “Health in All Policies Task Force Report.”

Council of the European Union. 2006. Council Conclusions on Health in All Policies
(HiAP). 2767th Employment, Social Policy, Health And Consumer Affairs Council
meeting, Brussels, 30 November and 1 December 2006.
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/lsa/91929.pdf

European Observatory on Health Systems and Policy. 2006. Health in All Policies:
Prospects and Potentials. Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, Finland.

European Union. 2007. Declaration on Health in All Policies. Health in All Policies:
Achievements and challenges. Rome.

Exworthy, M., and D. Hunter. 2011. The Challenge of Joined-Up Government in
Tackling Health Inequalities. International Journal of Public Administration 34 (4): 201–
12.

Galbally, R., A. Fidler, M. Chowdhury, K. C. Tang, S. Good, S. Tantivess. 2012. “Ten-
Year Review of Thai Health Promotion Foundation, Nov 2001 – Nov 2011.” Report to
ThaiHealth, Bangkok.

Global Burden of Disease (GBD) 2010. Global Burden of Disease: Generating
Evidence, Guiding Policy. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, Seattle.

Government of Australia. Department of Health and Ageing. 2011. “Review of Food
Labelling Law and Policy.” Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra.

Government of South Australia, Department of Health. 2010. Implementing Health in All
Policies. Department of Health, Government of South Australia, Adelaide.

Greer, S. 2012. “Interdepartmental units and committees”. In D. McQueen, M. Wismar,
V. Lin, C. Jones, and M. Davies (Eds). Intersectoral Governance for Health in All
Policies. 85-99. Copenhagen: WHO, European Observatory on Health Systems and
Policies.



                                           27
Hyde, J. 2008. “How to Make the Rhetoric of Joined-Up Government Really Work.”
Australia and New Zealand Health Policy 5:22.

Kemm, J., J. Parry, and S. Palmer, ed. 2004. Health Impact Assessment: Concepts,
Theory, Techniques, and Applications. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

Kickbusch, I., and K. Buckett. 2010. “Implementing Health in All Policies: Adelaide
2010.” Department of Health, Government of South Australia, Adelaide.

Laugesen, M., and K. Isett. 2013. “Evidence Use in New York City Public Health
Policymaking.” Frontiers in Public Health Services and Systems Research 2 (7): 1–5.

Leppo, K., E. Ollila, S. Cook, M. Wismar, and S. Pena, ed. 2013. “Health in All Policies:
Seizing Opportunities, Implementing Policies.” Government of Finland, Ministry of
Social Affairs and Health, Helsinki.

Lin, V., ed. 2013. Action on Social Determinants of Health: An Australian Casebook.
Prepared with Commonwealth Dept of Health, New South Wales Health Dept, South
Australia Health Dept, Victoria Health Dept, and Northern Territories Health Services for
8th Global Conference on Health Promotion, Helsinki.

Lin, V, C. Jones, A. Synnot, and M. Wismar. 2012. “Synthesizing the Evidence: How
Governance Structures Can Trigger Governance Actions to Support Health in All
Policies.” In Intersectoral Governance for Health in All Policies, ed. D. McQueen, M.
Wismar, V. Lin, C. Jones, and M. Davies, 23–55. Copenhagen: WHO, European
Observatory on Health Systems and Policies.




                                           28
McQueen, D., M. Wismar, V. Lin, C. Jones, M. Davies, ed. 2012. Intersectoral
Governance for Health in All Policies. Copenhagen: WHO, European Observatory for
Health Systems and Policies.

McQueen, D., M. Wismar, V. Lin, and C. Jones. 2012. “Introduction: Health in All
Policies, the Social Determinants of Health and Governance.” In Intersectoral
Governance for Health in All Policies, ed. D. McQueen, M. Wismar, V. Lin, C. Jones, M.
Davies, 3–21. Copenhagen: WHO, European Observatory on Health Systems and
Policies.

Melkas, T. 2013. “Health in All Policies as a Priority in Finnish Health Policy: A Case
Study on National Health Policy Development.” Scandinavian Journal of Public Health
41 (11 suppl.): 3–28.

Mulgan, G. 2010. “Holistic Government and What Works.” SA Public Health Bulletin 7
(2): 12–13.

National Collaborating Centre for Determinants of Health. 2012. Assessing the Impact
and Effectiveness of Intersectoral Action on the Social Determinants of Health and
Health Equity: An Expedited Systematic Review. NCCDH, Nova Scotia.

National Research Council. 2011. Improving Health in the United States: The Role of
Health Impact Assessment. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

NCD Roadmap Report. 2014. A draft background document on preventing and
controlling NCDs in the Pacific, for consideration by the Forum Economic Finance
Ministers Meeting. Developed for the Quintelateral Group,

PAHO (Pan American Health Organization). 2008. Mainstreaming Health Promotion in
PAHO. Manuscript, Washington, DC.

PAHO (Pan American Health Organization). 2013. “Health in All Policies: Summary of
the Experiences of the Americas.” Washington, DC: PAHO.

Rani, M., S. Nusrat, and L. Hawken. 2012. “A Qualitative Study of Governance of
Evolving Response to Non-Communicable Diseases in Low- and Middle-Income
Countries.” BMC Public Health 12: 877.

Rudolph, L., J. Caplan, K. Ben-Moshe, and L. Dillon. 2013. Health in All Policies: A
Guide for State and Local Governments. Washington, DC: American Public Health
Association and Oakland, CA: Public Health Institute.

Shankardass, K., O. Solar, K. Murphy, A. Freiler, S. Bobbili, A. Bayoumi, and P.
O’Campo. 2011. “Getting Started with Health in All Policies: A Resource Pack.” Report
to the Ministry of Health and Long-term Care. Keenan Research Centre, St Michael’s
Hospital, Toronto.




                                          29
Sihto, M., E. Ollila, and M. Koivusal. 2006. Principles and challenges of health in all
policies. In Health in All Policies: Prospects and potentials. Edited by T. Stahl, M.
Wismar, and E. Ollila. Helsinki: Ministry of Social Affairs and Health.

St. Pierre, L., and F. Gauvin. 2010. “Intersectoral Governance for Health in All Policies:
An Integrated Framework.” SA Public Health Bulletin 7 (2): 31–35.

Stahl, T., M. Wismar, E. Ollila, E. Lahtinen, K. Leppo K., ed. 2006. Health in All
Policies: Prospects and Potential. Government of Finland, Ministry of Social Affairs and
Health, Helsinki.

United Nations. 2011. “Political Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases.” New York.

World Bank. 2011. “Toward a Healthy and Harmonious Life in China: Stemming the
Rising Tide of Non-Communicable Diseases.” HD Unit, EAP Region, World Bank,
Washington, DC.

WHO (World Health Organization). 1986. Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion, WHO,
Geneva.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2004. Global Strategy on Diet, Physical Activity and
Health, WHO, Geneva.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2005. WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control. , WHO, Geneva.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2008. “Early Childhood: A Powerful Equalizer.”
Final report of the Early Childhood Knowledge Network, Commission for Social
Determinants of Health, WHO, Geneva.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2009. Population-Based Prevention Strategies for
Childhood Obesity, WHO, Geneva.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2010a. “Action on the Social Determinants of
Health: Learning from Previous Experiences.” Discussion Paper Series 1 (Debates),
WHO, Geneva. http://www.who.int/social_determinants/corner/SDHDP1.pdf,

WHO (World Health Organization). 2010b. “Adelaide Statement on Health in All
Policies.” WHO, Geneva.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2011a. From Burden to Best Buys: Reducing the
Economic Burdens of NCDs in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Geneva: WHO.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2011b. “Rio Political Declaration on Social
Determinants of Health.” World Conference on Social Determinants of Health, Rio de
Janeiro, October 19–21.




                                            30
WHO (World Health Organization). 2012. A Framework for Implementing the Set of
Recommendations on the Marketing of Foods and Non-Alcoholic Beverages to Children,
WHO, Geneva.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2013a. “Addressing Social Determinants of Health
through Intersectoral Work: Five Public Policy Cases from Mexico.” Discussion Paper
Series          6          (Case          Studies),          WHO,           Geneva.
http://www.who.int/social_determinants/publications/SDH6.pdf

WHO (World Health Organization). 2013b. Global NCD Action Plan 2010–2020. WHO,
Geneva.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2013c. “Helsinki Statement on Health in All
Policies.” 8th Global Conference on Health Promotion, June.




                                        31
                            ANNEX 1: CASE STUDIES
A Comprehensive Local Approach: New York City

Mayor of New York Michael Bloomberg has attracted international attention for his public
health policy reforms, which have taken the form of healthy public policy. These policy
measures address smoking, food supply, traffic, environment, and general quality of urban living
through various bans and include the following:
2003 Smoking in commercial establishments (bars and restaurants)
2009 Sale of flavored tobacco products
2011 Smoking in public places
2013 Cigarette sales to people under age 21
2013 Cigarette in-store display
2006 Trans fats in restaurants
2008 Chain restaurants’ menus without calorie count
2007 Nonfuel efficient cabs
2007 Cars driving in newly created bike lanes
2009 Cars in Time Square
2013 Speeding in residential “slow zones”
2005 Government buildings not LEED-certified
2007 Greenhouse emissions
2013 Styrofoam packaging in single-service food items
2013 Commercial music louder than 45 decibels
2013 Construction cranes more than 25 years old
2005 Less than 2:1 ratio of female-to-male restrooms in public buildings

In addition, there have been a number of suggested or voluntary bans:
2006 Illegal guns
2009 Black roofs
2010 Sodium level in processed foods
2013 Organic food waste from landfills
2013 Loud headphones

In 2012, his now infamous ban on soda bottles larger than 16 ounces was overruled.

These policy measures were supported by research, including appraisal of published studies,
granular and long-term local prevalence data, field studies in the community context, research
collaboration across sectors, and dissemination of research through a variety of media. In other
words, these policy measures were not based solely on the mayor's personal views or a result
only of his strong political leadership, but arose from a well-orchestrated policy process.
(Laugesen and Isett 2013) Opponents did raise concerns, for instance, about stigmatizing the
poor with anti-obesity policies as well as about the strength of evidence related to the anti-
obesity policies.

Source: Laugesen and Isett 2013.




                                              32
Comprehensive National Plan: Ecuador National Plan for Good Living (NPGL)

The NPGL is an example of the whole-of-government approach, where health is one of many
areas tackled by the policy. The plan redefines the role of the state in social policy and
establishes equity and redistribution goals from a rights-based approach. The commitment of the
legislature was necessary to adopt a new constitution for the country that set the grounds for this
plan. Public institutions were redesigned to reflect this vision and coordinating ministries were
created. Active civil society is promoted; the plan provides spaces for dialogue that ensure
adaptation to local needs and enable ownership from stakeholders.

The NPGL is present in all central, regional, and local state structures. The National Planning
Council, a collegial and intersectoral body, functions as the technical secretariat, while the
National Plan is coordinated by the National Secretariat for Planning and Development. All
sectors and levels of government are involved. National budget is allocated to each institution
involved. The sectoral-specific work plans have to be consistent with the National Plan. The
work of the health sector is guided by the principle of social determinants of health approach.

Citizenry accountability processes exist at both central and local levels. Active social
participation is mandated for development, construction, design, implementation, and evaluation
of the program. Focal groups, consultations, and consensus-building activities provide the
vehicle for community representatives to give input.

Source: PAHO 2013.

Targeted Population-Based Intersectoral Public Policies: Mexico


Human Development Program Oportunidades (Progresa prior to 2002)

Oportunidades is a supported and integrated approach to tackling the health and educational
needs of the poor. Conditional cash transfers provide financial incentives to parents to increase
school attendance and retention, improve the use of preventative and other medical services, and
improve nutrition. The program was created in 1997 on the basis of a strong body of evidence
from both social and health sciences developed over two decades that emphasized the links
between food intake, nutrition, health, and education. Food subsidies had been in place at the
time but were inadequate because a large share of the benefits was received by the non-poor, and
targeted programs had very limited coverage in rural areas.

Oportunidades is based on the idea that there is a synergistic, mutually reinforcing effect of
improvements in education, health, and nutrition. The program is therefore credited with
transcending notions, which underpin silo programs in the social sector. Accumulated empirical
evidence and economic arguments were considered important in achieving legal mandates. The
success of the original program led to expansion from rural to urban settings. The provision of
monetary incentives is considered unconventional, these are equivalent to a 25 percent increase
in family income and are given to the mother of the family. This is an intentional strategy
designed to target funds within the household to improve children’s education and nutrition. A
further condition of the cash transfer payments is that all family members including adults accept
preventative health services. The services are aimed at the most common health problems as well
as the most significant opportunities for prevention such as family planning, prevention and



                                                33
treatment of respiratory infections, and accident prevention.

Presidential leadership has been essential to the implementation of the program, which occurs
across sectors, involving the ministries of social development, health, education, and finance.
The various sectors involved share common goals and performance indicators, which are
published yearly and monitored regularly by a technical committee created specifically for this
purpose, as well as by Congress and the Ministry of Finance.

Evaluation involving independent national and international academic researchers has played a
key role in the continuity of the program. Demonstrated improvements in health include
improved access to primary care, both preventive and curative and in rural and urban areas,
reduced maternal and infant mortality, reduced illness in children age 0 to 5 years in rural areas,
and improved health in adults. Achievements of the program in relation to education include
higher middle-school enrollment rates, improved retention rates for 15 to 19 year olds in rural
areas, and reduced dropout rates among 16 to 19 year olds in urban areas. The success of the
Progresa/Oportunidades program has led to expansion of this sort of multisectoral approach to
other parts of Latin America.

Challenges identified for the program in the long term include linking achievements in improved
living conditions of the very poor with economic policies that allow beneficiaries to join the
labor force and improve their lifetime income. Improvements in the quality of health and
education are seen as essential in achieving such outcomes. Improvements in early childhood
development programs that develop physical, linguistic, cognitive, and socioemotional skills
were identified as a cost-effective strategy to improve middle-school retention rates, which
would contribute to subsequent improvements in employment outcomes in the future.

Sources: WHO 2010, 2013a.


Policy Agenda-Setting Focused on Cobenefits: California's Health in All Policies Task
Force


Established in 2010, California's Health in All Policies Task Force is a collaboration between the
Public Health Institute (PHI), the California Department of Public Health (CDPH), and the
California Strategic Growth Council (SGC). The task force comprises 19 designated agencies
and departments, and is the first formal use of HiAP by a US state governmental panel.

By harnessing the power that state agencies and departments can bring through their varied areas
of expertise the HiAP Task Force identifies priority programs, policies, and strategies with the
overall goal of improving the health of Californian people.

While advancing the existing SGC goals of improving air and water quality, protecting natural
resources and agricultural lands, increasing the availability of affordable housing, improving
infrastructure systems, promoting public health, planning sustainable communities, and meeting
the state’s climate change goals, the particular goals of the HiAP Task Force include the
following:

• All California residents have the option to safely walk, bicycle, or take public transit to school,



                                                 34
         work, and essential destinations
•   All California residents live in safe, healthy, and affordable housing
•   All California residents have access to places to be active, including parks, green space, and
         healthy tree canopy
•   All California residents are able to live and be active in their communities without fear of
         violence or crime
•   All California residents have access to healthy, affordable foods at school, at work, and in
         their neighborhoods
•   California's decision makers are informed about the health consequences of various policy
         options during the policy development process (Strategic Growth Council undated).

The approach adopted focused on co-benefits and win-win strategies. Over an eight-month
period, representatives from the 19 participating executive branch entities came together in
individual and group task force meetings, held public input workshops, and received written
comments from a diverse array of stakeholders. These state leaders developed a broad-ranging
set of recommendations geared to improve the efficiency, cost-effectiveness, and collaborative
nature of state government, while promoting health and sustainability.

The HiAP Task Force’s recommendations addressed two strategic directions:
1. Building healthy and safe communities with opportunities for active transportation; safe,
healthy, affordable housing; places to be active, including parks, green space, and healthy tree
canopy; the ability to be active without fear of violence or crime; and access to healthy,
affordable foods; and
2. Finding opportunities to apply a health lens during public policy and program development.

The recommendations range from one-time actions by a single agency to ongoing opportunities
for all agencies to consider health when making decisions. Many of the recommendations can be
implemented through administrative action, while others require legislation. Examples of
recommendations include removing barriers to institutional acquisition of locally grown produce,
adding a health lens to transportation and city planning guidance documents, and assessing tools
that might be used to project long-term costs and benefits of proposed legislation.

     Source: Greer 2012.



Intersectoral Policy Advocacy Through Autonomous Statutory Body: Thai Health
Promotion Foundation


Established in 2001 and funded by a surcharge on alcohol and tobacco, Thai Health Promotion
Foundation (ThaiHealth) addresses major health risk factors including tobacco and alcohol,
unsafe driving, physical inactivity, and junk food, as well as child, youth, and family health;
healthy organizations; health service system; and specific population groups. ThaiHealth
recognizes policy advocacy as one of three key strategies in a comprehensive approach to health
promotion. Together with knowledge and social participation, the power of policy is recognized
as a necessary element in achieving sustainable improvement in health status for the nation.
Working with a wide range of multisectorial implementation partners ThaiHealth emphasizes


                                                35
health-promoting public policies as well as issue-based programs and holistic approaches, while
targeting the social determinants of health. Policy is developed at the national, provincial,
district, and subdistrict levels. ThaiHealth also works with organizations and networks of
organizations advocating that they move toward developing healthy, safe, and supportive
environments in their local communities.

Since the establishment of ThaiHealth, significant reductions in health risk factors have been
achieved. By 2009 high smoking rates in Thailand recorded in 1991 had reduced by more than
half, down to 20.7 percent of the population. Policies related to tobacco consumption influenced
by ThaiHealth include cigarette pack warnings, bans on tobacco advertisements, bans on
smoking in public places and government buildings and hospitals, media and social antismoking
campaigns, movie ratings in relation to tobacco smoking content, and support services for giving
up smoking.

Alcohol consumption is of concern in Thailand, rates had nearly doubled during the 1990s;
however, alcohol consumption rates have since decreased overall including the percentage of
people consuming alcohol at a harmful level. The number of national alcohol-related policies has
increased. Road accident rates and traffic injury rates are falling dramatically, traffic accident
related death rates are also falling. Alcohol control policies implemented include taxation
measures, limitations on advertising and sales, abstinence campaigns such as “No alcohol during
Buddhist Lent,” and public warning messages.

The use of policy as a mechanism for achieving health is a clear goal, not only of all plans and
actions, but also of the range of health-promotion methods and approaches undertaken by the
foundation, including advocacy, social marketing, community development, partnerships, and
grants. The ThaiHealth Ten-Year Review reports that the organization has catalyzed policy
development in every part of government and across many settings at the local and provincial
levels, making a significant contribution to the development of government policies, many of
which would otherwise still be in development or would never have been developed at all.

ThaiHealth takes a particular approach to social marketing, which, rather than aiming only at
increasing awareness with the purpose of behavior change, has the more important goal of
mobilizing the community to act in ways conducive to health by changing society’s preparedness
to accept and advocate for major policy reform that will promote health. With this goal in mind
social marketing is used by ThaiHealth with the double aim of contributing to the reduction of
risk behavior, while at the same time enabling all levels of government, communities, and
organizations to develop health-promoting policies.

ThaiHealth recognizes the importance to the implementation of health in all policies of
maintaining good relationships with government, especially with health departments. To this end
ThaiHealth established a unit to liaise with members of Parliament, providing them with updates
about health promotion and ThaiHealth priorities and activities, arranging for health checks, and
running programs about healthy work environments. Of high priority is fostering understanding
among members of Parliament of the various dimensions of health promotion and also about the
importance of the social determinants of health (Galbally et al. 2012).

    Source: Galbally et al, 2012


        A National Approach: Health in All Policies in Finland


                                               36
Over the last few decades the standard of health among Finns has improved greatly, and the
country’s infant mortality rates have settled at among the best in the world. Since the 1970s, life
expectancy has increased almost 11 years for men and 9 years for women, functional capacity of
the elderly has improved dramatically, while health care expenditure has remained under control
at an average level for OECD countries.

Health became a political priority in the 1970s, with the recognition that the health of the
population depended less on the provision of health care services and more on social factors.
Development of a new health policy began with work carried out by the Economic Council of
Finland. Targets were set to improve the health of the population, beginning with prevention of
road accidents, work-related diseases and accidents, and smoking-related diseases. Coronary
heart disease rates among males of working age in Finland were among the highest in the world.
In 1972, after much debate about what action needed to be taken, a project commenced in the
hardest hit province of North Karelia, to address the risk factors of heart disease: poor diet,
smoking, and high blood pressure. The project aimed to influence people’s lifestyles through a
series of broad-based local measures. At the same time new legislation supported reform of
primary health care, and municipalities took responsibility for health centers and coordination of
care, with a focus on preventative work. The establishment of health centers within municipal
organizations provided a new framework for intersectoral cooperation for health.

HiAP policy has developed as national policy over the last few decades. National health policies
are drafted by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health (MSAH), which has also been primarily
responsible for strategic development of policy. Developments at the local level have been due
largely to guidance and direction from MSAH, policy making and development by local
authorities has also been important. The private sector and other organizations that are influential
in society in promoting health have also played an important role.

In 1985 the Finnish Parliament approved targets and policies for health, even in sectors outside
health care. The content was discussed at ministerial level with the result that the government
was committed to every aspect of the program, and the scope of the report was broadened and
established as a national Health for All Program. Subsequent evaluation of the program found
that debate of the report and endorsement of policies formulated from it had facilitated
intersectoral activities in those areas where it had been previously difficult. Importantly, the
process had involved health sector and other sectoral planners sitting around the same table
discussing broad-based health-related aims. The program was praised for its policies; however,
weaknesses in implementation were identified. Recommendations made as a result of the
evaluation in relation to improvements in infrastructure and research were subsequently
incorporated into a revised program. Formal processes for intersectoral cooperation were set up
and the National Public Health Committee was established. Research into health inequalities
among population groups was developed by universities and research institutes, funded by the
Academy of Finland, the government scientific research agency within the Ministry of
Education, Science and Culture.

The introduction of legislation in Finland in the 1990s, requiring all administrative sectors to
report on their work in the area of health, was important in making visible the responsibility of
all sectors for improving public health. A major step was constitutional reform, which placed
responsibility for health promotion with public authorities and resulted in the creation of



                                                37
administrative structures with management systems at both state and local authority levels. As a
result, the legal and administrative framework now in place is considered to be adequate, and the
report proposes that in future there is a need to focus on the content of work and action.
Although the methods needed for a comprehensive health policy have been developed, and the
use of health impact assessment (HIA) has improved understanding of health in other
administrative sectors, the report recognizes that HIA is not implemented sufficiently and that the
resources available for it are meagre.

The WHO evaluations of Finnish health policy concluded that HiAP is an effective way to
improve public health and that policy measures in the various sectors can be implemented in
most cases with a positive economic and financial impact on society. The report noted, however,
that the achievement of practical results using the HiAP approach requires continuous
determined work and made recommendations in six areas in relation to the challenges for
Finland:
    •               Health-promotion actors must exploit critical stages in policy development
        such as negotiating for government health services in a climate of privatization; more
        effective efforts need to be made to include health on the agendas of municipal boards as
        well as of the whole of government. The information on society’s scope for civic
        participation can be utilized to ensure transparency of policies and enable assessment of
        all the effects of different measures and decisions before they are made.
    •               Pursue international cooperation as it is increasingly important due to
        economic globalization. Challenges and solutions will be more similar across countries,
        so continued coworking with WHO will be important, as will be networking within the
        EU on the drafting of international economic and other agreements.
    •                Increase the use of HIA by insisting on the use of this process when the EU
        Commission drafts its decisions.
    •               Highlight the importance of health as a production factor in the development
        of economic policy by promoting more effective analysis of health impacts, such as the
        long-term financial losses sustained as a result of the poor health of low socioeconomic
        groups.
    •               Reduce inequality in society through further research as well as increased
        political will, for example, by using HIA to promote better working conditions for groups
        with poor socioeconomic status to extend working lives.
    •               Work with the EU and internationally to address obesity and alcohol, to strike
        a new balance between economic objectives and health targets, promote understanding
        between the public and private sector on the value of health as a resource for economic
        activity and also as an ethical goal for the whole of society.

     Source: Melkas 2013.




                                                38
            ANNEX 2: EZ DOCUMENTATION TOOL TEMPLATE

Background and instructions for filling out the HiAP for NCDs EZ-
Documentation Template
What is HiAP?
Health in All Policies (HiAP) is a policy practice used by government and
nongovernment actors to address factors outside of the health system and in policy sectors
other than health that influence the social determinants of health (such as transport,
housing, tax, and agricultural policies). These two broad categories of actors aim to
include the range of government actors (elected officials and civil servants) and
nongovernmental actors (professionals, NGOs, civil society, industry, and other
stakeholders) who participate in HiAP. HiAP builds on the health-promotion and public
health strategies of healthy public policy and intersectoral collaboration, but it uses a
more systemic (whole-of-government) approach to focus on action in the policy arena
related to the achievement of health and well-being goals rather than using a single
health–issue approach. 1 HiAP may be adopted by policy and decision makers who wish
to integrate a consideration of health, well-being, and equity in the development,
implementation, and evaluation of policies. 2

Purpose of documentation
The objective of this template is to provide a tool for documenting HiAP experiences in
addressing noncommunicable disease prevention and control in the countries of the WHO
Eastern Mediterranean Region. HiAP has been identified as important for the prevention
and control of NCDs because many of the determinants of NCDs are outside the direct
responsibility of the health sector. As HiAP 3 is a relatively new development, there is
limited documentation on its processes and a lack of evidence on outcomes. Policy
learning relies on understanding the context and processes of making particular policy
choices.

Instructions for the use of this documentation template
Section 1: It is recommended that one person be identified as the contact person for the
purpose of documentation to streamline the collection and documentation of information
on the policy process. Consultation with other stakeholders and partners is necessary to
cover a range of perspectives. This may be done with one-on-one discussion or in small
group meetings.

Section 2: This section aims to outline the policy issue and its context for development.
The documentation should include the problem to be addressed by the policy, the policy


1. Lin et al. 2012, 23–55.
2. McQueen et al. 2012, 3-21.
3. The term “HiAP” was first introduced in 2006 within the context of the priorities of the Finnish
presidency of the European Union.



                                                     39
instruments to be used for implementation (including specific measures ), and the
monitoring indicators for these. The context is intended to capture the leadership,
participation, structure, and evidence that supported the policy’s development. Users may
wish to refer to their country profile data on NCDs and country capacity at
http://www.who.int/nmh/countries/en/index.html.

Section 3: This section is the most substantial. The background section aims to document
the policy development and implementation actors, resources, and processes. The policy
analysis section proposes questions to help analyze the policy development process and
the way implementation was carried out. This section contains detailed questions to
encourage reflection on lessons to be learned. This section would benefit from discussion
with those closely involved with policy development and implementation to generate a
range of reflections for policy learning.




                                           40
                        HiAP for NCDs EZ-Documentation Template

Section 1: CONTACT INFORMATION
Please provide complete information for the contact person responsible for coordinating the
documentation of this policy.
    • Name:
    • Position:
    • Organization:
    • Address:
    • City, Country, Postal code:
    • Telephone:
    • Fax:
    • E-mail:
    • Relationship to the policy being documented:

Section 2: POLICY SUMMARY
Please provide a brief overview of the policy and its development.

2.1 Policy Overview

Name of policy:______________________________________________________________
When was the policy adopted? Month__________Year_________
What is the NCD condition, risk factor, or associated social determinant of health that the policy
addresses?
Policy measure(s) (for example, specific applications of such policy instruments as taxation, legislation,
program, subsidy, information/education, incentives):
Target population/location/setting or industry/product/service (for example, food, transportation):
Monitoring indicators used (if any):

2.2 Policy Development Background

•   What were the policy’s aims or objectives (short term and long term, if available)?
•   Who were the intended beneficiaries of the policy?
•   Does the policy make any particular considerations for vulnerable groups/populations? Was there an
    overall objective to reduce inequalities in health?
•   What was the information and evidence base (for example, epidemiological, economic, community
    attitude, stakeholder support) to support the development of the policy?
•   Who were the key leaders in advocating for policy development; what organizations/sectors did they
    come from; and what roles did they play?

     Leaders                  Organization/sector                    Leadership role played



                                                                                                       41
•       Which agencies were involved?

Policy phase                                                          Agencies involved

Policy development

Policy implementation

Policy oversight & monitoring

Policy evaluation


•   What funding was available for policy implementation?

Funding purpose                                                    Amount (and conditions, if any)

Overall

Specific activity / program

Specific activity / program


•   What policy instruments were used for implementation (for example, legislation and regulation,
    service delivery, financial subsidies, financial incentives, education, organizational change, joint
    budgeting)?
•   What is the monitoring and evaluation arrangement for the policy? Are there any results to report?


2.3 Policy Governance

•   What structure 4 (for example, commission, task force, committee, alliance) was established as the
    responsible governance body for this policy area (or which existing body was designated)?
•   What are its main terms of reference?
•   Who participates in that structure (what departments, organizations, policy makers, stakeholders)?
    Describe their involvement.




    4. If more than one governance structure is established for this policy area, repeat the questions in section 2.2 for each.
                                                                                                                                  42
     Participants         Participants’ organizational           How were they involved?
                                    role(s)




Section 3: POLICY ANALYSIS AND REFLECTION
Please describe the process of policy development and explore reflections on the lessons learned.

3.1 Policy Analysis

   Policy and political environment
   • Why was the policy needed?
   • How did it get started? Describe the political importance of the policy issue. Was there a sense
      of urgency for action? If yes, why? What were the political drivers for the policy issue?
   • How did the policy get on the political agenda?
   • How have any aspects of the political, economic, social, and/or cultural environment influenced
      the policy issue or proposed policy change?
   • Was there demonstrable political will for tackling the policy issue? From whom/at which level?
      How was it manifested? How was it recognized and utilized by HiAP and other key policy
      proponents?
   • Was there substantial debate about the policy? What were the main points of difference or
      compromises made?
   • Was there anything in the international environment that facilitated or hindered the process?

   Policy actors
   • How actively involved were actors within and outside government in developing the policy?
   • What opposition was there, and how was it manifested?
   • How well were constituent interests represented or addressed in the policy development? What
      compromises and negotiations were necessary?
   • How were beneficiaries involved in the planning, implementation, or evaluation of the policy?

   Policy content, instruments, and activities
   • How were the final choices made regarding instruments considered for policy implementation?
      How were the specific measures to apply these instruments developed, or adapted if they were
      piloted first?
   • How were monitoring arrangements (for example, indicators, reporting) decided?
   • What activities were implemented under the policy?
          o What activities worked well? How do you know they worked well?
          o What activities did not work well? How do you know they did not work well?


                                                                                                    43
3.2 Reflection

On objectives and outcomes
   • Was the policy able to achieve its objectives (and how is achievement measured)? Why or why
      not?
   • What were the main or proudest achievements/outcomes of the policy?
   • What were the unintended or unexpected consequences (either positive or negative) of the
      policy?
   • Was the policy able to address the systematic differences in health outcomes or the differential
      impacts of the determinants of health across the population?

On policy governance and the policy cycle
Please use the grid below to explore issues for reflection with regard to various phases in the policy
cycle.
    (1) How effective were the structure and processes for policy development?
    (2) How effective were the structure and processes for oversight of policy implementation?
    (3) What role did interagency partnership play in policy planning, implementation, and evaluation?
    (4) What role did nongovernment actors play in policy planning, implementation, and evaluation?
    (5) What were the main challenges and impediments faced in the policy planning, implementation,
    and evaluation?
    (6) What were the facilitating factors that enabled successful development and implementation of the
    policy?

                         Policy                 Policy            Policy oversight Policy evaluation
                         development/planning   implementation    & monitoring
Effectiveness       of
governance
structures          &
processes
Role of interagency
partnership
Role                of
nongovernment
actors
Challenges          &
impediments
(factors          that
hindered)
Facilitating factors

On policy learning
   • What are the lessons learned from this project that can be shared with others?
   • What changes would you suggest to policy makers as a result of policy implementation so far?

If you were to start again on developing this policy, what would you change?

                                                                                                     44
      ANNEX 3: HEALTH IN ALL POLICIES FOR NCD PREVENTION AND
                CONTROL-COUNTRY ASSESSMENT TOOL

BACKGROUND
This assessment tool is part of the joint effort of the World Bank and the WHO Regional Office for the
Eastern Mediterranean (EMRO) to promote the Health in All Policies (HiAP) approach in prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases (NCDs). While a relatively new term for integrated action on
factors outside the health sector affecting health outcomes, HiAP is a policy practice that builds on
earlier constructs of intersectoral or multisectoral action and healthy public policy, and uses a more
systematic (or whole-of-government) approach, rather than policy action on single policy sectoral issues.


This assessment exercise seeks to collect information from the countries of MENA/EMR related to
policy initiatives and intersectoral mechanisms, including partnerships with civil society and the private
sector, that address the key risk factors and the social determinants of NCD prevalence. Most of the
multisectoral collaboration between MOH and non-health sectors will be at national and subnational
levels, depending on the degree of decentralization within a country.

EXPECTED OUTCOMES

The result of this assessment will help identify progress and gaps, so that actions to enhance national
capacities or to advocate for policy actions can be identified. The result should also serve as a basis for
cross-country learning.

TARGET RESPONDENTS

The MOH focal point responsible for NCDs is the recommended coordinator for responding to this
assessment. It is expected that the focal point will need to complete the assessment with input from
relevant people from other sectors as well as from various areas within the MOH. Depending on the
policy coordination mechanism within a country, it may be appropriate for this assessment to be
completed by the NCD Commission, or by the secretariat of a whole-of-government structure that
supports the HiAP approach.

STRUCTURE OF ASSESSMENT

HiAP is a relatively new policy approach and practice, although it is closely related to earlier concepts
such as healthy public policy or intersectoral/multisectoral action. As such, this tool will be focused on
assessing progress, identifying facilitating factors and challenges, and adopting this approach for NCD
prevention and control. The questions are organized around the following key elements:

       1. Experience of governance structures and actions for HiAP

                                                                                                        45
        2. Extent of implementation of WHO’s recommended Best Buys for NCD interventions and
           other relevant policy actions on related social determinants of NCDs
        3. Capacities and resources for HiAP
        4. Reflections

 METHODOLOGY

 The information will be collected through three types of questions:
                  1. Structured closed-ended questions (yes, no, I don’t know/unsure)
                  2. Open-ended questions (needing description/ evidences)
                  3. Rank-order scaling questions from 1 to 6 as follows:

Status   of    policy Scal      Criteria
decision              e
implementation

Fully implemented        6      At least 5 of the 6 indicators below are met:

                                a) Policy/program fully funded and implemented for targeted issues or
                                   in targeted communities
                                b) Legislation/regulation is adopted and enforced
                                c) Voluntary agreement, such as a memorandum of understanding
                                    (MOU), is implemented
                                d) Implementation support unit in place and provides technical guidance
                                    for implementation and monitoring
                                e) Sustainability mechanism is considered or already approved and
                                    disseminated by high-level authorities and incorporated in national
                                    health and other development policies
                                f) At least one report has already been issued
Partially implemented    5      Implementation arrangements for policy decision are in place;
                                stakeholders are aware; funding allocated; monitoring mechanism
                                developed.

Actioned                 4      A policy decision has been publicly announced, involving two or more
                                sectors, with specific policy instruments adopted, for example, financing,
                                legislation, program delivery, targets.

Under development        3      Action for policy development has commenced — for example, national
                                or subnational policy/project team has been formed, relevant research and
                                data analysis is being undertaken, consultation is being developed,
                                intersectoral governance mechanism is in place.

Being considered         2      There is a verbal or written commitment from high-level policy makers
                                to initiate action, but no action has been undertaken for policy

                                                                                                      46
                                   development.

Not currently              1       The policy has either not been considered or has been rejected.
actioned


 The assessment can be administered in two ways:

    1. The focal point canvasses the questions and compiles the responses with all relevant individuals
       and/or agencies in a country;
    2. The MOH conducts a one-day workshop with relevant individuals/agencies to collectively
       generate the responses.

 The latter approach may be helpful in supporting a multisectoral conversation about HiAP and NCDs,
 thereby helping to identify areas for potential action or priority attention. It may also be more efficient
 than pursuing individual responses.




                                                                                                               47
INFORMATION ABOUT THE ASSESSMENT RESPONDENT(S)


Please provide complete information for the focal point for the completion of this
assessment.
Name:
Position:
Organization:

Address:
City, Country, Postal code:
Telephone:
Fax:
E-mail:

Please provide information on the other respondents who participated in/contributed to
the assessment. Where individuals are reluctant to be identified, please indicate the
organization they represent.

     Organization                 Name               Position            E-mail




                                         48
SECTION 1: EXPERIENCE OF GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES AND
ACTIONS FOR HIAP

1.1 Availability of Experiences on HiAP

Q1-1 Is there an explicit government commitment to joined-up government (or whole-
of-government approach or multisectoral action)?

Yes                            No                    I don’t know           Unsure



Q1-2       To what extent is the government moving toward joined-up government (or
whole-of-government approach or multisectoral action)?

1              2               3               4              5               6
No action      Being           Under           Actioned       Partially       Fully
               considered      development                    implemented     implemented


Q1-3     Is there a formal, agreed government process that is implemented, whereby the
Ministry of Health (MOH) gives input to policy making in other ministries?

Yes                    No                      I don’t know          Unsure



If yes or unsure, please specify:

……………………………………………………………………………………………



Q1-4      Is there a designated mechanism to ensure that health priorities are integrated in
existing national/subnational plans and policy documents of other nonhealth sectors?

       Yes                     No                I don’t know                   Unsure



If yes or unsure, please specify:

……………………………………………………………………………………………




                                          49
           Q1-5 is there formal collaboration between health and nonhealth entities for joint
           activities that improve health outcomes?


                          National or subnational              Civil society               Private sector (business)
Entities                       government
                        Yes   No   Don’t    Unsure      Yes   No   Don’t       Unsure     Yes     No    Don’t   Unsure
                                   know                            know                                 know
National           or
subnational
government

Civil society
Private         sector
(business)
Government-civil       Yes                  No                     Don’t know                     Unsure
society-private
sector     (joint all
three)

           If yes, please indicate what policy or program areas have formal collaboration or joint
           activities:

           ________________________________________________________________________
           ________________________________________________________________________

           Q1-6 Please characterize the main forms of engagement that MOH adopts with each of
           the following groups:

                        Communication    Consultation     Cooperation      Coordination     Collaboration

                         (information       (obtain        (shared             (aligned         (joint work)
                           provision)      feedback)      resources)            work)

      Community
      at large

      Beneficiaries

      Service
      providers

      Government
      agencies




                                                     50
1.2 National or Subnational Mechanisms for HIAP

Q1-7 Is there a structure for intersectoral policy governance for health, either in general
or for specific health issues? If yes, please specify name of mechanism. Please answer all
items.


                           Yes — specify name of       No      I don’t know      Unsure
                                mechanism
Parliament
(inquiry, committee)
Government
(cabinet committee,
coordinating minister)
Ministry
(interdepartmental
committee, joint task
force)
Statutory agency
(delegated financing,
service       delivery,
regulation)
Civil society
(consultative forum,
funded project)
Public-private
partnership
(joint        venture,
consultation)

If no structures exist, please go to Q2.1




                                            51
Q1-8 For each of the governance structures named above, please specify what
governance actions it is concerned with. Please answer all that apply.

Name      of     Agenda-setting and          Policy          Policy design   Implementation and
mechanism            preference        development and           an tool          oversight
                     formation            bargaining          development
                 Evidenc Advocac      Set       Develop     Specify tools:   Delivery or M&E
                 e         y          goals     plans       legislation,     enforcement
                 support              and       and         financing,
                                      targets guidance      programs,
                                                            information
Parliament

Government

Ministry

Statutory
agency

Civil society

Public-private
partners HIP


Q1-9 For each of the structures named above, how well is the structure supported in
relation to the following building blocks? (In case there are more than two structures,
please enlarge matrix).

Structure:________________

Building           No       Weak        Moderate           Good         Very      Don’t
block            support   support      support           support      strong     know
                                                                      support
Leadership
Political
commitment
/ government
mandate
Human
resources
Financial
resources
Information
and research
Policy
analysis


                                        52
tools
Partnership
management
Stakeholder
engagement

Structure:________________

Building             No            Weak           Moderate           Good          Very       Don’t
block              support        support         support           support       strong      know
                                                                                 support
Leadership
Political
commitment
/ government
mandate
Human
resources
Financial
resources
Information
and research
Policy
analysis
tools
Partnership
management
Stakeholder
engagement


Q1-10       How effective are these structures in performing the different phases of the
policy process?

Phase of policy     Ineffective     Somewhat           Somewhat       Quite         Very      Don’t
process                             ineffective         effective    effective    effective   know
Agenda setting
Policy
development
Policy      tool
selection
Policy
implementatio
n oversight
Policy
evaluation




                                                  53
Q1-11 What role has the Ministry of Health (MOH) played in these structures? Tick a
maximum of the five that apply. Please indicate the structure if there is more than one.
Please enlarge matrix in case there are more than two structures.

Structure:______________________________________

_____Provide health and population data
_____Provide research and analysis of health impact
_____Advocate for policy attention
_____Propose policy strategies
_____Draft policy documents
_____Negotiate budgets
_____Provide technical guidance on policy implementation
_____Develop performance-monitoring indicators
_____Provide monitoring and evaluation data
_____Provide capacity building for other sectors
_____Other. Please specify:___________________________________________

Structure:______________________________________

_____Provide health and population data
_____Provide research and analysis of health impact
_____Advocate for policy attention
_____Propose policy strategies
_____Draft policy documents
_____Negotiate budgets
_____Provide technical guidance on policy implementation
_____Develop performance-monitoring indicators
_____Provide monitoring and evaluation data
_____Provide capacity building for other sectors
_____Other. Please specify____________________________________________


1.3 Accountability Frameworks


Q1-12 (a) If relevant, what are the key performance expectations and outputs from the
HiAP mechanism?
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________




                                        54
Q1-12 (b) Is there a system in place for tracking or reporting on them? If yes, please
specify.
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



Q1-13 Are there any mechanisms to document, track, and/or report the progress and/or
achievements of national and subnational plans/activities that are jointly developed or
carried out by two or more sectors?

Yes                       No                   I don’t know

If yes, please specify:
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________



Q1-14 Is there any requirement to report on achievements of joint activities to higher
authorities such as an annual reporting to the Parliament, Council of Ministers, or others?

Yes                       No                   I don’t know

If yes, please specify:

________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________



Q1-15       Is there a process for ministries to come together, and with nongovernment
partners, to review progress, reflect on lessons learned, and revise policy strategies?

Yes                       No                   I don’t know

If yes, please specify:

________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________


                                          55
SECTION 2: EXTENT OF IMPLEMENTATION OF WHO’S BEST
BUYS FOR NCD INTERVENTIONS AND POLICY ACTION ON
SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF NCDS

2.1 Best Buy NCD Interventions

Risk Factor: Tobacco use

Has your country increased taxes on tobacco?

1                2            3               4             5               6
No action        Being        Under           Actioned      Partially       Fully
                 considered   development                   implemented     implemented
Date

Have smoke-free indoor worksites been introduced (that is, legislated and enforced)?

1                2            3               4             5               6
No action        Being        Under           Actioned      Partially       Fully
                 considered   development                   implemented     implemented

Have smoke-free public places been introduced (that is, legislated and enforced)?

1                2            3               4             5               6
No action        Being        Under           Actioned      Partially       Fully
                 considered   development                   implemented     implemented

Are health information and warnings available on the packet (of tobacco products)?

1                2            3                4            5               6
No action        Being        Under            Actioned     Partially       Fully
                 considered   development                   implemented     implemented
Type        of
warning

Are bans on tobacco advertising, promotion, and sponsorship in place?

1                2            3               4             5               6
No action        Being        Under           Actioned      Partially       Fully
                 considered   development                   implemented     implemented




                                         56
Risk Factor: Harmful alcohol use

Has your country increased taxes on alcohol?

1                2            3                  4           5             6
No action        Being        Under              Actioned    Partially     Fully
                 considered   development                    implemented   implemented
Date

Has access to retailed alcohol been restricted?

1                2             3                  4          5             6
No action        Being         Under              Actioned   Partially     Fully
                 considered    development                   implemented   implemented
Type        of
restriction


Are bans on alcohol advertising in place?

1                2            3                  4           5             6
No action        Being        Under              Actioned    Partially     Fully
                 considered   development                    implemented   implemented
Type of ban

Risk Factor: Unhealthy diet and physical inactivity

Have policy measures been adopted to reduce salt content of manufactured and prepared
foods?

1                2            3                  4           5             6
No action        Being        Under              Actioned    Partially     Fully
                 considered   development                    implemented   implemented

Have policy measures been adopted to require replacement of trans fat with
polyunsaturated fat?

1                2            3                  4           5             6
No action        Being        Under              Actioned    Partially     Fully
                 considered   development                    implemented   implemented

Have comprehensive communication measures been undertaken, in a variety of settings
and through the mass media, to raise awareness on diet and physical activity?




                                            57
1              2              3                 4             5             6
No action      Being          Under             Actioned      Partially     Fully
               considered     development                     implemented   implemented
Key issues
addressed


To what extent do the communication interventions target disadvantaged localities or
vulnerable population groups?

1              2             3                  4              5             6
Unsure         Not at all    Being              Under          Some          Well
                             considered         development    targeting     targeted

Disease Management: Cardiovascular disease and diabetes

Has government reduced financial barriers to multidrug therapy (for example, through
subsidies) for people with a high risk of developing heart attacks and strokes?

1             2              3                  4             5             6
No action     Being          Under              Actioned      Partially     Fully
              considered     development                      implemented   implemented

To what extent do the affordability interventions target vulnerable population groups?

1              2              3                 4             5              6
Unsure         Not at all     Being              Under        Some           Well
                              considered        development   targeting      targeted

Disease Prevention: Cancer

Have financial and service-delivery provisions, including outreach to disadvantaged
target communities, been made for scaling-up of hepatitis B immunization to prevent
liver cancer?

1             2              3                  4             5             6
No action     Being          Under              Actioned      Partially     Fully
              considered     development                      implemented   implemented

Have financial and service-delivery provisions, including outreach to disadvantaged
target communities, been made for screening and treatment of precancerous lesions to
prevent cervical cancer?




                                           58
1              2              3                 4             5                6
No action      Being          Under             Actioned      Partially        Fully
               considered     development                     implemented      implemented


2.2 Policy Actions on Other Relevant Social Determinants of Health

Have urban development polices (such as housing density, public transportation, green
space) been adopted to encourage active transport and walkable cities?

1              2              3                 4             5                6
No action      Being          Under             Actioned      Partially        Fully
               considered     development                     implemented      implemented

If relevant, to what extent do these urban development policies that promote good health
and safe environments target disadvantaged localities?

1              2              3                 4             5                6
Unsure         Not at all     Under             Being         Partially        Fully
                              consideration     developed     implemented      implemented


Do these policies that offer incentives for healthy lifestyle programs exist at the worksite?

1              2               3                4             5                6
No action      Being           Under            Actioned      Partially        Fully
               considered      development                    implemented      implemented
Type      of
incentive

If relevant, to what extent do the worksite incentive policies target vulnerable population
groups?

1              2               3                4              5               6
Unsure         Not at all      Under            Being           Limited        Well
                               consideration    developed      targeting       targeted


Has availability of safe environments for walking and recreational activities increased in
your major cities?

1              2              3                 4             5                6
No action      Being          Under             Actioned      Partially        Fully
               considered     development                     implemented      implemented




                                           59
If relevant, to what extent do the safer environment policies target disadvantaged
localities?

1              2             3                4             5              6
Unsure         Not at all    Under            Being         Partially      Fully
                             consideration    developed     implemented    implemented


Are there economic incentives in place to increase use of public transportation and other
incidental physical activity?

1              2              3               4             5              6
No action      Being          Under           Actioned      Partially      Fully
               considered     development                   implemented    implemented
Type      of
incentive


If relevant, to what extent do the incentives for physical activity target disadvantaged
localities or vulnerable population groups?

1              2             3                4              5              6
Unsure         Not at all    Under            Being          Some           Well
                             consideration    developed      targeting      targeted


Are there population-based early childhood development programs?

1              2             3                4             5              6
No action      Being         Under            Actioned      Partially      Fully
               considered    development                    implemented    implemented

Have health-promoting schools been instituted as a matter of policy?

1              2             3                4             5              6
No action      Being         Under            Actioned      Partially      Fully
               considered    development                    implemented    implemented

Are there controls on advertising of unhealthy food aimed at children?

1              2             3                4             5              6
No action      Being         Under            Actioned      Partially      Fully
               considered    development                    implemented    implemented




                                         60
Are there incentives in place to increase availability and affordability of fruits and
vegetables?

1               2            3                4             5              6
No action       Being        Under            Actioned      Partially      Fully
                considered   development                    implemented    implemented
Type       of
incentives


If relevant, to what extent do the policies to increase healthy food affordability target
disadvantaged communities or vulnerable population groups?

1               2            3                4             5               6
Unsure          Not at all   Under            Being         Some            Well
                             consideration    developed     targeting       targeted


Are there economic interventions in place to promote availability and access of healthy
foods?

1               2            3                4            5               6
No action       Being        Under            Actioned     Partially       Fully
                considered   development                   implemented     implemented

If relevant, to what extent do the healthy food–promotion policies target disadvantaged
localities or vulnerable population groups?

1               2            3                4            5               6
Unsure          Not at all   Under            Being        Partially       Fully
                             consideration    developed    implemented     implemented


2.3 National or Subnational Mechanisms for NCDs

Q2-1 Is there any high-level body such as a council/commission/committee bringing
representatives from different sectors to work together on NCDs?


         Yes                 No                     I don’t know          Unsure




                                         61
If the answer is YES, please specify the nonhealth sectors, nongovernmental, and private
sector organizations represented in each, and answer the subsequent question. If the
answer is NO, please move to section 3.

Name of the high-level body (1):

Nonhealth sectors included:                        Nongovernmental      &    private   sector
                                                   organizations included:



Name of the high-level body (2):

Nonhealth sectors included:                        Nongovernmental      &    private   sector
                                                   organizations included:



Name of the high- level body (3):

Nonhealth sectors included:                        Nongovernmental      &    private   sector
                                                   organizations included:




Q2-2 Has the high-level body (bodies) developed and priorities/decisions shared with
stakeholders?

                                                        Yes          No            I don’t know

Clear terms of reference

A process for identifying shared priorities

Transparency in decision-making, including
resolution of disagreements

A process for engaging multiple stakeholders
within and outside government
Available multisectoral policy and action plan

A budget or funding mechanism for joint
programs and activities
A budget or funding mechanism for relevant
programs for each ministry



                                              62
Monitoring and evaluation mechanism/ tools


Regular communication and reporting tools/
mechanism with the general public (e.g., TV,
journals, radio, special communiqué)?




2.4 Accountability Frameworks

Q2-3 If relevant, what are the key performance expectations and outputs from the NCD
Commission?____________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



Q2-4 Are there any mechanisms to document, track, and/or report the progress and/or
achievements of joint NCD plans/activities at the national and subnational levels?

Yes                       No                 I don’t know

If                  yes,                  please                  specify:
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
__________________________

Q2-5 Is there any requirement to report on achievements of joint activities to higher
authorities, such as an annual NCD reporting to the Parliament, Council of Ministers, or
others?

Yes                       No                 I don’t know

If yes, please specify:

________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
__________________________

Q2-6 Is there a process for ministries to come together, and with nongovernment
partners, to review progress, reflect on lessons learned, and revise policy strategies?

Yes                       No                 I don’t know




                                        63
If yes, please specify:

________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
__________________________



SECTION 3: ORGANIZATIONAL CAPACITY AND RESOURCES FOR
HIAP

Q3-1 To what extent does the government expect the MOH to collaborate with other
sectors as part of the routine work in policy development and implementation?


Too much            As needed            Not enough        Not all          Unsure

Q3-2     How effective is the MOH in performing the following health sector roles in
support of HiAP? Tick whichever applies for each role.

Role                 Unable     Seldom       Periodicall   Often     Consistentl   Don’t
                     to do      done         y done        done      y done        know
Provide health
and population
data
Provide
research     and
analysis       of
health impact of
other sectors’
policies
Advocate      for
policy attention
Propose
evidence-
informed policy
strategies
Draft      policy
documents
Negotiate
budgets
Provide
technical


                                            64
guidance       on
policy
implementation
Develop
performance-
monitoring
indicators
Provide
monitoring and
evaluation data
Capacity
building      for
other sectors


Q3-3 How effectively does the MOH provide the following policy functions? Tick
whichever applies for each competency

Competency             Ineffectiv   Somewhat      Somewhat    Quite       Very        Don’t
                       e            ineffective   effective   effective   effective   know
Using information
and evidence
Managing
stakeholder
relations
Managing
intraportfolio,
cross-portfolio,
and
intergovernmenta
l relations
Policy
implementation
Policy evaluation
and monitoring
Managing         the
policy process


Q3-4 Is there a need to enhance the organizational systems of the MOH to work with
other sectors?

        Yes              No             I don’t know          Unsure




                                             65
If yes, what are the organizational systems and competencies that require further
development?
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
__________________________


SECTION 4: REFLECTIONS ON EXISTING AND EFFECTIVE
EXPERIENCES RELATED TO HIAP
Q4-1 In your opinion, what were the factors/circumstances that initiated/supported HiAP?
(Please circle one or more answers and provide an example):

   (1) Importance of burden of disease

   (2) Community advocacy

   (3) Interest in joined-up government and multisectoral collaboration

   (4) Decision by the highest authority at the national or subnational level, for example,

       presidential decree

   (5) Clear mutual benefit for various ministries

   (6) Commitment to a global agenda, such as the MDGs, social determinants of health

       (SDH)

   (7) Request from a funding agency

   (8) Request from other sectors

   (9) Resources available

   (10)        Others, please specify below

   …………………………………………………………………………………………
   …………………………………………………

Q4-2 What are the main challenges when working with sectors or with civil society
outside health? How did you handle those challenges? Please describe briefly:

………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………..……………………………


                                         66
………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………..…………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
……..………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………..……………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………..…………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………..………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………..………………

Q4-3 What kind of mechanisms can be set-up to improve collaboration between MOH
and other sectors and civil society in your country? Please describe briefly:

………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………..……………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………..…………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
……..………………………………………………………………………………………
………



Thank you very much for participating in this assessment.




                                      67
                                                      About this series...
                           This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Family
                           (HNP) of the World Bank’s Human Development Network. The papers
                           in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary and
                           unpolished results on HNP topics to encourage discussion and debate.
                           The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper
                           are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any
                           manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members
                           of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent.
                           Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take
                           into account this provisional character. For free copies of papers in this
                           series please contact the individual authors whose name appears on
                           the paper.

                           Enquiries about the series and submissions should be made directly to
                           the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Ser-
                           vice (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256, fax 202 522-3234).
                           For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




The world bank

1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC USA 20433
Telephone: 	     202 473 1000
Facsimile:	      202 477 6391
Internet:	www.worldbank.org
E-mail:	 feedback@worldbank.org	
