                                                88356


             LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
             NAM THEUN 2 MULTIPURPOSE PROJECT




       TWENTY SECOND REPORT OF THE INTERNATIONAL
       ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL PANEL OF EXPERTS




                                        DAVID McDOWELL
                                        THAYER SCUDDER
8 May 2014                              LEE M. TALBOT
                            CONTENTS


LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS                            1


INTRODUCTION                                       6

        1.1 The Panel’s Mandate                    7
        1.2 Panel Activities                       8
        1.3 Acknowledgments and Appreciation       9

I THE NAKAI PLATEAU: KEY POE ISSUES                10

  A. The List of Measures (LOM)                    10

  B. The Five Livelihood Pillars                   10
     (1.) Fisheries                                10
     (2.) Agriculture                              14
     (3.) Livestock                                15
     (4.) The Village Forestry Pillar              17
     (5.) The Off-farm Pillar                      21
     Ecotourism                                    22

  C. GoL Funding                                   23

  D. Monitoring                                    25

  E. Education                                     27

  F. Health Services                               27

  G. Hamlet and Village Issues                     28
    Village and Hamlet Committees                  28
    The Community Living Well Program              29
    Village Credit and Savings Fund                30

  H. Infrastructure, SERF and the Khon Kaen Road   30

  I. Broad Social and Environmental Issues         32




                                                        i
     (1)   Resettlement Gender Strategy                             32
     (2)   Mining near the Nakadok Village                          33
     (3)   Illegal Timber Extraction                                34
     (4)   Wildlife Marketing                                       35


II XE BANG FAI DOWNSTREAM PROGRAM                                   36


III WATERSHED MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION                             39
    AUTHORITY

Independent Fiduciary Review                                        39

The PAW Organizational Review of the WMPA                           40

Next Steps: POE Views                                               44


ANNEX 1: LIST OF MEASURES (LOM) TEXT


ANNEX 2: ROSEWOOD AND OTHER ILLEGAL TIMBER




              Cover photo: Fishing is the resettlers’ biggest legitimate
              money earner but they do not reap the full benefits. Here, at
              an undesignated landing site near the dam, a Lak Sao fish
              trader pays a resettler wholesale prices for his catch and
              evades paying fees.




ii
                   LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS

                          NAKAI PLATEAU

The POE recommends:

      1/22 That GoL (as well as the NRO) anticipate the need to provide
adequate financial and staff resources during 2015 through such sources
as the Khammouane Development Program to provide sufficient capacity
building for the Village Fishery Association and Village Fishery Groups
to enable them to compete in the future with “other people” (some of
whom, better educated and more experienced than many resettlers,
already are dominant participants in the fishery, fish marketing and fish
processing).

     That in regard to the CA’s aquaculture component, action be
     postponed until, based on expert advice, reservoir conditions allow
     a professional decision to be made.

The POE recommends:

     2/22 That GoL and NRO explore as part of the Village
     Development Planning Process ways in which indigenous
     knowledge could be used not just in the utilization of the additional
     lands but also in a wider range of agricultural and other
     community activities.

The POE recommends:

     3/22 That the WMPA finance with Nakai’s DAFO a realistic large
     animal vaccination program in the catchment and that GoL
     consider using NT2 revenue for an integrated vaccination program
     to cover Nakai District, the catchment, and PIZ villages in
     Khamkeut and Gnommalath.




                                                                        1
The POE recommends:

    4/22 That negotiations by the team appointed by the Provincial
    Governor be undertaken in an endeavor to recover the claimed
    unpaid logging and timber sale arrears from Leung Fat Hong by
    May 2014.
    That the interim VFDC manager seeks the early release of tax
    funds authorized by order of DPM Somsavat Lengsavad in March
    2013 but not yet paid over from Ministry of Finance and/or
    Provincial funds and organizes, from the refunds, in full or in part,
    the payment of dividends to the resettlers.

    That the interim VFDC manager likewise seeks payment of claimed
    replanting fees paid by VFA over past years to help fund
    reforestation operations on village forest lands.

    That the forest inventory required for planning purposes be
    undertaken as a matter of urgency once the arrears are available
    and paid.

    That appropriate steps be taken by the VFDC Board (or its
    successor), in consultation with all stakeholders and the villagers
    themselves, to ensure that the CA’s call for “forest management by
    villagers, for villagers” is given a practical and sustainable form.

    That this include, as set out in the LOM, realistic targets and
    deadlines for achieving an updated strategy, with forest protection
    and management, marketing and reforestation elements included.

The POE recommends:

    5/22 That with one year only remaining before the handing over of
    most programs, an intensive program of vocational, skills and
    managerial training be mounted as soon as the report on training
    needs has been absorbed. This initiative should be closely
    monitored by NTPC and Nakai District management since the
    success of the handover will rest substantially on the outcome of the
    training and skills development achieved in the months ahead.




2
The POE recommends:

      6/22 That GoL agencies, including the Khammouane Provincial
Department for Tourism and Culture and a restructured WMPA and
with technical assistance from NTPC, work in concert with the new
Provincial Tourism SOE to set up later this year or early next year a
workshop of potential stakeholders to gauge the level of interest in
fostering ecotourism on the Nakai Plateau and NNT NPA, looking
towards the possible drawing up of a District Tourism Plan during 2015.

The POE recommends:

      7/22 That NRO, DAFO and village institutions discuss how to
address key environment issues of relevance to current and future Nakai
District generations such as enhancing soil quality, sustaining reservoir
aquatic resources, re-establishing essential forest, non-timber forest
products (NTFPs), and pasture resources, and minimizing reservoir
sedimentation through appropriate use of the drawdown area, islands
and fields.

The POE recommends:

      8/22 That in the interest of helping ensure sustainability of VCFs
      individually and collectively, negotiations begin as soon as is
      feasible on practical handover arrangements and agreements with
      LWU and RDPEO.


WATERSHED MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION AUTHORITY

The POE recommends:

      9/22. That GOL proceed without delay along the following lines:

               • Create a very high-level Government commission to
                 review the WMPA, its objectives and purpose as
                 presented in the SEMFOP, and other relevant material
                 including the Reviews discussed. It should determine
                 what the basic functions of the WMPA should now be,
                 given its manifest failure in its present form to carry




                                                                        3
      out the fundamental task of protecting the watershed’s
      biodiversity. The Commission must not be subjected to
      the influence of the WMPA secretariat for obvious
      conflict of interest reasons. Among the options to be
      considered by the commission is some form of
      partnership or other cooperation with an international
      environmental organization.

    • The commission would propose (a) a new design for
      WMPA incorporating reprioritizing of functions and a
      new structure to implement them, (b) the steps
      required to establish the new design, and (3) the
      rationale for the proposed action.

    • It would manage the transition from the current
      WMPA to the new one through actions including, but
      not limited to, the following decisions and actions:
      - GOL’s Department of Energy Business (DEB) to ask
        NTPC to withhold the full payment for this financial
        year’s Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB),
        which was approved in December, 2013 (the
        Authority has sufficient funds in hand to maintain
        the minimal operations specified below).
      - The BoD to reduce the WMPA staff to handle
        minimal essential ongoing operations, primarily
        land and reservoir patrols, and for core village
        support activities such as maintaining health and
        education services. The staff to be retained should
        be almost completely technical and those involved
        with patrolling and development functions. An
        interim manager should be appointed by the BoD
        from the above retained staff.
      - WMPA with appropriate expert assistance to revise
        the AWPB (or identify specific budget lines of the
        existing AWPB which are critical) for the reduced
        interim operations, and have the revised AWPB
        approved by the BoD.
      - GoL to ask NTPC (a) to transfer funds for the
        revised Budget to WMPA once the above is




4
    completed, and (b) to hold the balance for
    subsequent years.
-   This form of operation to remain in place until the
    transition to a “new WMPA” is approved and
    initiated as the results of the commission’s work.
-   To re-establish the WMPA, once an option has been
    chosen by Ministers, to achieve the priority
    functions identified.
-   The necessary restructuring of WMPA will require
    new staff positions that should be suitably advertised or
    announced publicly and applications should be
    assessed and selections made by an independent group
    with international representation.
-   The IMA to be administratively and financially
    separated and independent from the WMPA
    Secretariat, and be provided adequate time to
    achieve their mission.
-   A review of the salaries and 2013 inflations of the
    salaries of the WMPA Secretariat be undertaken by
    an independent agency or firm and the results be
    made available to the DEB, IMA, POE, NTPC and
    IFIs.
-   An immediate inventory of confiscated goods and
    other WMPA assets (including vehicles, computer
    and office equipment, etc.) be conducted. Ideally it
    should be a joint inventory conducted by an
    appropriate GOL agency and an independent body
    such as Price Waterhouse.




                                                          5
1.    INTRODUCTION


      This is Report 22 of the International Panel of Environmental and
Social Experts (POE or the Panel) for the Nam Theun 2 (NT2) Multipurpose
Project in the Lao People's Democratic Republic. The members of the Panel
are D.K.McDowell (consultant, Otaki, New Zealand), T. Scudder (Professor
Emeritus, California Institute of Technology, USA) and L.M.Talbot,
(Professor, George Mason University, Virginia, USA).

      Comments and suggestions from stakeholders on preliminary and
second drafts have been taken into account in this final text though not always
accepted in their entirety.

        Attached to this report as Annex 1 is a List of Measures (LOM) against
which to assess achievement of the Objectives and Provisions of the
Resettlement Implementation Period (RIP) as set out in the Concession
Agreement (CA). The List was discussed in Vientiane in consultations spread
over several days with NT2 stakeholders in February 2014 and further
comments of stakeholders on the revised LOM are incorporated in the Annex
1 text.

      This mission had two main foci. The first was the resettlement process
and progress on the Nakai Plateau to assess the progress of handing over to
the Government of Laos (GoL) the responsibility for execution and
completion of the resettlement component so that the requirements of the
Concession Agreement (CA) for the Resettlement Implementation Period
(RIP) could be assessed during the first quarter of 2015.

       The second main focus was the Watershed Management and Protection
Authority (WMPA). The performance of the WMPA has always been
problematical, most particularly in terms of its responsibilities for
conservation of the globally important biodiversity of the Nakai-Nam Theun
National Protected Area (NPA). Two recent external reviews of the WMPA
(a Fiduciary review and an Organizational one) have documented that the
performance of the WMPA has been so lacking that a comprehensive
restructuring is required.

       The report itself is organized into three sections dealing with the
resettlement program on the Nakai Plateau, a brief section on the Xe Bang




6
Fai (XBF) Downstream Program and a fuller one on the WMPA, plus two
Annexes. The first Annex consists of the List of Measures (LOM) against
which to assess achievement of the Objectives and Provisions of the
Resettlement Implementation Period (RIP) as set out in the Concession
Agreement (CA) and the second deals with the POE’s views on Rosewood
and Other Illegal Timbers.

       It should be noted that in December 2013 it was declared by GoL that
Nakai District is "out of poverty" in accordance with the Government's
criteria. That is a decision for the GoL to make. The Resettlement Committee
in January 2014 declared that the Resettlement Household Income Target had
been achieved "in accordance with the Concession Agreement". While not
suggesting that incomes have fallen below CA requirements, the POE points
out below (under B. The Five Livelihood Pillars and D. Monitoring) that it is
also important to realize that important problems remain with each of the five
pillars at this time and with their integration to achieve a sustainable and
diversified program of livelihood activities and that, as it has frequently
stated, the Panel has reservations about the accuracy of some aspects of the
recorded household income data.


1.1 The Panel’s Mandate

     The Panel derives its mandate from the Concession Agreement. This is a
1,352 page legal document which assigns the POE a contractual responsibility
to provide independent review of, and guidance on, the treatment of
environmental and social issues associated with the Project, along with some
executive functions, and towards the conclusion of the respective
Implementation Periods, to review and report on whether the Resettlement
Objectives and the Resettlement Provisions “have been achieved and
maintained for a reasonable period of time”. The POE remains a standing
body for the period of the concession. The POE submits its findings to the
GOL Minister of Energy and Mines and to Deputy Prime Minister Somsavat
Lengsavad, addresses recommendations to the GOL, Nam Theun 2 Power
Company (NTPC) and the International Financial Institutions (IFIs), and is
required to “act independently of the parties and in a manner which…is in
accordance with the World Bank Safeguard Policies and the ADB Safeguard
Policies and best protects both the environment and the interests of those
affected by the Project Impacts.”




                                                                            7
1.2 Panel Activities

     All three Panel members (David McDowell, Thayer Scudder and Lee
Talbot) arrived in Vientiane on 1 February, 2014. That day and the next
informal meetings were held with various individuals involved with the
project to obtain further background information. On February 3,4 and 5
meetings and briefings were held with the Minister of Energy and Mines,
Soulivong Daravong, the Department of Energy Business (DEB) of the
Ministry of Energy and Mines, the NTPC, the World Bank and the other IFIs.

      The afternoon of 5 February the team drove to Lak Sao and on 6
February visited the fish market, the Khamkeut Office of the WMPA, and the
site of a cassava factory outside of Lak Sao. Later the team visited the valley
above Nakadok Village to survey the status of previous industrial mining and
current artisanal mining within the NPA, and then proceeded to the Nakai
Reservoir dam site to spend the night at the NTPC quarters.

     During the following day the team observed illegal marketing of
reservoir fish and found facilities used to transport and load illegally cut logs,
both adjacent to the dam site facility. They later found and drove along a 3
km. track that allowed vehicles with illegal loads to bypass the WMPA
checkpoint on the main road to Lak Sao. They visited Pakatan Village and
then proceeded to Oudomsouk and the NTPC Wooden Guest House.

     The following five days were spent on the Nakai Plateau. Visits were
made to the Thalang Fish Landing site and to landing sites at other villages.
Part of a day was spent on foot inspecting areas of recent slash and burn
agriculture near the villages of Khon Kaen and Ban Done. Meetings and
consultations were held with the Nakai Resettlement Office, the District
Governor, District Working Groups, Resettlement Management Unit, the
Village Forestry Development Company Ltd. (formerly the Village Forestry
Association), Watershed Management and Protection Authority (WMPA),
GOL officials and volunteers at the three Resettlement Village Centers,
Reservoir Fishery Association, Village Development Committees, Village
Fishery Association and Village Fishing Groups, and households involved in
the 5 pillar activities in two villages in each zone. A meeting was also held
with the Chairman of the NTPC Board of Directors and NTPC CEO.

   On February 13 the team proceeded to Thakhek for a meeting with the
Khammouane Governor, the Resettlement Management Unit, and Health




8
Program managers. The following day they proceeded to Vientiane and the
next two days were spent report writing.

     February 17 and the morning of February 18 were spent in a meeting at
DEB discussing the List of Measures (LOM) with representatives of GOL, the
International Financial Institutions (IFIs), NTPC and WMPA. A meeting was
held with the Minister of Energy and Mines on the afternoon of the 18th.

     The usual wrap-up meeting to present POE preliminary views was held
on February 19. In the evening T. Scudder departed. The 20th was devoted to
report writing. On February 21 D. McDowell and L Talbot met with Deputy
Prime Minister Asang Laoly, had lunch with representatives of the Wildlife
Conservation Society (WCS) and later met the Vice Minister of MONRE. On
February 22nd David McDowell and Lee Talbot departed Laos.

1.3 Acknowledgements – Appreciation

      The POE expresses its appreciation to Patrick Dye of NTPC for
organizing the very full, worthwhile and productive program for the POE. The
Panel is particularly grateful to Deputy Prime Minister Asang Laoly for a very
productive meeting, and to Minister of Energy and Mines, Soulivong
Daravong, for taking the time to meet with the Panel twice. We are grateful to
Khammouane Governor Khambay Damlath for his time, insights and
hospitality, and likewise to Nakai District Governor Bouma Soutsadavone.
The Panel is grateful for the time, information and advice from the many
individuals we met, including NTPC Board Chair Jean-Christophe Philbe,
NTPC CEO Michel Robino, NTPC E& S Director Ruedi Luthi, NRO
Manager Xavier Bouan, World Bank Country Manager Keiko Miwa, WB
NT2 Manager Ingo Wiederhofer, ADB Country Director Sandra Nicoll and
ADB consultant Francois Obein, RMU Manager Sivixay Soukkarath and
Deputy Manager Mme. Keoula Souliyadeth, WMPA Director Phouthone
Sophathilath, interim manager of VFDC Khamsing Boualaphant, Director
General of DEB Xaypaseuth Phomsoupha and Deputy Director Sychath
Boutsakitirath, and many others in the DEB and other GOL units, World
Bank, and NTPC. Phalim Daravong, this time as an independent consultant
rather than an NTPC staff member, accompanied the Panel throughout the
visit and provided essential assistance. And as always, the Panel is extremely
grateful for the warmth and willing help it has received from all the Lao and
others it has had the pleasure and privilege of meeting.




                                                                           9
I THE NAKAI PLATEAU: KEY POE ISSUES


A. The LOM

       An NT2 stakeholder workshop held in Thakhek last May requested the
POE to help focus the work required to achieve the aims of the Concession
Agreement (CA) by drawing up a List of Measures (LOM), with indicators
and targets, which sets out what still needs to be done. This draft “indicative
list” was circulated in December 2013 and discussed in a free-ranging three
days of meetings during the POE’s visit. The result was the beginnings of a
consensus among stakeholders, including the Governor of Nakai District and
the Director General and Deputy Director General of the Ministry of Energy
and Mines’ Department of Energy Business, on what needs to be done before
RIP closure. The revised LOM below will now serve, with the CA itself, as a
reference point and guide for all parties but particularly the POE during the
next two years as the Panel makes its assessment of developments and
provides advice to the Resettlement Committee, with whom the final decision
on closure of the Resettlement Implementation Period rests.

B. The Five Livelihood Pillars

       It is important to realize that important problems remain with each of
the five pillars at this time and with their integration to achieve a sustainable
and diversified program of livelihood activities. More attention must also be
paid to marketing produce in the case of fisheries, agriculture, livestock and
forestry. In the paragraphs that follow, POE will address activities that can
achieve a diversified set of income generating activities.

             (1) Fisheries

      Introduction: The Fisheries Management Plan (FMP) is first rate but
      implementation will be the key to success.




10
     Resettlers coming into an unofficial fish landing site to
                   sell their catch to a trader.

(a) The POE sees as essential much improved law enforcement by
    frequent patrols that include much closer cooperation between
    village fishing groups, the Watershed Management and Protection
    Authority (WMPA) and appropriately armed militia/police/army
    personnel.

   In the attached LOM the WMPA, on Board approval, is required by
   May 1, 2014 to authorize and properly equip its Khamkeut office
   with water transport and staff to patrol reservoir areas within
   Khamkeut District and with the Oudomsouk Office authorized and
   equipped to patrol all Nakai-Nam Theun areas within Nakai District.
   The POE considers such Board approval as an essential component
   of fisheries law enforcement.




                                                                   11
     (b) The POE would appreciate getting from NRO’s Fisheries Program
         quarterly updates during the all important Fisheries Management
         Plan implementation process.

     (c) The LOM recognizes that GoL’s recent ten year extension of the
         reservoir fishery beyond the initial 10 years stipulated in PM Degree
         24 includes beside resettler hamlets “other people who used to fish
         in the inundation zone, and their respective descendants.” Though
         that requirement is an equitable one, its implementation needs
         further analysis and further thought as to its implications for what
         currently is the resettlers’ major source of income.

        The necessary action is that GoL assess by the end of 2014 the
        approximate number of households in Khamkeut villages, Nakai
        Plateau host villages (Oudomsouk and PhonPanPek), Nakai-Nam
        Theun villages and Gnommalath villages that formerly used to fish in
        areas now inundated by the reservoir. If the number of households
        is such as to significantly increase the number of fishers, as the POE
        anticipates, then further action will be called for.




            Fish retailer in Lak Sao prepares NT2 reservoir fish for sale.




12
     The POE recommends:

      1/22 That GoL (as well as the NRO) anticipate the need to provide
adequate financial and staff resources during 2015 through such sources
as the Khammouane Development Program to provide sufficient capacity
building for the Village Fishery Association and Village Fishery Groups
to enable them to compete in the future with “other people” (some of
whom, better educated and more experienced than many resettlers,
already are dominant participants in the fishery, fish marketing and fish
processing).

     That in regard to the CA’s aquaculture component , action be
     postponed until, based on expert advice, reservoir conditions allow
     a professional decision to be made.

     The POE would appreciate WMPA and Nakai District reaching an
     agreement (that initially does not require complicated boundary
     alterations) clarifying the issue of resettler fishing downstream from the
     Thalang bridge and on the south side of the Nam Theun adjacent to
     Thalang villagers’ fields and the additional Nam Malou land that will
     be made available to first and second generation resettlers.




                   Khon Kaen children collecting aquatic life.




                                                                            13
           (2) Agriculture

     Introduction: In our report the POE will only address issues that it
     considers most important to foster sufficient activity diversification and
     which, where possible, makes use of current resettler knowledge.

     (a) In clearing and cultivating additional lands the POE in 2013
         observed multiple households working together to prepare and plant
         rice. Men from multiple households did the land preparation, while
         women, also from multiple households, cooperated in planting rice
         in successive fields. In 2014 in the additional field area of another
         hamlet the POE realized that the communal fencing not only
         enclosed an area of over 20 fields but, as in the fields photographed
         in 2013, was of superior quality to the fencing surrounding 0.66 ha
         fields.

        Furthermore, on their own initiative farmers during the second year
        were beginning the intensification of swidden cultivation on
        additional land. One elderly woman, for example, had planted taro
        and was preparing an appropriate area for paddy cultivation while
        resettlers from another household had planted well protected chillies.


        The POE recommends:

              2/22 That GoL and NRO explore as part of the Village
              Development Planning Process ways in which indigenous
              knowledge could be used not just in the utilization of the
              additional lands but also in a wider range of agricultural
              and other community activities.

        As possible examples, might better use of at least some 0.66 ha
        fields follow if they were enclosed in communal fencing?
        Following the harvest in communally fenced fields could communal
        grazing on treated (with urea, for example) rice straw be encouraged
        not just as an end in itself but also as a means to encourage gradual
        intensification of livestock management? Are there other indigenous
        beliefs that could be used for hamlet upkeep and waste disposal?




14
(b) Simultaneous and immediate irrigation system rehabilitation and
    training provided by the RMU, Nakai District, and the Social and
    Environmental Remediation Fund (SERF), with strong NRO
    support, is essential in the 50 odd projects that the resettlers want to
    use.

(c) The POE wishes to reiterate the cultural importance of rice to the
    resettlers. Without exception when the POE asks households which
    was the most important year or years to date, the answer is the years
    when the project provided rice.

   By way of example, is there sufficient emphasis, as occurred in the
   Xe Bang Fai Downstream Program, to improve rainfed rice varieties
   under Nakai Plateau conditions and to obtain short season flood
   tolerant and/or floating rice varieties for use in suitable drawdown
   areas? Is sufficient attention being paid to encourage flood tolerant
   native grasses which have provided important grazing in other hydro
   reservoirs?

(d) There is an ongoing need for cash crop diversification and for rapid
    expansion of the successfully introduced agro-forestry program,
    involving for example the further building up of the existing tree and
    domesticated NTFP nurseries in each Zone. Seedling production
    should be coordinated with VFDC through an agreed plan, with
    NRO help and advice.

      (3) Livestock

Good progress has been made with cattle groups, cattle pens and
pasture development but critical is achieving a vaccination rate as close
as possible to 50% for cattle and buffalo because of the threat of disease
being introduced from the catchment, Khamkeut, and Gnommalath.




                                                                          15
       Buffalo grazing and wallowing in drawdown zone of the reservoir.

     Granted the historical and current importance of large animals to the
     resettlers and of buffalo to catchment villagers, further delay in
     DAFO/WMPA planning a credible vaccination program for the Nakai
     Plateau and adjacent NT2 Project Zones should be avoided. The POE is
     well aware of the complexities that planning, implementing and
     monitoring such a program involves at this time; not the least of which
     are the reorganization that the WMPA is undergoing and expected
     variation in animal husbandry priorities among villagers. However, the
     frequency with which epidemic disease has devastated large animal
     populations, as recently in the adjacent PIZ village of Pakatan, is a
     warning against further planning delays.

     The POE recommends:

           3/22 That the WMPA finance with Nakai’s DAFO a realistic
           large animal vaccination program in the catchment and that
           GoL consider using NT2 revenue for an integrated
           vaccination program to cover Nakai District, the catchment,
           and PIZ villages in Khamkeut and Gnommalath.




16
      (4) The Village Forestry Pillar

The only bright spot in the village forestry sector is the progress being
achieved in promoting agro forestry. Nearly three hundred households
took part in agro forestry activity in 2013, with NTPC providing them
with thousands of largely fruit tree seedlings. A Moringa Producers’
Group has been set up and has signed a contract for supply. There have
been high losses of mortality of Moringa seedlings due to farmer
neglect but the problem is being addressed. While conventional pasture
areas are being extended there is a need, with growing herds of cattle, to
develop agro pasture acreage as well but it is premature to be engaging
in this latter work. The wider community participation in agro forestry
is encouraging.

Beyond the agro forestry sector, however, it must be said that village
forestry is unquestionably the least successful of the five pillar
livelihood ventures. It was originally planned to provide a third of the
resettlers’ income but has not succeeded in coming close to that goal,
though a number of dividends have been paid to the villagers over the
years. It now faces considerable constraints with the resource depleted
to a presently unquantified degree by poor management, illegal cutting
by a variety of predators, a reallocation of lands originally assigned to
the former VFA (now the VFDC, Village Forestry Development
Company Limited) having been reassigned to provide additional
agricultural land to resettlers and second generation families, substantial
unpaid arrears owed by the logging sales contractor and – an old
problem – unreasonably heavy taxation of a venture which was set up
to provide compensatory income for the dislocated resettlers.
Government approval at a very high level has been given to a tax
reduction, with back dating, but it has yet to register in VFDC’s bank
account. There is also a return owed to VFDC for a replantation fee/tax
it has been paying but has received no money back for the replanting.




                                                                       17
        Relocated VFA lands being burned off for hill rice cultivation.

     The sustainability sought in the CA is a remote prospect. Attaining a
     degree of sustainability will depend on firm action by the responsible
     GoL agencies and the resettlers themselves to protect the remaining
     resource and the required new plantings and a willingness on the latter’s
     part to forego at least a proportion of immediate returns from a
     declining resource in the medium term interest of protecting, managing
     and rebuilding the forest reserves to the point where they are once again
     sustainably productive.

     There has been a managerial vacuum over the past two to three years
     but a new interim manager who knows both the project and the forestry
     business has been appointed and is moving to correct the situation he
     faces, not least the absence of a sense of ownership over the resource by
     the villagers. He will need strong support from the Provincial and
     District governors and from the new Board and cooperation from
     rejuvenated Village Forestry Committees to make progress including on
     the payment of arrears by the contractor and the authorized but not paid
     refund of the high taxes.




18
Sorting out the problem of failures to meet payments owed to VFDC is
an immediate priority. As noted above the Company is owed substantial
sums by the logging and marketing contractor and there is confusion
over two tax issues, one at least of which should result in the payment
of a large backdated refund. Not unreasonably the World Bank, which
has indicated a willingness to provide further support on village forestry
issues on the Nakai Plateau in principle, qualifies this offer by making it
subject to a GoL request and satisfactory resolution of the contractor
payment, contract and taxation issues. NTPC, which has already
contributed generously to the forestry work, is also willing to consider
provision of additional support subject to IFI involvement and the
satisfactory resolution of the outstanding contractual and taxation issues
by the GoL and the VFDC. The ADB considers that the project should
at this point stand on its own feet and that “achieving resettlement
targets as per CA requirements is and should be the responsibility of the
project implementing agencies, namely the GoL and the NTPC.”

Once the arrears issue has been settled the next step will be to provide a
basis for planning by undertaking a forest inventory survey on the
ground. As set out in the LOM several further steps follow the
completion of the inventory. With so many unknowns the precise
sequence of actions to be taken is speculative only at this point. The
necessary technical expertise to undertake the forest inventory survey
can be found. It is critically important that this task be undertaken well
and at an early date.

NTPC has said it will contribute to strengthening the forestry pillar if
one of the IFIs steps forward. NTPC has contributed substantially over
the years to the endeavor to turn the village forest resources into a
productive and sustainable income source in an often confused GoL
administrative context. That effort is fully acknowledged by the POE.
At the same time it must be said that a reading of the CA suggests that
there are important elements of the company’s obligations which were
not able to be achieved within the “limited by cost” expenditure cap. An
example is the requirement to oversee implementation of the 2005
sustainable forest plan and review it as appropriate and adjust it “in
order to achieve the objectives of the Community Forestry Program”. It
would be unfair to assign sole responsibility for the failure thus far to
implement the plan to NTPC, the RMU and/or the VFA management
– the difficulties in working in the forestry sector in Laos are well




                                                                       19
     known. But it illustrates that there remains work to be done before RIP
     closure. The POE therefore warmly welcomes the NTPC’s willingness
     to continue to be involved subject to IFI involvement as well.

     To lift the performance of this sector over the next two years to the
     stage where it could be regarded as back on its feet and beginning to
     operate effectively may well call for close attention not only by the
     Provincial and District Governors but at senior Ministerial level also.
     Without such support and direction sustainability would indeed be a
     remote prospect for what was seen as one of the main pillars of the
     livelihood program.

     The POE recommends:

           4/22 That negotiations by the team appointed by the
           Provincial Governor be undertaken in an endeavor to
           recover the claimed unpaid logging and timber sale arrears
           from Leung Fat Hong by May 2014.

           That the interim VFDC manager seeks the early release of
           tax funds authorized by order of DPM Somsavat Lengsavad
           in March 2013 but not yet paid over from Ministry of
           Finance and/or Provincial funds and organizes, from the
           refunds, in full or in part, the payment of dividends to the
           resettlers.

           That the interim VFDC manager likewise seeks payment of
           claimed replanting fees paid by VFA over past years to help
           fund reforestation operations on village forest lands.

           That the forest inventory required for planning purposes be
           undertaken as a matter of urgency once the arrears are
           available and paid.

           That appropriate steps be taken by the VFDC Board (or its
           successor), in consultation with all stakeholders and the
           villagers themselves, to ensure that the CA’s call for “forest
           management by villagers, for villagers” is given a practical
           and sustainable form.




20
             That this include, as set out in the LOM, realistic targets and
             deadlines for achieving an updated strategy, with forest
             protection and management, marketing and reforestation
             elements included.

       In summary, fostering forestry sector sustainability requires effective
forest protection, active forest management and the earmarking of a
substantial percentage of earnings in future budgets both for short term
planting of quick producing crop trees and domesticated NTFPs, and to get
long term forest regeneration and restoration, and propagation and planting,
underway by 2015.

      (5) The Off-Farm Pillar

      The CA sets out an ambitious program for skills training for off-farm
      employment covering many sectors. (Sched.4,Pt.1, para.10.4.1). The
      object was to stimulate new businesses and service opportunities to
      generate alternative income sources beyond farming, forestry and
      fishing. The proliferation of off-farm activities has happened only
      slowly, with resettlers more inclined to engage in pursuits they are
      familiar with or in more immediately remunerative activities like
      rosewood gathering and selling.

      It has to be said that until recently there has been a lack of dynamism in
      the area of capacity building in general. It is a propitious time – given
      that easily accessible rosewood stocks are now virtually exhausted and
      total incomes could well be falling – for NRO/RMU, working closely
      with the VDCs and drawing on the Village Development Plans, to put
      together a list of preferred vocational and skills training proposals and
      to implement them. The AIP records an intention during 2014 to engage
      external facilitators to ensure “the continuous and sustainable
      development of Nakai District and identify any necessary further
      training needs”. Workshops on capacity building issues are also
      planned, with plans for putting in place a systematic program of formal
      and informal upgrading courses and, where required, recruitment of
      additional staff. That is all reassuring; but time is short to allay fears of
      continuing inadequate capacity at the District and village/hamlet levels
      in nearly all sectors. Action on this front is vital. The POE has seen a
      draft of the pending report on vocational and training needs, which
      usefully pulls together a range of ideas on the employment potential of




                                                                               21
     several sectors, including the VFDC operations and tourism, and
     proposes a detailed skills assessment and a Nakai area skills
     development project.

     The POE recommends:

           5/22 That with one year only remaining before the handing
           over of most programs, an intensive program of vocational,
           skills and managerial training be mounted as soon as the
           report on training needs has been absorbed. This initiative
           should be closely monitored by NTPC and Nakai District
           management since the success of the handover will rest
           substantially on the outcome of the training and skills
           development achieved in the months ahead.


     Ecotourism

     As the consultants’ report concludes, one promising sector for job
     creation may be the promotion of a modest tourism industry, focusing
     on ecotourism in the watershed and on the Plateau as well. There is a
     slowly growing awareness of the potential of the area as adjacent
     regions develop their tourist potential. Already there are parties of
     young people, attracted by the remoteness of the region and some of its
     spectacular features, motor biking across the plateau. The sealing of the
     Lak Sao to Thalang road during 2015 can be expected to swell the
     numbers coming through with regional traffic coming in from Vietnam
     and China and going on to Thailand and Myanmar. The District should
     probably be starting soon to prepare to handle and hopefully profit from
     this expected influx.

     The Khammouane Province Department for Tourism and Culture has
     produced a Tourism Master Plan for the Province and has experience of
     ecotourism beyond the Nakai Nam Theun area. The Provincial
     Governor has also established very recently a state owned enterprise
     (SOE) tasked with developing tourism in the Province in a “strategic
     and integrated” manner. These developments provide a basis for
     moving forward and possibly for some funding in the NNT area. A next
     step may be to set up a meeting of potential stakeholders to assess the
     level of interest and resources to initiate action in the Nakai area.




22
     Subject to a positive response - including a readiness on the part of a
     restructured WMPA to play a full part in the process - the drawing up
     of a District Tourism Plan might follow.

     There are several imponderables here. The next initiatives must come
     from agencies and firms with interests in the area and the World Bank’s
     PAW project will doubtless also address the matter of where tourism
     fits into the NNT Management Plan. Based on the success of
     ecotourism ventures, whether community based or joint ventures with
     the private sector, elsewhere in Laos the POE sees considerable
     potential in well-planned and low-key ecotourism ventures for the
     District. There may well be a role here for the District and Provincial
     Governors, working with the new SOE and a restructured WMPA, to
     stimulate planning and action among potential stakeholders.

     The POE recommends:


      6/22 That GoL agencies, including the Khammouane Provincial
Department for Tourism and Culture and a restructured WMPA and
with technical assistance from NTPC, work in concert with the new
Provincial Tourism SOE to set up later this year or early next year a
workshop of potential stakeholders to gauge the level of interest in
fostering ecotourism on the Nakai Plateau and NNT NPA, looking
towards the possible drawing up of a District Tourism Plan during 2015.


     C. GoL funding

     The issue of GoL funding is dealt with in detail in the attached
     LOM as reproduced here:

     “Issues: Where the CA requires the setting up of institutions like the
     RMU, adequate funding to carry out their RIP responsibilities is
     essential (See para.3.1(b) of Schedule 4, Part 1 of the CA). Similarly,
     whereas GoL and the IFIs have agreed that NT2 revenue can be used on
     the NT2 project, such funds should be accessible for stipulated and
     emergency purposes during the RIP. The mechanisms for managing
     such funding need clarification.




                                                                          23
     Measures and Targets:

     1. The appropriate GoL agencies make available the GoL-approved
     RMU budget for the October 1, 2013 - September 30, 2014 fiscal year
     no later than May 15, 2014 [GoL].

     2. Provided the RMU submit an appropriate budget on time, GoL
     approve and provide for fiscal year October 1, 2014 – September 30,
     2015 an appropriate budget at the required intervals after September 30,
     2014 [GoL].

     3. GoL agree to make available NT2 revenue, as agreed upon with the
     IFIs, no later than September 30, 2014 for emergency and other critical
     situations than may arise during the RIP process.”

      While Measures and Targets 1 and 2 are obvious CA requirements,
     some background to 3. follows:

     (1) A major issue discussed with senior GOL officials during our visit
         was the possibility of accessing GoL NT2 revenue to deal with
         especially critical NT2 issues. (As indicated in the Aide Memoire of
         the IFI management mission of November 2013). One such issue,
         dealt with in the first two LOM requirements, is the need for RMU
         funding for 2014 and 2015 to complement NTPC funding and for
         implementing ongoing and other important RMU responsibilities in
         connection with the XBF Downstream Program. RMU funding has
         been formally approved for the 2013 – 2014 fiscal year but the claim
         is made that no GoL funds are readily available; hence the need for
         accessing NT2 revenue if other options continue to be unavailable.

     (2) The increasing international experience and emphasis on benefit
        sharing for project affected people based on finance from hydro-
        power revenue (see, for example, Chaogang Wang, “A Guide for
        Local Benefit Sharing in Hydropower Projects”, Social
        Development Working Paper No. 128, The World Bank, June 2012)
        and other sources throughout the concession period or project life is
        especially applicable to Laos because of its many dams with
        significant impacts on the environment and Lao citizens.
        Encouragingly, the World Bank has been discussing issues including




24
   benefit sharing with GoL agencies under the Hydropower and
   Mining Technical Assistance Project.

(3) Such funding, as well as technical assistance that NTPC (a socially
    responsible institution) has informed the POE that the Company is
    willing to consider, also is apt to be especially important for
    ensuring the sustainability of the numerous hydropower facilities in
    Laos because of limited regular staff capacity and budgets at district
    level.

D. Monitoring

The quality of NTPC’s environmental monitoring is superior to its
socio-economic monitoring of resettler hamlets, households and
individuals. A major problem with all LSMS reports is that ethnicity is
based on language spoken with over 50 percent of resettlers classified
as Lao, while Chamberlain’s pre-resettlement 1995 data has ethnic
minorities being a large majority of the resettler population.
Furthermore the LSMS Surveys, unlike the QSEM surveys, were not
designed to look at inter-village differences, let alone intra-village
differences.

Both LSMS and QSEM surveys exclude “natural growth” second
generation families since both data sets “only reflects the experiences of
the original resettler households.” (page 7 of NTPC’s Draft Quarterly
Socio-Economic Survey. Third Quarter 2013. Version 1). There is,
however, a partial exception to that statement mentioned on page 7
which states that “second generation households … were included in an
extended QSEM survey (Round 5) undertaken in the fourth quarter of
2012. These data are being analyzed separately.” Since Round 5 is
referred to as a census it remains to be seen what type of data were
collected on “natural growth” families; hence the importance of future
NTPC monitoring including additional “natural growth” family data.
While the POE is pleased, as stated in March 20, 2014 stakeholder
comments on the first draft of POE 22, “that natural growth households
would receive support via access to education, health services , other
social services, community land with land use certificates, micro-
finance (VCF) and irrigation during RIP,” further definition of required
services is necessary.




                                                                       25
        POE meeting with Nakai District Governor Bouma Soutsadavone
                         and Senior District officials


     Therefore as stated in the attached LOM it is especially important for
     NTPC and GOL to share “relevant monitoring accumulated to date on
     the Nakai Plateau resettler population” and that “NTPC intensify
     analysis of QSEM data to analyze primary drivers of poverty and
     vulnerability” and acquire the necessary analytical capacity for timely
     data accumulation and analysis.

     A further problem is that the household income data in LSMS 7 is
     inflated by compensation paid to resettler households and by very
     substantial illegal income from rosewood and other forest products (the
     POE’s analysis of this issue is elaborated in Annex 2 of this report);
     hence the POE’s belief that income has been dropping since 2012.
     While that conclusion is not to suggest that income has fallen below CA
     requirements, it does emphasize two important conclusions:
            First, the importance of correcting previous livelihood
     weaknesses in the five pillars.
            Second, a need to increase the staffing of the NTPC monitoring
     unit to expand the unit’s ability to analyze further in the critically




26
      important 2014 QSEM reports the nature and causes of inter- and intra-
      village differences.

      E. Education

      NTPC has handed over an excellent preschool, primary and secondary
      school program to the GoL which has initiated a program whereby 50
      secondary school graduates have received government scholarships for
      further study. GoL responsibilities during the rest of the RIP are dealt
      with in the attached LOM.

      The NT2 project, as resettlers have frequently mentioned during
      monitoring, has significantly reduced available arable land, grazing and
      NTFPs. One way to deal with such environmental restrictions is for
      NRO to work with DAFO and the Village Development Committees
      and other village institutions on how best to discuss, for example,
      during Youth, Lao Women’s Union and Elder meetings, and perhaps in
      after-school settings, key environmental issues that must be addressed if
      CA livelihood sustainability is to be achieved.

      The POE recommends:

      7/22 That NRO, DAFO and village institutions discuss how to
address key environment issues of relevance to current and future Nakai
District generations such as enhancing soil quality, sustaining reservoir
aquatic resources, re-establishing essential forest, non-timber forest
products (NTFPs), and pasture resources, and minimizing reservoir
sedimentation through appropriate use of the drawdown area, islands
and fields.

       As previously mentioned under the Off-Farm Pillar, the major
weakness of the system of education is lack of a broad and integrated program
of vocational training to provides the range of careers and expertise that
resettlers require to maintain their livelihood and other equipment, their
houses, and their communities and community supplies.

      F. Health Services

      There remain some actions relating to sustainability of this admirable
program which call for a brief mention. NTPC has undertaken to provide this




                                                                            27
year not only additional staff but to hand over data bases and software and to
consider support for publishing works describing the health system pioneered
by the NT2 Program managers. The latter measures would help replicate the
system in other Provinces of Laos and possibly elsewhere. It merits support.

      G. Hamlet and Village Issues

      Village and Hamlet Committees

      (1) The POE supports NTPC’s intention to contract an outside firm to
          address and review “all basic services to the communities of the
          District, whether resettlers or not.” The focus of the review on
          communities is crucial especially in resettler villages and hamlets
          where the number and interrelationship of multiple committees is
          confusing even to the POE. A two step approach with the consultant
          firm concentrating initially on the District level issues and then, with
          advice from Village Development Committees (VDCs), considering
          intra-village level coherence seems appropriate.

      (2) The POE had a lengthy meeting with key members of the
          administratively consolidated Donjaleun VDC and much shorter
          sessions with the PhonsaOn and Hueymalay VDCs in the Southern
          and Central Zones. Though belatedly established during the second
          half of 2013, progress to date is impressive. The POE was especially
          impressed that the relevant Village Extension Worker was present in
          each case and that the Donjaleun VDC had given equal
          representation to the smaller and poorer of the village’s two hamlets.
          In all cases, however, women were seriously under represented and
          in the other two cases POE interviews in the two poorer villages
          indicated that hamlet concern existed as to whether their interests
          were being fairly represented. Their women were also said to be
          embarrassed to attend meetings due to being less well dressed,
          educated and sophisticated.




28
  Donjaleun Village Development Committee meeting with POE.


The Community Living Well Program (CLWP)

This is an excellent program which was piloted in three villages in
2013. The objective now is to extend it to all 16 hamlets in 2014/2015,
a plan which the POE believes is fully justified by the results thus far.
There may be a need to foster a stronger feeling of ownership of the
Program in the communities. NRO and the CLWP consultant are aware
of this. The POE does believe that an emphasis on three separate
groups (mother and child and hygiene, youth development and Social
Issues for the Elderly) courts the risk of under-emphasizing key cross-
cutting issues that need to be addressed such as those mentioned under
Education and Village and Hamlet Committees above as well as alcohol
abuse which is a serious problem, for example in Sop Phene. NTPC
comments that the CLWP “will expand its target groups” and that more
cross-cutting issues will be covered where relevant.




                                                                      29
     Village Credit and Savings Fund

     On the basis of an external consultant’s advice the Village Credit Fund
     (VCF) has been converted into a Village Credit and Savings Fund. The
     Fund practices have also been changed to make it easier for “natural
     growth” resettlers to have access to micro credit and there are step-by-
     step moves to allow vulnerable households to withdraw the “converted
     entitlement” segment of their shares from the VCFs so as to ensure that
     the vulnerable can access the compensation to which they have an
     entitlement. The POE supports this move, which is supported by the
     IFIs, so long as it does not undermine the sustainability of the Funds as
     such.

     The viability of the Fund is vital to underpinning the livelihood pillars.
     Interestingly, loans to small businesses (38%) now supercedes fishing
     (30%) as the largest recipient by volume of monies disbursed though
     more fishers than business people received loans. Small livestock and
     cultivation also featured, but provision of loans to cover medical
     emergencies was still the third largest disbursement recipient.

     Long term sustainability of the Fund remains a preoccupation of NTPC,
     Rural Development and Poverty Eradication Office (RDPEO), Lao
     Women’s Union (LWU) and the District authorities. Upgrading of
     accounting practices is ongoing and further capacity building at hamlet
     and village levels is called for. The POE encourages NRO and the
     District to work towards drawing up practical handover agreements
     with LWU and RDPEO.

     The POE recommends:

           8/22 That in the interest of helping ensure sustainability of
     VCFs individually and collectively negotiations begin as soon as is
     feasible on practical handover arrangements and agreements with
     LWU and RDPEO.


     H . Infrastructure, SERF and the Khon Kaen Road

     Most of the many and often complex infrastructure requirements in the
     CA have been more than adequately met. This is a plus which is greatly
     valued by the resettlers themselves. As can be expected in a higher




30
altitude tropical environment a number of maintenance issues have
arisen with the passage of time. Several of these (roads, water supply,
housing) are addressed in the LOM. The only debatable question is to
know exactly to which purposes the SERF, a very valuable and
imaginative ongoing initiative, should be put. On the POE’s reading of
the CA the primary emphasis in the use of the SERF is on maintenance,
and in limited cases operation, of community assets. There has been a
small number of cases where this emphasis seems to have been set
aside, with funds spent on the Khon Kaen Road maintenance beyond
the agreed guidelines, for example. Some projects have involved capital
expenditure which might more appropriately be financed from other
sources. NRO is well aware of the issues and has sensibly engaged an
outside consultant to review fund use, assess accountability and
management capacity and contribute to capacity building in financial
management. The POE supports this approach, which should lead to a
removal of present ambiguities in use of these valuable funds. The
LOM lists a number of useful measures designed to ensure the long
term effectiveness of the program.




              Roads and electricity pylons – parts of the
               project’s infrastructure improvements.




                                                                    31
     I. Broad Social Issues and Environmental Issues


     (1) Resettlement gender strategy

     The CA devotes three pages to setting out a positive program for
     promoting gender equity and providing opportunities, for example, for
     women to have access to positions of authority and decision-making
     and for girls to have enhanced opportunities for higher education. It
     includes gender-balanced targets in each project activity, the setting of a
     target number of women as staff in project institutions, identification of
     gender divisions of labor within each village and ethnic group to foster
     gender sensitive development and participatory village planning.

     In the initial stages of the project there was a flurry of activity and a
     specialist was brought in during early 2008 to talk to women’s groups
     and then draw up a comprehensive list of seven gender strategies
     designed to mainstream gender considerations in the project’s activities.

     It is fair to say that some impetus appears to have been lost in recent
     years. In the POE’s own observations of the VDP planning process, for
     example, there was good participation of women – sometimes
     outnumbering the men – at the consultative phase, but this is much less
     apparent now that the process has moved on to the resource allocation
     and action plan phases. As for membership of VDCs, women are
     seldom above 20% in number, if that, in most Committees.

     A review of the attainment of the CA’s requirements and possible more
     vigorous action is timely. The LOM proposes that the specialist
     recruited in 2008 be brought back to assess implementation of gender
     plans and attainment of targets and to suggest further action if so
     required. NTPC has agreed to this. The POE awaits the outcome of
     such a review and any follow up with interest.




32
(2) Mining near the Nakadok village




                          Artisanal gold panners.

As noted above, POE visited the valley above the old Nakadok village
and saw no indication of recent mechanical mining anywhere in the
valley, inside or outside the NPA. We understand that the district
authorities directed that the mining machinery used by the “artisanal
mining” be removed from the valley and the only artisanal mining we
saw was a group of seven Vietic women with gold pans.

The Phonesack mining left their administrative and maintenance
buildings in the valley outside the NPA boundary when they ceased
illegal mining in the NPA. These buildings remain, apparently
unoccupied except for caretakers, and the more recently installed
electric lines remain in place. We remain concerned that the Phonesack
mining company may be poised to restart its mining operations in the
NPA at a future time, so WMPA (Khamkeut) must continue to monitor
the situation.




                                                                   33
     (3) Illegal timber extraction

     The POE wishes to alert the stakeholders that significant illegal timber
     extraction (apparently from the Corridor area) is ongoing close to the
     NT2 dam with logs being removed close to the entrance to the former
     residence area, that fish traders are evading landing fees by setting up
     their own landing places close to the designated one near the dam and
     that a 3 km track easily used by fish and timber traders by-passes the
     WMPA check point at the road junction to Lak Sao by starting at
     Ponsa-art and rejoining the main road a kilometer beyond the
     checkpoint.

     Close to the dam logs are cut from the west side of the river just
     downstream of the dam. They are brought across the river and hauled
     up to waiting trucks. There is a poachers’ camp at the river landing site
     and a well developed skid track up the steep hill. It appears that a
     portable winch is set at the top and it snakes the logs up to the truck
     landing spot – which is just across the dam road from the NTPC
     helicopter pad, and about 200 meters from the NTPC guard post at the
     gate to the dam.




               Chute for extracting illegal logs from Corridor area.




34
(4) Wildlife marketing

In its first report the POE noted the abundance of wildlife for sale in the
Lak Sao market and along the Thakhek to Vientiane road. Subsequent
action by the authorities led to great diminution of wildlife in the
markets but now there seems to be a resurgence. On a brief visit to the
Lak Sao market the POE found live jungle fowl, dead and live bamboo
rats, other small rodents, squirrels, porcupines, mouse deer and a large
flying squirrel, and in a market on the road to Thakhek we saw civets,
squirrels, porcupines, small rodents and serow horns. We recommend
that the authorities crack down again on this wildlife trade.




    Civet cat and porcupine on sale along Thakhek/Vientiane road.




                                                                       35
     II   XE BANG FAI DOWNSTREAM PROGRAM

            The NT2 Downstream Program is an innovative feature of the
     project, being among the very few such Programs worldwide which
     specifically addresses the problems faced by those downstream of a
     dam powerhouse. As such it has created a precedent which is beginning
     to be followed by other dam builders including some in Laos. The
     Program is commendable for this reason and because it includes
     elements, such as support of promising research on flood-resistant rice
     and farmer-to-farmer programs, which are themselves innovative. It
     should be maintained.

            The Program was handed over (prematurely in the POE’s view)
     to the GoL on 1 January 2013 at a time when 67 (see maps below) of
     the 159 project affected villages received only US$100 cash
     compensation per household. Unfortunately this was the year of a
     national fiscal crunch so although GoL approval has been given to the
     allocation of the budget funds needed to maintain the Program they
     have not been forthcoming. Although the Government’s Khammouane
     Development Project (KDP), financed by a grant from the World Bank,
     has expanded in a welcome endeavor to keep up the momentum, the
     ADB’s useful smallholder project is not being continued. Without
     adequate funds the village-level work of the RMU has wound down to a
     low level and will decline further if no further funds are forthcoming.

            This is regrettable. The CA provides for livelihood restoration of
     Downstream PAPs “on a sustainable basis” and seeks “a self-sustained
     livelihood”. So sustainability is a prime objective here as on the
     Plateau. But there has been no GoL budget for DSP activities through
     the RMU since April 2013. The question is how does the GoL meet its
     CA obligations to finance ongoing activities in the DS zone in a time of
     financial stringency? The POE has addressed this broad issue in Section
     C GoL Funding.




36
37
38
           III WATERSHED MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION
                       AUTHORITY (WMPA)

       From the POE’s first Report in 1997 we have emphasized that effective
conservation and management of the Nakai-Nam Theun National Protected
Area (NPA), and the Watershed, were crucial to the success of the NT2
project. The POE previously has described the importance of the watershed
and its globally significant biological and cultural diversity, along with the
threats it faces, so that will not be reiterated here.

       The Watershed Management and Protection Authority (WMPA) was
created in accordance with the Concession Agreement (CA) under the Prime
Minister’s Decree No. 25 of 2001, updated by PM No. 39 in 2005 and PM No.
471 in 2010. GOL mandated WMPA to work with local people and other
stakeholders to ensure sustainability of both biological diversity and living
conditions and welfare of watershed inhabitants. The overall goal of
management for the watershed is to restore, maintain and enhance the
biodiversity, habitats, and conservation values, as well as the cultural values,
of the NPA and guarantee sufficient volume of water with low sediment loads
flowing into the NT2 Reservoir. The WMPA’s management mandate and
activities are detailed in the Social and Environmental Management
Framework and Operational Plan (SEMFOP). To accomplish this the NTPC
made a remarkable commitment to provide US$ one million a year (indexed
for inflation) for the duration of the concession to provide funding for the
Operational Plan activities. Among other things this had the effect of making
the NNT-NPA a protected area with one of the highest and longest guaranteed
funding of any such area in the world. Consequently the WMPA was
launched with great optimism - which regrettably was short lived.

       In virtually every Report since 2001 the POE has emphasized problems
with the WMPA’s performance in carrying out its mandates. For example, in
our last report (Report 21A, in 2013) we stated that “at least until recently, the
WMPA has been totally ineffective in protecting the watershed’s
biodiversity.” The situation has now become critical as indicated by two
current outside reviews of WMPA.

Independent Fiduciary Review

      In 2009 a Mid Term Review of the WMPA’s program was carried out
by International Financial Institutions (IFIs), and the same year POE also




                                                                               39
reviewed progress in the Watershed. Both the IFIs and POE recommended
that the fiduciary systems of the WMPA be reviewed in order to improve their
effectiveness and efficiency. The WMPA recently requested assistance from
the World Bank to help it assess its fiduciary systems, as well as recommend
how they might be strengthened over time.

       Consequently the World Bank had an Independent Fiduciary Review of
the WMPA conducted with the final report published in December, 2013. The
review found that the WMPA’s yearly financial statements are not compatible
with international reporting standards. All of the three core components of the
fiduciary framework - financial management, procurement and disbursement
– have to be rated as representing high fiduciary risks. Their findings were
extremely critical of the WMPA, concluding “that none of the internal and
external controls on WMPA are effective”. The Review notes that “the annual
work plan 2013-2014 raises considerable concern when looking at the ratio
between salaries and operating and related costs on one hand, and activities
that can be directly linked to the WMPA mission objectives on the other
hand” It concluded that there is a gross imbalance between the headquarters
salaries and associated costs on the one hand, and the on ground conservation
and development improvements that the WMPA was created to accomplish on
the other. And the Review emphasizes that “Especially inflations in the salary
scale should be analyzed critically, as this is by definition WMPA’s most
manageable cost.”

      The review emphasized the need to correct these problems rapidly “in
order to provide reasonable assurance to all the stakeholders that the annual
contribution WMPA receives from the NTPC is managed well and serves the
objectives of the SEMFOP only.”

      The POE strongly supports the findings and recommendations of the
review.

The PAW Organizational Review of the WMPA

      The World Bank/GOL Protected Areas and Wildlife Program (PAW)
addresses protected areas and wildlife management and conservation in Laos,
and a key component involves an expanded Organizational Review of the
WMPA conducted in late 2013. This review was mandated by the Department
of Planning and Cooperation of the Ministry of Natural Resources and the
Environment (MONRE). While the original mandate was for organizational




40
review, the reviewer quickly found that the problems and malfunctions of
WMPA were more than organizational alone and were “primarily linked to
institutional aspects” and it concluded that “it would be insufficient and rather
irresponsible to restrict the recommendations to organizational arrangements,
as if applying a bandage to a wound without addressing the cause of illness.”

       The POE considers the review with its assessments and
recommendations to be remarkably insightful and consistent with our own
observations and recommendations over the years. The review was extremely
critical of the WMPA and it detailed a number of issues. Some of these issues
relate to practices that have been allowed to develop over the years and some
relate to the design of WMPA itself. Among the findings of particular concern
to – and agreement by -- the POE are the following:

1. Internal/Management Issues:
   • “Lack of internal and external information and communication.” This
      includes communication within the headquarters, between the
      headquarters and the clusters, and within the clusters.
   • “Need to revise the wage policy.” When WMPA was created the salary
      levels were set high with the objective of attracting the most qualified
      individuals with backgrounds and training that related to the WMPA
      mandates. For the most part this objective has not been met at all and
      staff selection appears to have been based more on personal
      relationships within the agencies, mostly MAF, and political
      considerations, than any considerations of suitable expertise and ability.
      On top of that, early in 2013 when the financial problems of the GOL
      led to impacts on Lao public servants’ salaries, the WMPA increased its
      salaries, at least those in the headquarters, by a reported 30%.
   • “Inadequate hiring and operations of staff.” SEMFOP II emphasized
      the low technical, financial and management capacities of the staff, and
      summarized the very severe negative impacts of the low capacities on
      the operation of WMPA, a key point often emphasized by POE. Of
      particular significance, the Review recommends that staff be selected
      by an independent firm – not by personal consultation with the home
      ministry or agency -- and that high level international expertise is also
      required.
   • “Unsatisfactory management procedures and controls.” The review
      emphasized deficiencies or dysfunctions including the roles of
      managers being too political and the lack of focus on
      technical/managerial skills, the absence of linkages between budgets




                                                                             41
         and activities, the absence of monitoring of achievements from one year
         to the next and the lack of control of the use of funds. They noted “The
         management system is prone to favoritism/nepotism.”
     •   “Lack of surveillance efficiency”. While very significant problems
         remain, this is one area where important improvements have been made
         during the past year thanks to WMPA’s Lao Consultant, Dr. Chanthavy,
         and WMPA’s head of law enforcement, Phoukuakham.
     •   “Very limited opening to partnerships.” While the WMPA leadership
         states that it is open to partnerships, partnerships in the form of MOUs
         and collaborative agreements between WMPA and partner services in
         districts and provinces, universities, NGOs, researchers and research
         centers are almost non-existent. The situation with regard to joint
         action to curtail fish poaching, including road check points and
         reservoir patrolling by WMPA and village or reservoir authorities is
         illustrative. All the district and village officials and others consulted by
         POE emphasized that in spite of repeated requests and offers, the
         WMPA had refused or had provided very minimal effort and many
         emphasized that WMPA consistently worked against co-management
         agreements and efforts.
     •   “Unbalanced organizational chart not focusing enough on conservation
         and field activities”.
     •   The Review also discusses other internal WMPA issues along with a
         series of external factors that affect the WMPA including growing
         pressures on the NPA and national GOL approaches and priorities to
         management of natural resources including protected areas.
     •   Allocation of funding should be based on specified results. The POE
         has repeatedly emphasized, and we do so here again, that funding
         should be based on achievement of specified targets and goals.

     2. Structural and Contextual Issues:

     • “Approaches not adapted to the current situation.” The design appeared
        appropriate originally but conditions in Laos have changed. Also, as
        noted above, it was assumed that high salaries and good equipment
        would attract high quality recruits and thus lift overall staff capacities.
        This has proved wrong and has led to significant discrepancies
        between salaries and other conditions of the WMPA and those of the
        other services that are expected now to carry out many of the
        conservation and development activities. At national level, the review




42
     noted two additional key issues. One is the risks of decentralization,
     especially in natural resource conservation and environmental
     protection, when introduced before either the central government or the
     local one have the necessary capacities. The other issue is the flawed
     national classification system of protected areas (conservation forests
     and protection forests) and the poor level of protection of natural sites
     throughout the country
•   “Inconsistency between the regulations of WMPA on one hand, and the
     initial design and the new provisions on conservation at the national
     level on the other hand.” Under the CA the WMPA is a special
     authority of the GOL with responsibility for the management,
     development and protection of the NT2 Watershed area. But PM
     Decree 471 shifts the WMPA mission towards coordination and
     supervision. In effect, WMPA now has the mandate to achieve results
     without being able to control decision-making and implementation.
     Further, there are insufficient capacities of the district services that are
     supposed to implement conservation and development. And another
     inconsistency between the CA and the Decree comes from the new
     Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment (MONRE’s)
     mandate that has the clear mission of managing the NPAs.
•   “Lack of conservation vision of the WMPA Board of Directors (BoD)
     and the International Monitoring Agency (IMA), and of
     control/supervision of the WMPA.” The review noted that the practice
     of one BoD meeting a year is insufficient to give the BoD sufficient
     control on WMPA. The review also observes “the fact that the BoD
     shows the most interest for development activities” that might be
     explained by the lack of required experience in management of
     protected areas available to the BoD. The IMA is hired by the WMPA
     which clearly limits the independence of the IMA “and even
     constitutes an organizational dysfunction.” Further, the time allotted to
     the IMA is insufficient to achieve its objectives.
•   “A new player (MONRE) with limited means of intervention and
     cumbersome administrative structure.” The Ministry is a recent
     creation with an enormous scope of responsibilities, among which is
     protected areas. However, responsibility for protected areas is low
     down in the ministries’ organizational structure and “is associated with
     lack of capacities in protected area conservation.”
•   “Services in the districts do not have the resources to achieve their new
     mission.” The capacities and equipment, etc., in the districts are not




                                                                             43
        commensurate with their missions under the PM Decree 471, most
        particularly in protected area management.

   In view of the weaknesses and failures of the WMPA in its present form
and with its present staffing, the Review presents four management options:

     • 1. “Dissolution of the WMPA.” This option, although possibly fully
       justified by the performance of WMPA to date, would require that
       operational activities be carried out by the districts and provinces and
       funding be provided from some other source. The Review does not
       recommend this option.
     • 2. “Enforcement of the provisions of PM Decree 471.” This option
       abandons the initial plan of establishing an efficient management
       structure for a protected area and the WMPA becomes an
       advisory/coordination/funding body. The Review concludes that since
       WMPA is unable to play this role for its own activities, this option is
       not relevant enough.
     • 3. “A second chance for WMPA: refocus its mission so that it could
       become an actual protected area management entity.” This option
       would maintain the Board of Directors (but modified to become a real
       and independent management body) and the IMA. The WMPA would
       focus on conservation and PAFO/DAFO would handle the development
       components and would receive funding from the NTPC, with
       management control outsourced to a private agency.
     • 4. “The MONRE services will be in charge of conservation. The
       WMPA would become a foundation with the mission of ensuring long
       term funding of conservation actions and livelihood improvements in
       the Watershed.” WMPA would have fundraising functions and the
       mission of establishing a trust fund and providing funds generated by
       financial investments. As in option 3, PAFO/DAFO would deal with
       the development objectives, with management outsourced.

Next Steps: POE Views

      We do not feel that a single workshop to determine the future of the
WMPA is likely to achieve the desired results. One approach is to have an
appropriately high authority, preferably at the Deputy Prime Minister level, to
appoint a small commission (or task force) of highly competent and
committed Lao nationals with some relevant international expertise. Members
should be individuals who are especially knowledgeable about conservation




44
and development. They should be able to rise above organizational issues and
should focus on how best to achieve the objectives and goals of the SEMFOP.
They should not include the WMPA Secretariat, although representatives from
the Secretariat could provide information and advice as requested by the
commission. Their mandate would be to review these reports, review all
background documents, interview stakeholders, organize a workshop if they
see it as beneficial, and then propose to Government an option which sets out
their rethinking of the WMPA’s basic functions and a structure which is
designed to achieve these functions and which fits the Lao-specific and the
NNT-NPA-specific situation. All this while maintaining the contractual
engagement of the country vis a vis its partners such as NTPC. Once an option
has been chosen the WMPA must be restructured to achieve the functions that
are involved.

       The process outlined above may identify options other than those in the
Organizational Review. However, if the WMPA is to be an effective
organization it will require comprehensive restructuring of the Secretariat to
accomplish the specified functions, and will require selection of appropriate
staff and refocusing of an independently appointed IMA.

       The new staff positions that are required should be suitably advertised
or announced, and the applications should be assessed and selections made by
an independent group with some members from international organizations
like IUCN and/or WCS. The selection organization must have expertise and
experience with conservation, development, and organizational management
and must involve Lao-speakers as full members. IUCN and WCS are
examples of potentially suitable organizations to nominate participants.

       If an option is chosen that involves payment by NTPC to implementing
agencies, as in option 3 of the Organizational Review (above), the Review
notes that management control should be outsourced to an independent
agency. Such payment should be reviewed by IMA and POE as required by
Article 35 in Decree 471.

      We also agree with the Review that high level international expertise is
also required in the process of determining the future of WMPA and
implementing the needed actions. When a suitable option is chosen a new
Prime Minister’s Decree will be required.




                                                                           45
      As emphasized by the Review, to maintain control over the WMPA
Secretariat, the BoD needs to be more closely involved with its activities and
to have access to independent expertise in conservation as well as
development. At present, and with one meeting a year only, the BoD must
rely almost entirely on information and advice from the director of the
Secretariat.

      An IMA is required, but to be effective it must be appointed and hired
independently from the WMPA Secretariat, and must have adequate time and
resources to carry out its functions. Under the present arrangements, even
with very competent personnel it is hard for the IMA to do much more than
rubber stamp what the Secretariat wants and tells them.

       The POE notes that the NTPC has not yet provided the full funding for
this year for the WMPA because it has been waiting for the required audit,
although it has provided limited interim funding as required by the CA. We
recommend that the full amount be withheld until a new WMPA structure and
function are decided upon. The full funding can then be applied to the
transition to the new structure and functions, and future years as necessary.
We understand that this procedure may require an early letter from DEB to
NTPC.

      The POE recommends:

      9/22. That GOL proceed without delay along the following lines:

               • Create a very high-level Government commission to
                 review the WMPA, its objectives and purpose as
                 presented in the SEMFOP, and other relevant material
                 including the Reviews discussed above. It should
                 determine what the basic functions of the WMPA
                 should now be, given manifest failure in its present
                 form to carry out the fundamental task of protecting
                 the watershed’s biodiversity. The Commission must not
                 be subjected to the influence of the WMPA secretariat
                 for obvious conflict of interest reasons. Among the
                 options to be considered by the commission is some
                 form of partnership or other cooperation with an
                 international environmental organization.




46
•    The commission would propose (a) a new design for
    WMPA incorporating reprioritizing of functions and a
    new structure to implement them, (b) the steps
    required to establish the new design, and (3) the
    rationale for the proposed action.

• Manage the transition from the current WMPA to the
  new one through actions including, but not limited to,
  the following decisions and actions:

    - GOL’s Department of Energy Business (DEB) to ask
      NTPC to withhold the full payment for this financial
      year’s Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB),
      which was approved in December, 2013 (the
      Authority has sufficient funds in hand to maintain
      the minimal operations specified below).

    - The BoD to reduce the WMPA staff to handle
      minimal essential ongoing operations, primarily
      land and reservoir patrols, and for core village
      support activities such as maintaining health and
      education services. The staff to be retained should
      be almost completely technical and those involved
      with patrolling and development functions. An
      interim manager should be appointed by the BoD
      from the above retained staff.

    - WMPA with appropriate expert assistance to revise
      the AWPB (or identify specific budget lines of the
      existing AWPB which are critical) for the reduced
      interim operations, and have the revised AWPB
      approved by the BoD.

    - GoL to ask NTPC (a) to transfer funds for the
      revised Budget to WMPA once the above is
      completed, and (b) to hold the balance for
      subsequent years.

    - This form of operation to remain in place until the
      transition to a “new WMPA” is approved and




                                                       47
       initiated as the results of the commission’s work.

     - To re-establish the WMPA, once an option has been
       chosen by Ministers, to achieve the priority
       functions identified.

     - The necessary restructuring of WMPA will require
       new staff positions that should be suitably
       advertised or announced and applications should be
       assessed and selections made by an independent
       group with international representation.

     - The IMA to be administratively and financially
       separated and independent from the WMPA
       Secretariat, and be provided adequate time to
       achieve their mission.

     - A review of the salaries and 2013 inflations of the
       salaries of the WMPA Secretariat be undertaken by
       an independent agency or firm and that the results
       be made available to the DEB, IMA, POE, NTPC
       and IFIs.

     - An immediate inventory of confiscated goods and
       other WMPA assets (including vehicles, computer
       and office equipment, etc.) be conducted. Ideally it
       should be a joint inventory conducted by an
       appropriate GOL agency and an independent body
       such as Price Waterhouse.




48
                                    ANNEX 1

                NAKAI RESETTLEMENT IMPLEMENTATION


       LIST OF MEASURES TO GUIDE THE ASSESSMENT OF
THE ACHIEVEMENT OF THE RESETTLEMENT OBJECTIVES OF
                                    THE CA

                               Table of Contents

I ACCELERATE AND FURTHER DIVERSIFY LIVELIHOOD DEVELOPMENT
ON A SUSTAINABLE BASIS

Introduction                                                           3

1. The Fisheries Pillar                                                3
2. The Village Forestry Pillar                                         5
3. The Agricultural Pillar                                             6
4. The Livestock Pillar                                                7
5. The Off-farm Pillar                                                 8
6. Marketing                                                           9
7. Prioritizing the Poorer Hamlets                                     9
8. Strengthening the Village Savings and Credit Fund                   10
9. Law Enforcement Matters                                             10

II GOL FUNDING, AND RESETTLEMENT MONITORING                            11

10. GoL Funding                                                        11
11. Monitoring                                                         12

III SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY AND SOCIAL SERVICES                          12

12. Sustainable Community Development                                  12
13. Upgrading Educational 0pportunities                                13
14. A functional Community Living Well Program (CLWP) in each Hamlet   13
15. Social Safety Net                                                  14
16. Resettlement village and hamlet gender strategy                    14




                                                                            1
IV HANDING OVER PREPARATIONS                                           14

17. Capacity Building                                                  14
18. NT2 Parties’ Budgetting, Staffing and Handing Over Preparations    15
19. Achieving Institutional and Programmatic Coherence at all Levels   15

V SUSTAINING RESETTLEMENT INFRASTRUCTURE                               16

20. Infrastructure Maintenance                                         16




2
Introduction

        The NT2 Concession Agreement (CA) requires the POE to review activities
performed during the Resettlement Implementation Period (RIP), analyze whether the
Resettlement Objectives and Provisions have been met and provide advice accordingly to
the Resettlement Committee before the latter makes a decision on the ending (or otherwise)
of the Period.
        The POE, following close consultation with GoL, NTPC and the IFIs, has produced
below a revised list of measures to guide assessment of the achievement of the resettlement
objectives and provisions specified in the CA.

I - ACCELERATE AND FURTHER DIVERSIFY LIVELIHOOD
DEVELOPMENT ON A SUSTAINABLE BASIS
    To achieve the requirements, including village income targets, set out in the Concession
Agreement, an accelerated program is required in the case of all five livelihood pillars. The
POE assesses the livelihood sectors for priority action relative to their inherent importance
to achievement of sustainability and/or the urgency for attention as follows.

1. The Fisheries Pillar
Issues:
Currently the reservoir fishery is the most important income earning activity and the main
source of protein for Nakai communities but needs more effective protection from illegal
encroachment by outsiders plus enhanced sustainability through extension of exclusive
rights to resettlers, and other Nakai and Khamkeut residents who used to fish in the
inundation zone, and their respective descendants, and an effective system of fisheries
planning and management and capacity building in community fisheries organizations.

Measures to be taken:
  1. Resettler protection, control and management of the reservoir fishery, fish
     processing and fish trading established and respected for a twenty year period.
  2. Though the LOM requirement that the 10 year further extension of the reservoir
     fishery include, beside the resettlers, other people who used to fish the inundation
     zones is an equitable one, its implementation needs further analysis and further
     thought as to its implications for what is currently the resettlers’ major source of
     income.
  3. Reservoir restocking/aquaculture considered in 2015 or beyond.

Indicators, targets and action agencies:
   1. The Nakai District Governor has signed into law the ten year extension of the
   resettlers’ and other people who used to fish in the inundation zone, and their respective
   descendants, exclusive control over the NT2 fishery. [Reservoir Management
   Secretariat (RMS)/Governor’s Office].[ Now that the above ten year extension has been




                                                                                            3
    approved no further changes in PM Decree No. 24 are acceptable without explicit
    approval from the Prime Minister’s office.]1
    2. Subject to WMPA Board approval,
        a.   the WMPA is instructed that patrolling and enforcement in the reservoir areas
             under its jurisdiction are the WMPA’s responsibility [WMPA Board] and
        b.    is required to put in place by 1 May 2014 an effective mobile patrolling and
             enforcement system whereby the Khamkeut office is authorized and properly
             equipped with water transport to patrol reservoir areas within Khamkeut District
             and the Oudomsouk Office is authorized to patrol reservoir areas within Nakai
             District [WMPA Board].2
    4. Similarly, subject to GoL approval,
        a.   it is made clear by 1 May 2014 that Village Fishery Groups have responsibility
             for patrolling and enforcement of regulations within the reservoir boundaries of
             their hamlet [District Governor/RMC], and that
        b.   patrolling and enforcement are effective by 1 June 2014. [GoL/District
             Governor/RMS/RFA/VFG]
    5. The Fisheries Management Plan is put in place and the consequential institutional
       and operational changes including the transfer of responsibilities from GoL to
       community-level organisations (the Reservoir Fisheries Association and the Village
       Fishing Groups) are achieved during 2014 according to the Plan’s schedule. [District
       Governor/RMC/RFA/NRO]
    6. In the interest of stopping illegal fishing
      a.    an effective and cooperative patrolling regime on the reservoir is put in place by
            1 June 2014,
      b. (i) fishing licensing and (ii) boat registration schemes are made operational by
            mid-2014,
      c.    a fisheries conflict resolution plan is developed and endorsed by the District
            Governor by 1 August 2014 and
      d. fish trading and processing rules and regulations are modified, as envisaged in
            the Fisheries Management Plan, by 1 August 2014. [NRO/RFA/VFGs/District
            Governor]
    7. Village Fishing Groups and the Village Fishing Association are empowered and
       trained by the first quarter of 2015 so that they are capable, among other functions,
       of restricting fishing to those listed in PMD 24 of February 2005.[NRO/RFA/VFGs]


    1
      The POE’s intention is that the resettlers, who were intended to be the main beneficiaries of the
    “fishery, fish processing and fish trading” under PM Decree 24 of 13 February 2008, must be encouraged
    and trained to be partners and eventual owners of fish processing ventures and that the Village Fishery
    Association be encouraged and trained to develop a cooperative trading organization in competition with
    other traders.

    2
      Measure further explained in POE Report 22 




4
     8. NRO focuses on capacity building of Village Fishery Groups and the Village
        Fishery Association through a strengthened Fishery Co-management Program
        through 2015.[NRO/RFA/VFGs]
     9. The still unresolved issue of resettler fishing downstream of the Thalang Bridge be
        resolved by 1 June 2014 [Nakai District/WMPA/ VFGs/RFA/RMS].


    2. The Village Forestry Pillar

    Issues:

    Forestry is currently underperforming and failing to meet expectations and calls for
    immediate and decisive action by GOL and the Village Forestry Development Company
    Ltd. (VFDC)3 interim manager and the shortly to be elected Board.

Measures to be taken: There are so many variables and unknowns in this sector that the
following is a possible scenario only at this point. GOL agencies, the interim manager and
Board, in collaboration with the resettlers themselves and on the basis of the recent remote
sensing assessment and a new forest inventory to be conducted, rethink by mid-2014 the
future of the resettlement village forestry pillar and restructure the program to help ensure
short term returns and employment for the villagers and prepare during the first quarter of
2015 a strategy to ensure the sustainability of the resource, long term returns through
regeneration and reforestation programs, and local employment.

Indicators, targets and action agencies:
     1. MAF-DoF, PAFO, DAFO and the ADB and/or the World Bank – undertake, at the
        start of the dry season 2014-2015, a ground-based forest inventory of the village
        forest resources. [MAF-DoF, PAFO, DAFO/VFDC Board/ADB/World Bank].
     2. An updated strategy for the community forests on the Nakai Plateau is endorsed by
        GoL within 3 months of the completion of the inventory. [MAF/Provincial and
        District Governors /PAFO/DAFO/VFDC Board (if remaining in place)/VFCs].
     3. A New Plan/Program/Budget is operating within 3 months of the completion of the
        strategy.[VFDC Board].Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry gives renewed
        consideration to integrating VFDC into its Forest Investment Program as soon as is
        feasible. [MAF/PAFO]
     4. Regulations on the use of new agricultural lands and on encroachment for cropping
        on VFDC lands by resettlers are clarified, disseminated and enforced by 1 June
        2014. [District Governor/DAFO/DONRE/VDCs/VFDC]




3
 Formerly VFA. 




                                                                                           5
     3. The Agriculture Pillar

       (i) Issue: Lifting agricultural productivity

       Measures to be taken:
       1. Lift agricultural productivity through soil fertility improvement, rotational
          cropping, green manuring, composting, and community involvement.
       2. Adhere to land use plans drawn up during PLUP exercise. (See also irrigation
          measures below).

       Targets and Indicators:
       1. Increased income, food security, and community involvement for resettlers through
          an increasing use of the 0.66 ha plots, and other additional identified agricultural
          lands through PLUP, utilized for productive purposes (including fallows, pasture,
          agro-forestry, soil fertility restoration, etc), with realistic targets for increasing
          percentages used in the rainy season 2014 and in the rainy season 2015
          [NRO/RMU/VDCs/DWG]. This will be achieved through continued efforts to
          intensify agricultural production in new additional agricultural lands, to extend
          agro-forestry and pasture development [NRO/RMU/VDCs/DWG].

       2. Extension services will be strengthened, with a particular focus on uplifting poorer
          hamlets, through a better identification of expected outcomes, planning of activities,
          allocation and augmentation where necessary of appropriate technical and
          community development staff [DAFO/VDCs]

       3. Further use of community involvement and indigenous knowledge as when multiple
          households were observed in recent years working together in preparing and
          planting rice in newly fenced additional agricultural lands
          [VDC/DWG/RMU/NRO].4


       (ii) Irrigation use

       Issue:
       The irrigation system set up by NTPC is under-utilized and insufficient numbers of
       low–tech systems like gully dams exist.

       Measures to be taken: (i) Prompt setting up of a NTPC/RMU/DAFO irrigation team
       (ii) for planning, strategizing and (iii) implementing by mid 2014 a broadly defined
       irrigation program which integrates NRO irrigation schemes with gully dams that can
       eventually be handed over to Village Development Committees in close cooperation
       with DAFO, and that (iv) intensifies throughout 2014 the simultaneous training of
       functional Water User Associations in each Hamlet.

4
      Measure further explained in POE Report 22 




6
   Targets and indicators:
   1. DAFO establishes an irrigation team with the support of RMU and NRO with an aim
   to design an irrigation program (by 1 May 2014) and implement a capacity building
   program of Water User Associations (from 1 June 2014) for those irrigation schemes
   that resettlers wish to be rehabilitated and for village gully dams in each Hamlet
   through the first quarter of 2015. [DAFO/RMU/NRO/WUAs].

   2. Simultaneously and by 1 June 2014 where possible and otherwise before the
   commencement of the 2015 rainy season, NTPC completes additional gully dam
   construction with emphasis on poorer villages such as Phonsavang [NTPC].

   3. SERF committee ensures timely funding for the maintenance of viable small scale
   existing irrigation projects and gully dams, for which resettlers have expressed their
   interest.


   (iii)Agro-pastoral-forestry

   Measures to be taken:
   Working closely with those restructuring and re-planning the forestry sector as a whole,
   NRO rapidly expands the agro-forestry Program in 2014/2015 and brings an expanding
   number of the resettlers into the Program.
   An agro-pastoral component will necessarily be delayed for several years, but should be
   taken into consideration during the planning of the agro-forestry activities and the
   plantation and regeneration activities under the VFDC.

   Targets and Indicators:
  1. Budget provisions for expansion of agro-forestry in 2014/2015 reflect the high
     priority to be given (1 April 2014) [NTPC/NRO].

  2. Existing tree and domesticated NTFP nurseries in each Zone, and individual
     nurseries operated by villagers, are expanded, by 1 April 2014, to provide seedlings
     for the agro-forestry program in all categories of village land including degraded
     forest lands formerly designated as VFDC land.


4. The Livestock Pillar
Issue:
Livestock mortality figures are high in Gnommalath and Khamkeut Districts (and also in
the adjacent NPA – see main report) essentially because of low rates of vaccination of both
large and small animals. Correspondingly, the contribution of this sector to resettler
household incomes is continually at risk.




                                                                                            7
Measures to be taken:
DAFO and resettlers, supported by NTPC, achieve substantially improved vaccination rates
for cattle and buffalo in each Hamlet during 2014/2015, with households with large
livestock joining livestock production groups, completing their cattle yards and
participating in the NTPC Agro-forestry and Pasture Development Program.

Indicators and targets:
      1. A vaccination rate for all large livestock including buffalo that can be handled
         are lifted to 50% by the beginning of 2015 or to whatever rate Lao vets consider
         to be sustainable under Lao conditions. [NRO/DAFO/VDCs].
      2. A program to stimulate the vaccination of small livestock and poultry is initiated
         no later than 1 June 2014 by NTPC, DAFO and VDCs.

5. The Off-farm Pillar

Issues:
While a number of small stores and repair workshops have been set up in the resettlement
villages over the years – in part stimulated by the availability of micro credit through the
VCSF - there has not been the flowering of off-farm activities envisaged in the CA and the
original SDP. Skills training in a range of trades were envisaged but have only recently
begun. The new activity with potential for creating jobs both on the Plateau (and in the
WMPA) may be the fostering of an ecotourism industry along the lines of those established
with some success elsewhere in the country.

Measures to be taken:

1. Vocational training: NRO/RMU have commissioned a consultant’s review of
vocational and skills training needs.(Now to hand – see main body of POE Report 22).
They will assess, in consultation with VDCs, by 1 June 2014, how to proceed in the light of
the consultant’s report.

Targets and indicators:
Funds are provided to meet this CA undertaking, with appropriate courses held during
2014/2015 [NTPC/RMU/NRO/VDCs].


2. Promotion of ecotourism: GOL agencies, including the Provincial Department of
Tourism and Culture and a restructured WMPA, with technical assistance from NTPC
where appropriate, work in concert with the newly created Provincial Tourism SOE to set
up a workshop of potential stakeholders to gauge the level of interest in fostering tourism
on the Nakai Plateau and the NPA.

Targets and indicators:

    1. A workshop is convened later this year or early next year to gauge interest in
    tourism.




8
   2. Should there be a positive response from workshop participants a District plan
   (including an overall strategy and framework) for the initial stages of establishing a
   modest venture is drawn up by a designated agency/firm in consultation with interested
   parties.

   Sustainability of tourism activities: Sources of funding will be identified during the
   preparation of the plan mentioned in point 2 above.



6. Marketing
Issues:
Rethinking is called for on (1) how best to market the opportunities and productivity of the
five pillars in terms of improved and improving access to markets in South East Asia and
elsewhere, (2) capacity building within resettler hamlets and villages, and (3) how to take
advantage of such opportunities as contract-farming (cassava and moringa, for example),
and increased national and international demand for fish, meat and forest products as well
as possibilities that “sell” to discerning tourists in the NT2 Project zones from the Mekong
to the Vietnam border.

Measures to be taken:
GOL, NTPC, and VDCs/ Village Fishery Association consider other marketing
opportunities provided in the NT2 area.

Targets and indicators:
       1. Nakai District, DWG and NRO commence discussion of marketing issues,
       including development of production groups and value added products , with
       Village and Hamlet Development Committees (in particular for agricultural,
       livestock, forestry and other products) and the Village Fishery Association for fish
       marketing and the marketing of fish products (second quarter of 2014).
       2. DAFO and NRO inform and sensitize farmers to the pro and cons in relation to
       existing contract farming options (second quarter of 2014).

7. Prioritizing the poorer hamlets

 Issues:
 To address the risk of vulnerable hamlets emerging, GOL and NTPC need to pay more
attention to identifying who the village elites are, the characteristics of elite status and the
implications of elite status in terms of village development plans, their implementation and
monitoring for the majority within each hamlet so as to reduce the risk of vulnerable
hamlets emerging in addition to vulnerable households (including second generation
households affiliated with those households) and individuals.

There is also a need to analyze the significance of village size, ethnicity and gender to the
extent possible in LSMS 7 and to systematically target the role of village size (and previous




                                                                                              9
isolation), ethnicity, gender and education in future QSEM (Quarterly Socioeconomic
Monitoring) reports.

Targets and indicators:

     (1) Identify primary drivers of poverty in future QSEM reports (from report #8),
            including possible relationships between poverty in relationship to ethnicity,
            village size and previous isolation, gender, labor resources and education [NRO,
            DWG].
     (2) Based on existing studies, DWG, with the support of NRO, identifies the poorer
           hamlets by 1 June 2014.
     (3) NRO and the District Working Group develop approaches to address the drivers of
           poverty within poorer hamlets (throughout 2014 and 2015).


8. Strengthening the Village Savings and Credit Fund

Issues:
Having flexible, viable and sustainable VSCFs in each village and hamlet is fundamental to
strengthening all five livelihood pillars, and should be a high priority.

Measures:
NRO/District/LWU/RDPEO work together to build VCFs individually and collectively,
make their resources even more accessible to all resettlers and all sectors, and ensure long
term sustainability of the Fund. Technical assistance from the World Bank , as in the case
of VIRF, would help in this endeavor.

Targets and indicators:
                  (1)      Procedures and accounting practices continue to be upgraded
                           through technical assistance and capacity building programs at
                           hamlet and village levels (through 2014).
                           [NRO/LWU/RDPEO/District]
                  (2)      Procedures are revised to ensure resources are made more accessible
                           to all including not only the second generation, but the poor and the
                           vulnerable as well (by 1 May 2014) [Agencies as in (1)]
                  (3)      NRO and District take the lead in negotiating post-handover support
                           agreements with LWU and RDPEO (by 1 December 2014).5

9. Law enforcement matters
Issues:
An effective, uniform and consistent rule of law is essential to the well-being of the
resettlers, the resettlement process and to the sustainability of the resettlers’ livelihoods.

5
  This measure targets the sustainability of the VCFs. 




10
Law enforcement for domestic and social issues in the resettlement villages appears
adequate at present. However, this is not the case with law enforcement focused on
fisheries, forest trees, wildlife and other natural resources of value to the resettlement
process.

Reportedly a high percentage of the total reservoir fish catch is illegal with much of it in
the northern end of the reservoir being taken to Lak Sao market. People from the
resettlement villages cross the reservoir and fish, hunt, collect NTFPs and cut rosewood
and other valuable trees in the supposedly protected NPA. The resources involved are finite
and the supplies are already greatly depleted, so this illegal activity does not constitute a
sustainable livelihood option. In addition to depleting the biodiversity of the NPA, the
illegally collected resources, and especially the valuable woods, distorts the income and
livelihood data for the resettlers and delays their transition to sustainable livelihoods.

Measures to be taken, targets, indicators, action agencies:
       1. Law enforcement for domestic and social issues in the resettlement villages
          should be monitored and analysed in case problems arise. [Nakai District
          Administration/ Village Authorities]
       2. GoL (Central, Provinces, Districts) make a concerted effort to stop the illegal
          cutting and traffic in rosewood and other commercial woods happening in the
          project area, particularly in the VFDC land (by 1 December 2014).


II - GOL FUNDING, AND RESETTLEMENT MONITORING

10. GOL Funding

Issues:
Where the CA requires the setting up of institutions like the RMU, adequate funding to
carry out their RIP responsibilities is essential (see para.3.1(b) of Schedule 4, Part 1 of the
CA). Similarly, where GOL and the IFIs have agreed that NT2 revenue can be used on the
NT2 project, such funds should be accessible for stipulated and emergency purposes during
the RIP.6 The mechanisms for managing such funding need clarification.

Measures and Targets:

1. The appropriate GoL agencies make available the GoL approved RMU budget for the
October 1, 2013 – September 30, 2014 fiscal year no later than May 15, 2014 [GoL].

2. Provided the RMU submit an appropriate budget on time, GoL approves and provides
for fiscal year October 1, 2014 – September 30, 2015 an appropriate budget at the required
intervals after September 30, 2014 [GoL].

6
  POE Report 22 will recommend, following an explanatory section, that this procedure should be extended 
throughout the Concession Period and the life of the NT2 project thereafter. 




                                                                                                      11
3 GoL agree to make available NT2 revenue, as agreed upon with the IFIs, no later than
September 30, 2014 for emergency and other critical situations than may arise during the
RIP process


11. Monitoring

Issues:
The monitoring process should begin as an important component of options assessment
and, following project identification and implementation, should facilitate, as its major
function, an effective adaptive management process. Satisfying that function requires not
just prompt reporting of essential monitoring results but capacity to alter monitoring and
project priorities as project implementation proceeds.

At this time in the resettlement process the quarterly QSEM surveys provide the best
possibility for monitoring livelihood development progress.

Measures to be taken:


1. GoL and NTPC to share relevant monitoring data accumulated to date on the Nakai
Plateau resettler population, including data on ‘natural growth’ households.

2. Starting with the first 2014 QSEM, NTPC intensify analysis of QSEM data to analyse
the primary drivers of poverty and vulnerability. Key parameters to be considered may
include ethnicity, gender, age, language, geographic location and hamlet size, labor
resources and marital status.

3. NTPC to acquire by 1 August 2014 the necessary analytical capacity for timely
monitoring data accumulation and analysis.


III - SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY AND SOCIAL SERVICES
12. Sustainable Community Development
Issues:
Though Extension Workers are expected to have both technical expertise relating to the
five pillars as well as more general community development expertise, the risk exists that
necessary emphasis on overall development of viable resettler hamlets and villages will be
lost. Reasons are several. First, the number of Extension Workers has been reduced from
sixteen to ten; a number that both the POE and LTA monitors consider inadequate.
Second, when extension worker backgrounds were last checked by the POE, the majority
were volunteers rather than permanent government staff. Third, it was the POE’s
impression that their expertise dealt mainly with specific technical topics as opposed to
community development planning and implementation.




12
 Measures and targets:
1. NRO, DWG and RMU assess by 1 July 2014, the capacity of their joint staffs to
implement the CA required community development plan (Schedule 4, Part 1.11.4) with
special emphasis now on the necessity to raise the awareness of hamlet members and
members of new hamlet committees of the need to work together for the benefit of each
community as a whole.

2. DWG, with NRO enhancement of assisting staff where relevant, fills identified staff
inadequacies no later than 1 October 2014.



13. Upgrading educational opportunities


Measures and Targets
1. Every student who graduates from primary school and wishes to continue her/his
education is able to find a place during 2014 and 2015 in a secondary school on the Nakai
Plateau [Nakai District].
2. No recent primary school graduates who apply to a Nakai secondary school are rejected
because of lack of space / teachers / teaching materials in 2014 and 2015. [Nakai District]
3. Nakai Plateau secondary schools in terms of space / teachers / teaching materials are able
to absorb an increasing number of primary school graduates in 2014 and 2015. [Nakai
District]

14. A functional Community Living Well Program in each Hamlet
Issues:
This recently developed Program meets a set of important needs around generational,
gender and well being concerns and should be broadened and consolidated.

Measures to be taken: NRO, in cooperation with resettlers, the Lao Women’s Union and
other partners and the consultant, further designs, and implements during 2014 and 2015, a
broadened and more integrated Community Living Well Program, extended to all 16
Hamlets.

Targets and indicators:
      1. NTPC, GOL and the VDCs design and implement a more integrated and
         broadened Program no later than the first quarter of 2015 to continue during the
         remainder of 2015 and as long thereafter as necessary to achieve the objectives
         of the community living well program.
      2. The Program be extended during 2014 to all 16 Hamlets.




                                                                                         13
15. Social Safety Net
Measures to be taken, targets and indicators:
      1.Profiles of vulnerable persons, households (including married second generation
      couples), and hamlets are prepared and endorsed by the District by 1 October 2014
      [NRO, DSW].
       2. A safety net program, within existing GOL programs or a stand alone one, is set
       up by 1 October 2014 to take care of ongoing needs, to foster self-reliance and to
       improve the socio-economic status of the vulnerable persons, households, and
       hamlets. [DSW-Nakai District, NRO].



16. Resettlement village and hamlet gender strategy
Issues:

During the RIP there has been only limited professional assessment of the implementation
on the ground of the CA’s comprehensive gender policy provisions.

Measures to be taken:
Implementation of the resettlement gender strategy and of specific gender strategy plans
are assessed, as now agreed, by a NTPC appointed gender specialist, with targets set out in
Cl.9.1.5 of the CA as a reference point.

Targets and indicators:
The specialist’s assessment, funded by NTPC, is available to all NT2 stakeholders by the
end of 2014, with suggestions for further action if so required. [NTPC].



IV - HANDING OVER PREPARATIONS
Overall measures:
1. Adequate ongoing funds and trained staff are allocated by GOL and NTPC to
   livelihood, institution and capacity building programs to ensure their viability into 2015
   and throughout handover periods and beyond.
2. A coherent institutional basis is strengthened by 1 January 2015 to ensure a coordinated
   approach to livelihood.
3. Community development and capacity building at all levels is well planned and funded,
   from 1 January 2015.

17. Capacity building.
This is a key element in ensuring sustainability of all resettlement programs including
livelihood development but has not been addressed systematically across all sectors. It will
be a vital factor in assessing readiness to take over programs across the project and to
ending the RIP.




14
Measures to be taken, targets and indicators:

1. NTPC/GOL conducted a workshop in early March and plans a follow-up workshop in
May 2014 on capacity building issues. Reports to be circulated.

2. NTPC/GOL: where deficiencies are identified by the workshops, plan and put in place a
systematic program of formal and informal upgrading courses and, where required,
recruitment of additional staff, during the balance of 2014 and into 2015.

18. NT2 Stakeholders’ Budgeting, Staffing, and Handing Over Preparations
Issues:
The handing over processes in the social sector requires further collaborative planning,
preparation, budgeting, staffing, capacity and institution building, and monitoring.

Measures to be taken, targets and indicators

1. NTPC to provide in timely fashion its portion of RMU funding at least through 2015.

2. GOL to provide sufficient budget and staff for the District Working Group to
complement NRO budgeting and staff throughout 2014 and 2015 and following handing
over.

3. NTPC to continue to adapt its budgeting, staffing and handing over policies in
accordance with the resettlement program needs and timetable throughout 2014 and 2015.

4. SERF: review as planned early in 2014 the use of the funds provided through SERF to
   ensure that they are being used to maximum advantage in accordance with SERF
   regulations and the intent of the CA provisions.

5. IFIs to continue their monitoring and Aides Memoires through 2015/2016 followed by
   a final Evaluation and Implementation Completion Report in 2017 [World Bank].

19. Achieving institutional and programmatic coherence at all levels, especially in the
    10 villages and 16 hamlets
Issues:
There is a need to strengthen institutional and programmatic coherence and to enhance
participatory practices at the grass roots level.

Measures to be taken:
NTPC has engaged consultants to address at both the District and village/hamlet levels a
rationalization of the multiplicity of bodies now involved in both District-level and village
planning and development. VDCs will be closely consulted over changes proposed in
village/hamlet arrangements.




                                                                                           15
Possible outcomes, targets

1. RMU/NRO: build capacity in all hamlets so that they are able to undertake regular local
development activities, with relevant Provincial and District authorities at the end of the
RIP. (ongoing until end of 2015).

2. VDPs: the content, funding and implementation of Village Development Plans are
assessed for effectiveness and progress towards their intended outcomes by 1 August
2014. [NRO/RMU/DWG].

3. VDCs’ guidelines require the participation of the hamlet and actively encourage and
support the participation of women, ethnic groups, etc. [RMU/DWG/VDCs].


V - SUSTAINING RESETTLEMENT INFRASTRUCTURE
20. Infrastructure maintenance

Issues:
Maintenance of access, village systems and housing is important. As indicated above,
judicious use of the SERF funds is a crucial element to ensure the maintenance of village
level public infrastructure.

Measures to be taken, targets and indicators:
1. Roads within villages, and roads, where needed, to village fish landing sites are well
   maintained, with particular attention paid to degraded conditions during the wet
   seasons. [SERF/DPWT].
2. Access road from Phonphanpek to Khon Kaen is well maintained, with particular
   attention paid to degraded conditions during the wet seasons. [DPWT].
3. Village and Household electricity supply are established, monitored and maintained on
   a reliable basis. [EDL/Households].
4. Monitoring of an acceptable and reliable Village Water Supply is assured. Regular
   monitoring of water quality is assured by NTPC through continued periodic testing of
   water from all village supplies. Maintenance of an acceptable and reliable Village
   Water Supply is assured. Adequate training for water supply maintenance is set up and
   lines of responsibility to check on the status of water supplies and to undertake
   maintenance are established. [SERF, Namsaat]
5. A planned solid waste collection system is established in each village by 1 July 2014
   [NTPC/DONRE/SERF].




16
6. In accord with District regulations7, water-sealed toilets are built by 1 October 2014 by
   the 225 resettlement villager households who do not have them, the families involved
   to provide materials and labor while NTPC provides technical assistance and advice to
   VDCs in the form of drawings and specifications. [DWG/MOH/NTPC].


7. Drainage channels within all hamlets are extended and upgraded to ensure their
   effective operation on an ongoing basis and, before the next wet season
   [SERF/DONRE]




7
  It is required by the district, under penalty, that owners of all new houses built after mid‐2014 have water 
sealed toilets, 




                                                                                                           17
                               ANNEX TWO

            ROSEWOOD AND OTHER ILLEGAL TIMBERS


       The trend of the POE’s qualitative data on resettler profiting from
procuring Rosewood and other valuable timbers that are illegal to cut suggests
that such timbers were the major source of income for many resettlers through
or well into 2012. During 2013 informants claimed that scarcity of Rosewood
and Maidou led to increasing utilization of Rosewood roots and cut branches
with the supply largely exhausted by the end of 2013. This trend was also
mentioned by a Rosewood trader interviewed by the POE in May 2013 who
speculated that soon there would be no Rosewood left between the reservoir
and the Middle Hills. A trader’s van inspected in February 2014 contained
only low quality Rosewood that he had been buying from villagers for 3,000
to 5,000 kip per kilo.




        Senior WMPA manager from Lak Sao office beside a pile of
        confiscated rose wood – the last of the big accessible trees?

       This trend is supported by one headman and others who, when asked,
said that he had had no income from Rosewood for two years so his last major




                                                                            1
purchase was a TV purchased some three years earlier. A similar trend was
reported by women in three families who said that during recent years they
had made no major purchases, that the fridge of one family had been
repossessed and the motor cycle of another was now dysfunctional.

       The example of Sop Phene is especially relevant. A draft village
module given the POE by NTPC showed that Sop Phene was the poorest of
the resettler hamlets in 2010. Yet by 2012 it was one of the richest according
to LSMS 7 data, with the highest value in household savings. Early maps
show that Sop Phene was an isolated village before resettlement on the far
side of the Nam Theun in a productive portion of the NNT-NPA. Presumably
their rapid increase in wealth was fueled by illegal cutting of valuable timbers
from the area they know well and illegal fishing in the adjacent fish
conservation area.

       With the depletion of the more accessible rosewood around the
reservoir and into the watershed, at least to the middle hills, rosewood
poaching organized by middlemen with high level connections now appears to
focus on the upper parts of the watershed. POE has brought this situation to
the attention of the GOL authorities previously, and we again emphasize the
importance and urgency of high level GOL attention to the organized
poaching problems.




2
