                                              88366




                  World Bank
Statistics for Results Facility – Catalytic Fund
                   (SRF-CF)


Evaluation Report of the Pilot Phase




                    Brian T. Ngo
                   Andrew J. Flatt




                   February 2014

         Management Response added May 2014




                          1
       World Bank Statistics for Results Facility – Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF)

                                         Evaluation Report of the Pilot Phase


Contents
       List of box and tables ...................................................................................................................... 4
 Executive summary ............................................................................................................................. 5
       List of acronyms and abbreviations .............................................................................................. 18
 I.          Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 21
       i)       Background and overview .................................................................................................... 21
       ii)      The pilot phase ...................................................................................................................... 22
       iii) The evaluation: rationale, objectives, and intended outcomes.............................................. 23
 II.         Methodology and conduct of the evaluation ............................................................................. 25
       i)       Scope of the evaluation ......................................................................................................... 25
       ii)      Methodology and design of the evaluation ........................................................................... 25
       iii) Conduct of the evaluation ..................................................................................................... 28
       iv)       Limitations to the evaluation ................................................................................................ 30
 III.           Main findings ........................................................................................................................ 32
       i)       Promoting a system-wide approach in statistics at the country level .................................... 32
       ii)      Increasing resources for implementing national statistical plans .......................................... 36
       iii)      Linking statistical systems to the needs of national monitoring frameworks ....................... 40
       iv)       Promoting dialogue between statistics users and statistical producers ................................ 43
       v)       Delivering more effective aid through coordination of development partners ..................... 47
       vi) Impact of the in-country donor statistician ........................................................................... 49
       vii) Broad issues related to the SRF Charter (realism of the expectations for the SRF, choice of
       countries, regional project considerations) ................................................................................... 52
       viii) SRF governance arrangements and operational practices and procedures .......................... 58
       ix)       General questions on the impacts of the SRF-CF on national statistical systems ................ 66
       x)         Looking to the future ........................................................................................................... 74
 IV.            Conclusions and recommendations ....................................................................................... 76
       i)       Main conclusion and context ................................................................................................ 76
       ii)      Previous reviews of the SRF ................................................................................................. 77
       iii) Limitations of the evaluation: A cautious interpretation is needed ....................................... 78
       iv) Detailed conclusions and recommendations by SRF main objectives ................................... 78
       v) Other conclusions and recommendations based on the survey ............................................... 82
       vi) Insights and recommendations on three specific issues concerning the future of the SRF .... 86
       ANNEX 1: Survey questionnaire for SRF-CF stakeholders ........................................................ 94


                                                                             2
ANNEX 2: Tabulations from the survey of SRF-CF stakeholders ............................................ 103
ANNEX 3: Detailed reviews of Nigeria and Rwanda experiences with the SRF-CF ................ 144
ANNEX 4: The Results Framework and Monitoring of Progress ............................................. 157
ANNEX 5: Report on missions undertaken by the Evaluation Team ........................................ 178
ANNEX 6: List of persons met and contacted ........................................................................... 182
ANNEX 7: References ............................................................................................................... 186
ANNEX 8: Terms of Reference for the Evaluation of the SRF-CF Pilot Phase ........................ 192
Overview of the SRF-CF ............................................................................................................ 192
ANNEX 9: Management’s response to recommendations ........................................................ 198




                                                               3
                                       List of box and tables                              Page


    Box 1                Status of Pilot Projects, as of October 2013                       22
    Table 1              Detailed Recommendations - A Summary                               13
    Table 2              Proposals on specific issues assuming the extension and
                         expansion of the SRF approach - A summary                          17
    Table 3             Questionnaire response rates by country                             28
    Table 4             Questionnaire response rates by stakeholder group                   29
    Table 5             Success of the SRF-CF in promoting a system-wide
                                                                                            32
                        approach
    Table 6             Success of the SRF-CF in increasing resources for
                                                                                            36
                        implementing national statistical development strategies
    Table 7             Success of the SRF in linking improvements in the
                                                                                            40
                        statistical system to the needs of monitoring frameworks
    Table 8             Success of the SRF in promoting an improved dialogue
                                                                                            44
                        between users and producers of statistics
    Table 9             Success of the SRF in delivering more effective aid for
                                                                                            47
                        strengthening statistical systems
    Table 10            Expectations for the SRF                                            52
    Table 11            Possible extension of the SRF to regional operations                54
    Table 12            SRF grant approval and disbursement process                         57
    Table 13            Recipient-country execution of SRF projects                         61
    Table 14            Attention to SRF projects by World Bank line
                        management                                                          62
    Table 15            The SRF concept and statistical capacity building                   66
    Table 16            Leadership of the statistical development process                   69
    Table 17            SRF project implementation and governmental reform
                        measures                                                            71
    Table 18            SRF facilitation of the use of data to support evidence-
                        based decision-making                                               72
    Table 19            A two-step approach to country selection for SRF funding            87


Acknowledgements

The Evaluation Team of Brian Ngo and Andrew Flatt would like to express its gratitude to all the
persons met and contacted for their generous provision of time and assistance during this
assignment. Special thanks go to World Bank staff in Washington, Nigeria and Rwanda, who
assisted the Team in the planning and conduct of its missions and in the efficient supply of
documentation and information. The advice and input of PARIS21 and DfID staff is also
gratefully acknowledged. The Team benefited greatly from the interviews held with Task Team
Leaders and in-country donor statisticians. It is also very grateful to all those stakeholders in the
participating countries who responded to the survey questionnaire and provided many valuable
insights into the SRF. The opinions expressed in this report are nevertheless those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the World Bank.




                                                4
Executive summary

Introduction

1.      The World Bank has commissioned an independent evaluation of the Pilot Phase
of the Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF) to assess experience,
identify achievements to date, and recommend any changes in policies and practices that
may be necessary in order to improve results. The SRF, which began its pilot phase in
2009 with support from UK/DfID and the Netherlands, is designed to support the capacity
building of developing countries to improve the production, availability, and use of
official statistics as a basis for evidence-based policy formulation and decision making.
2.      The SRF was established on the broad principles of the Managing for Development
Results process (MfDR) and of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, and aims to
promote a system-wide approach to strengthening national statistical systems. The SRF
principles stress country ownership and leadership, dialogue across the national statistical
system, and the alignment of donor support with country priorities.
3.     The pilot phase of the SRF-CF was set up to provide financial and technical support
to a limited number of countries that either had weak statistical capacity or had recently
emerged from conflict. Five countries were initially invited by the World Bank to submit
applications for assistance, with three more joining following a decision to expand the pilot
phase.
4.       The evaluation aims to assess the success of the pilot phase in achieving the SRF’s
specific objectives of: i) promoting a system-wide approach in statistics; ii) increasing
resources for implementing national statistical plans; iii) linking improvements in the
statistical system to the needs of national and sectoral monitoring frameworks; iv) promoting
an improved national dialogue and partnership between statistics users and statistical
producers; and v) delivering more efficient and effective assistance to statistics through better
coordination and alignment to agreed national statistical plans. The evaluation also assesses
the impact of the in-country donor statisticians in helping countries reach the SRF objectives,
and the Facility’s governance arrangements and operational practices and procedures.

Methodology and conduct of the evaluation

5.     The evaluation commenced in mid-May 2013 and a member of the Evaluation Team
undertook an inception mission to World Bank Headquarters towards the end of May.
Telephone interviews were held with Task Team Leaders and in-country statisticians from
late May to the end of July. The Evaluation Team conducted a field mission to Nigeria and
Rwanda, coupled with a visit to the offices of PARIS21 and the OECD in Paris, in June 2013,
and one member of the Team also visited DfID Headquarters in East Kilbride, United
Kingdom, in July 2013.

6.      The rather limited implementation experience -- in Afghanistan, Nigeria and Rwanda,
and latterly in Lao PDR -- posed significant challenges in drawing conclusions from the
assessment, which therefore focuses more on processes and outputs than on final outcomes
related to evidence-based policy-making. To partly remedy this lack of information, the
Evaluation Team attempted to make extensive use of a questionnaire covering the questions
and issues to be addressed in the evaluation report.
7.    The questions designed for the assessment covered the outputs and practices
engendered by the SRF-CF approach, the inputs and contributions to the SRF objectives

                                               5
made possible by that approach, and broad governance issues related to the SRF Charter and
to arrangements and operational practices and procedures for the preparation and
implementation of pilot projects. While mainly multiple-choice in design, the questionnaire
also encouraged respondents to provide additional comments. Over 1000 comments were
received, and contributed significantly to the understanding of the Evaluation Team of the
issues involved.
8.       The wording of the questionnaire attempted to cover the situation in countries where
activities were well underway as well as those where implementation had yet to begin. The
questionnaire was sent to 7 different groups of stakeholders involved in the SRF:
    World Bank task team leaders (TTL);
    Primary recipient agencies of the SRF grant, usually national statistical offices (NSO);
    Other agencies within government involved in producing and/or using statistics
     (OGA);
    Other national users of statistics such as the media, researchers, and academia (ONU);
    In-country donor statisticians (IDS);
    Local bilateral and multilateral development partners (LDP); and
    National poverty reduction or MDG coordination units (PRC).
9.       Of the seven categories of stakeholders, only the Task Team Leaders and in-country
statisticians were readily identifiable. For the other categories, the process of drawing up the
lists of potential respondents was not completed until the middle of August 2013. Analysis of
the completed questionnaires continued into September 2013 and report writing proceeded
concurrently. Given the lack of any responses from the PRC group, it was decided to exclude
them from the tabulations. Both the length and the composition of the respondent lists varied
considerably among the countries.
10.     Significant problems were encountered in soliciting responses from questionnaire
recipients. After a drawn-out process of recalls and reminders, a total of 110 responses were
received by the Team, representing an overall response rate of 36 per cent. For the purposes
of analysis, Afghanistan, Nigeria and Rwanda were termed ‘implementing countries’, and the
remainder – DR Congo, Ethiopia, Ghana, Lao PDR and Senegal -- ‘pipeline countries’.
11.    The Evaluation Team submitted its draft report by end-October 2013; comments and
additional material requested by DECDG were incorporated in the final report in February
2014. In reaching its findings and preparing its conclusions and recommendations, the
Evaluation Team has drawn not only on the quantitative analysis of the questionnaire
responses but also on the numerous comments supplied by respondents, as well as the in-
depth discussions with the Task Team Leaders and the in-country statisticians, the field visits
to Nigeria and Rwanda, and the desk study of documentation. To the extent possible, the
Team has attempted to verify the findings and recommendations of this assessment with key
stakeholders.
12.     Nevertheless, it was clear from the outset that drawing conclusions from the
experience of a relatively small group of countries, a majority of which had not commenced
implementation of their SRF projects, would present a significant challenge. In view of this
and in the light of the response to the questionnaire, care needs to be exercised in interpreting
the findings of the evaluation. In particular, the Evaluation Team draws attention to the
widely differing response rates among the various stakeholder groups, and to the likelihood
that different groups may have different ‘stakes’ in the outcome of the assessment.
Comparisons between countries also need to be undertaken with care, because of the different
mix of respondents from each country.

                                               6
Main findings

13.    Promoting a system-wide approach to strengthening national statistical systems.
Over 70 per cent of respondents in the countries which have started project implementation
believe that the SRF-CF is at least somewhat successful in promoting a system-wide
approach to statistics. In the pipeline countries, where many respondents understandably
noted that it was premature to draw conclusions, some nevertheless saw reasonable promise
in the SRF’s potential in this regard. Contributory factors included support for the
operationalization of national statistical development strategies, the general alignment of
donors behind those strategies, and the promotion of dialogues between the NSO and
development partners and among government institutions.
14.     Three sub-questions were asked to obtain a more in-depth assessment of the role of
the SRF approach in promoting a system-wide approach to statistical development in the
pilot countries. They covered the degree of inclusiveness of the NSDS, the perception of
support by local development partners of the system-wide approach, and challenges to the
system-wide approach. Eighty-five per cent of all respondents, led by TTLs and NSOs, felt
that the NSDS process was at least somewhat inclusive.
15.    Eighty per cent of local development partners supported the development of a system-
wide approach at least to some extent, with those in the implementing countries generally
more positive than those from the pipeline countries. They did however identify two groups
of problems in this regard, the first concerning limitations on the part of NSOs, difficulties of
coordination among government agencies, and a lack of commitment from some government
partners. A second set of difficulties related to development partners themselves and included
a lack of statistical expertise, frequent turnover among staff, and weak harmonization and
coordination among some development partners.
16.     Despite some positive findings about the success of the SRF in promoting a system-
wide approach, only 15 per cent of respondents overall indicated that such an approach
would not pose any significant challenge in their countries. Reasons cited included the lack
of a data culture and limited capacity of the national statistical system, while a shortfall of
political will and commitment in some countries has contributed to weak collaboration
among government agencies and to the failure of government to take a leading and sustained
role in mobilizing funding for statistics.

17.     Increasing resources for implementing national statistical plans.             While
acknowledging that levels of funding were difficult to measure exactly, 72 per cent of
respondents in implementing countries stated that the SRF-CF had been at least somewhat
successful in its objective of attracting supplementary resources for the implementation of
country-owned statistical development strategies. Positive results from SRF projects, along
with the secure nature of SRF funding, were instrumental in building confidence in both
influential government agencies and among other development partners, opening up the
actual or potential flow of resources.

18.     However, attempts to obtain additional details on the effect of the SRF project on
domestic and external resources revealed very wide variations among countries and a
significant lack of knowledge among respondents about the resource situation. What emerges
clearly from the responses is that only 10 per cent of respondents attributed increases in
domestic resources directly to the SRF, with a similar percentage indicating that the increase
would have occurred anyway.


                                                7
19.    As to external resources, there was a clear divergence of views between non-LDP
respondents and the donors themselves about the catalytic effect of the SRF, with only 7 per
cent of local development partners attributing increases in their resources to the Facility.
Despite a degree of uncertainty, it appears that the direct effect of the SRF project on
increases in both domestic and external resources for statistics in the pilot countries has so far
been quite modest. There would also appear to be scope for the freer exchange of information
so that a much clearer idea can be gained of the future availability of funding for the
implementation of national statistical development strategies.
20.     More than half of all respondents thought that SRF funds should be seen as possible
core finance for implementing national statistical development strategies, and the figure rose
to 60 per cent in the implementing countries. In an environment of inadequate domestic
resources and limited and changing contributions by donors, the SRF was seen as central and
sustained core funding for broader, more fundamental issues, thus helping to institutionalize a
system-wide approach to statistics through the NSDS. A sizeable minority of respondents,
however, expressed the opinion that core financing for the NSDS should be the responsibility
of the government for purposes of ownership and sustainability. In some countries, such as
Nigeria and Ghana, it was argued that SRF funding constitutes a very small proportion of
total requirements for statistical development and thus cannot have the necessary impact to be
viewed as core finance. Notwithstanding this line of argument, it is worth noting that SRF
resources are generally much larger than what has been provided for statistical capacity
building from other sources, either bilateral or multilateral.
21.     Linking statistical systems to the needs of national monitoring frameworks . The
most frequent answer overall to the question of linking improvements in the capacity and
outputs of the statistical system with the requirements of national monitoring frameworks
was that it was too early to judge the performance of the SRF against this criterion. But in
the implementing countries, some 60 per cent of respondents felt that the SRF was being at
least somewhat successful in fostering this linkage, and the figure rose to 75 per cent in
Nigeria. In some instances the stimulus provided by the SRF process to collaborative effort
between the statistical office and other stakeholders was seen as having a positive effect on
national and sectoral monitoring and evaluation frameworks.
22.     In the implementing countries, half of all respondents considered that the SRF had
played a very significant role to date in enhancing the production, quality and timeliness of
data, and that figure rose to nearly 80 per cent when those who felt that it had played some
role were added in. There were however significant differences among the implementing
countries, while in the pipeline countries the impact to date of SRF activities was
understandably much smaller.
23.     The effect of the SRF in enhancing the accessibility and usability of data was reported
to be somewhat less than for their production, quality and timeliness; nevertheless 72 per
cent of respondents in the implementing countries reported that the SRF had played at least
some role to date. Enhancements reported included, in general terms, the encouragement of
open data initiatives, the promotion of transparency, and awareness-raising about statistics.
24.     Promoting an improved national dialogue between users and producers of statistics.
In the implementing countries, a quarter of all respondents felt that the SRF was very
successful in this regard, and a further 32 per cent rated it as somewhat successful. In the
pipeline countries, over half the respondents either felt that it was too early to judge on this
issue, or failed to answer the question. In so far as producers and users of statistics could be
distinguished from among the stakeholders responding, it appeared that the two groups held
quite similar views on the success of the SRF to date in promoting a dialogue between them.

                                                8
25.     Generally speaking, the responses to the questionnaire reflected limited knowledge of
user satisfaction surveys, which are a requirement under the SRF and have so far been
undertaken in four pilot countries. Of more concern is the fact that, in the countries where
surveys had already been conducted, over three-quarters of respondents in what could be
considered the main user groups (OGA and ONU), and over half of local development
partners, either professed ignorance about the status of user satisfaction surveys in their
respective countries or gave an inaccurate answer. Respondents who were aware of these
surveys generally expressed satisfaction about their utility.
26.     Various efforts under the SRF to enhance the capacity of data users were reported by
many respondents in the implementing countries, and by a few in pipeline countries as
preparatory activities got underway. However, over one-third of respondents were unsure of
the situation in this regard, and again, the stakeholder groups most closely identified with
users of statistics were the least well informed about the activities being undertaken for their
purported benefit. The survey responses highlighted the need to maintain the momentum of
user-producer dialogue, in order to enhance coordination and increase awareness among
users.
27.     Delivering more effective aid through coordination of development partners. The
survey showed that in the implementing countries, 65 per cent of respondents felt that the
SRF was at least somewhat successful in delivering more efficient and effective aid and
technical assistance for strengthening statistical systems and results measurement. There
were fairly substantial differences among the three implementing countries, with Nigeria the
most positive in this regard. Respondents frequently made reference to the fact that the SRF
project addressed the overall statistical system in each country, and provided a good platform
for development partners to share information and experiences, become aware of what others
were doing, and plan and channel their support to statistics.
28.     Overall, 35 per cent of respondents in the implementing countries considered that the
SRF had already had a positive impact on aligning support for statistical capacity building to
the NSDSs. Fifty three per cent of respondents in implementing countries, and 81 per cent of
those in pipeline countries, considered that the SRF had the potential to make a positive
impact. Similar figures applied to the effect of the SRF on improved donor coordination.
The number of development partners active in statistics in each country, and the ease or
otherwise of gathering them together for meetings organized by the lead donor, were noted as
practical factors affecting coordination of statistical capacity building.
29.      The impact of the in-country donor statistician (IDS). At the time of this report,
statisticians were working with the SRF projects in Afghanistan, DRC, Ghana and Nigeria.
In all three countries where the statisticians have been working for some time, there was a
general consensus that they have had a very significant positive impact on the successful
implementation of, or preparation for, the respective projects and on helping to achieve the
various objectives of the SRF. The SRF-Catalytic Fund guidelines on the contributions by the
in-country statisticians are very broad and include guidance and advice to the statistical
offices, coordination of donor activities, leadership of the development partner group, and
advocacy of the importance of the SRF and its role in supporting the NSDS. In addition to
the various objectives listed above, the statisticians also provide support for recipient
country-executed projects. In the particular case of Nigeria, the IDS also plays the very
important function of a ‘clearing house’ for all data used in World Bank projects, thus further
complicating the statistician’s role.
30.     A large majority of respondents indicated that they saw no actual or potential areas of
friction or contention surrounding the role of the statisticians in relation to the statistical

                                               9
office staff. There was widespread agreement that the fact that the in-country donor
statistician represents a major donor had a positive impact on the incumbent’s effectiveness,
especially where the statistician’s agency was also the lead donor in the national partnership
group.
31.     Emerging very clearly from the survey is a strong sentiment that because of a lack of
capacity in statistics, the post of in-country donor statistician would be needed over a
substantial period of time. Most respondents did see the need to have an exit strategy in
place; it was feared that otherwise a vacuum would be created, and all the progress made
under the project would be undone.
32.     Broad issues related to the SRF Charter. Questions were asked about selected issues
that relate to the Charter. The great majority of respondents considered the expectations for
the SRF in terms of its impact and timing to be ‘very reasonable’ or ‘somewhat reasonable’,
with however considerable variations among the implementing countries. Responses about
the impact of the SRF covered the gamut of SRF objectives, but well over half the ‘most
significant’ impacts related either to improvements in the statistical system in terms of data
production, quality and usability, or to the promotion of a system-wide approach.
33.     Some 38 per cent of respondents considered that the SRF should be extended to
regional initiatives and operations, with another 37 per cent being undecided. South-south
exchange of experiences among statistical offices and the sharing of best practices and
international expertise were frequently mentioned. Many respondents felt that a regional
focus in these initiatives was critical as countries learned from each other and were given the
opportunity to share knowledge and demonstrate results. Despite the enthusiasm for regional
projects, a minority of respondents were anxious that the SRF projects should first help to
tackle more important national issues.
34.     SRF governance arrangements and World Bank operational practices and
procedures. The survey also sought information on how well the governance arrangements of
the SRF-CF and the operational practices and procedures of the Facility were serving the
SRF’s objectives and its various stakeholders. Some 30 per cent of all respondents answering
the question stated that the SRF grant approval and disbursement processes had been beset by
difficulties and delays, some of which had occurred for reasons internal to the pilot countries.
Many respondents reported that the Bank’s administrative procedures had caused significant
delays in SRF projects. In general, respondents pointed out that more awareness of and
training in SRF principles, norms and procedures was needed on the part of both Bank staff
and government officials in the SRF project team.
35.     Nearly half of respondents in the implementing countries stated that their experience
in implementing the SRF grant was very positive, and another 30 per cent had a somewhat
positive impression. While negative experiences were in a small minority, they were
nevertheless strongly expressed. Major problems faced in implementing the SRF projects
included the inadequacy of counterpart government budgetary support, a lack of coordination
among government agencies and among development partners, and a lack of capacity.
36.     A mere 5 per cent of TTLs, NSOs and in-country statisticians reported their
experience with using the SRF Results Framework to be very positive. A common complaint
was that the generic framework was often not in line with, or was even at odds with, the
country-level results frameworks. Criticisms made of the generic framework were that it
contained too many indicators, was too heavy to maintain, required input from user surveys,
and included indicators and targets that were too ambitious given the countries’ capacities to
report.


                                              10
37.      General questions on the impacts of the SRF-CF on national statistical systems.
Over half of all respondents, in both implementing and pipeline countries, felt that the
concept of the SRF met statistical capacity building needs to a great extent When those who
felt that the concept met such needs to some extent were added in, the overall figure among
all respondents who answered the question rose to 90 per cent. There were however wide
variations among countries; it appears from the Evaluation Team’s survey that the SRF
concept may better meet the statistical capacity building needs of those countries which
already have higher statistical capacity as measured by the SCI. Notwithstanding any
differences between countries, however, the Evaluation Team felt that overall, the SRF was
playing a special role in statistical capacity building in the pilot countries, due to the relative
size of the grants and the concept and principles embodied in the SRF approach.
38.      In the implementing countries, over half of respondents considered that the SRF had
facilitated effective government ownership and leadership of the statistical development
process to a great extent, and a further third thought that this was the case to some extent. In
terms of potential, the response from the pipeline countries was similar. There were,
however, wide variations among both groups of countries as well as among the various
stakeholder groups. Some 65 per cent of respondents thought that, in the course of
implementing the SRF projects, national authorities were, or would be, taking reform
measures that would not otherwise have been embarked on.
39.     On the key issue of the extent to which statistical data are used in policy processes,
just over half of all respondents considered that the concept of the SRF has facilitated, or has
the potential to facilitate, the greater use of statistical data and indicators to support evidence-
based decision-making. As for other questions, the proportion of respondents taking this view
varied greatly across countries, ranging from 80 per cent in Ghana and 72 per cent in Rwanda
to 33 per cent in DRC and only 11 per cent in Afghanistan. Although differences in the mix
of respondents from one country to another cannot be ignored, this range of figures again
appears to reflect, to a substantial degree, the level of statistical capacity development in the
respective countries.
40.     In terms of forward-looking comments, respondents in all three implementing
countries expressed the wish that SRF funding should be continued. In the pipeline countries
where projects were under preparation, the SRF grants were eagerly awaited as a means of,
among other things, financing key statistical activities and filling data gaps to monitor
development plans. Respondents also felt that the SRF-CF should be expanded to other
countries, drawing on lessons learned in the pilot phase. The notional resource allocation
ceiling of $10 million was described as rather arbitrary, and respondents advocated more
flexibility for larger countries and for those countries that were performing well.

Conclusions and recommendations

41.     Based on the generally positive feedback received, the Evaluation Team concludes
that the SRF appears to be reasonably successful in meeting its objectives. It is, however,
important to note the limitations of this evaluation, which draws conclusions from the
experience about a program which is basically operational in only three countries. In view of
this, care needs to be taken when considering this report in general and the conclusions and
recommendations presented in this section. Most importantly, there is a clear general
impression that for most of the success criteria utilized in the survey, the stakeholder groups
which could be said to have a larger stake or vested interest in the SRF (TTL, NSO and IDS)
were more positive than the remaining groups which largely comprise users of statistics.
While this general conclusion is not necessarily unexpected, the Evaluation Team feels that in

                                                11
the future, more conscious attention needs to be paid in the course of SRF implementation to
involving these groups.

42.    There are real achievements that can be attributed to the SRF in all three
implementing countries. In general, the five SRF objectives are being met, but with
somewhat differing rates of success. The Team therefore recommends that the SRF approach
should be extended and expanded. Details of the recommendations per SRF objectives
together with the assessments to provide the context are shown in Table 1.




                                            12
                                                   Table 1
                             Detailed recommendations - A summary
   SRF Objectives                    Assessment                           Recommendations
Promotion of a system-       Positive findings but the        One particular aspect that may need
wide approach to            survey results suggest that       further consideration is the role of the in-
statistics                  implementation of such an         country donor statistician on coordination.
                            approach would pose a              The World Bank should lead by example
                            moderate to significant           by ensuring that it has staff in the country
                            challenge.                        office suitably qualified in statistics or M&E
                                                              to serve on the National Partnership Group
                                                              and should encourage other development
                                                              partners to do likewise.
Resource mobilization        The direct effect of the SRF     Promote a more systematic exchange of
                            on increases in resources, both   information on funding intentions within
                            from domestic and external        national partnership groups.
                            sources, has so far been quite     Given the role of funding in ensuring
                            modest.                           sustainability of the support for statistics
                                                              generated by the SRF, it is desirable for all
                                                              concerned parties to increase efforts to
                                                              generate additional funding and to actively
                                                              explore additional resource mobilization
                                                              methods, for example through matched
                                                              funding arrangements.
                                                                        Promote the practice of producing
                                                              regular NSDS implementation reports to help
                                                              in monitoring the commitment of resources
                                                              and their delivery. The TORs of the in-
                                                              country donor statisticians should specifically
                                                              mention the provision of support to national
                                                              authorities in the preparation of NSDS
                                                              implementation reports.
                                                               Aided by a conducive environment, the
                                                              basket fund in Rwanda was proving effective
                                                              for NSDS implementation, and the SRF
                                                              should be used to encourage the use of basket
                                                              funds elsewhere, taking country
                                                              circumstances into consideration.
Linking Statistical          In implementing countries,       Highlight the importance of the use of
Systems to National         the SRF has played a              statistics in future SRF projects.
Monitoring Frameworks       significant role in enhancing      More research aimed at improving the
                            the production, quality and       quality and efficacy of user satisfaction
                            timeliness of data.               surveys. In the interim fully support the
                             Its impact on enhancing the     proposal by the SRF Administration Unit to
                            accessibility and usability of    lighten the surveys and to be more selective
                            data is somewhat less but still   on key data users.
                            significant.                       Opportunities should be taken to critically
                            .                                 assess initiatives to measure the use of
                                                              statistics in the policy process.
Promoting Dialogue           A modest majority of             Implementing agencies need to mainstream
Between Statistics Users    respondents in implementing       user satisfaction surveys in their work
and Statistical Producers   countries consider the SRF to     programs, to inform other stakeholders and to
                            be at least somewhat              publicize the results of these surveys.
                            successful in promoting this       Pay more attention to user-oriented
                            dialogue.                         awareness raising activities through greater
                             But users of statistics         publicity and outreach.
                            generally professed ignorance      Encourage sharing among countries of


                                                      13
                            about the status of user           various practices such as workshops, training
                            satisfaction surveys in their      of journalists and mobile education for user
                            countries and were not well        outreach.
                            informed about capacity
                            building activities designed for
                            their benefit.
Delivering More              A small majority of               The importance of sustaining these
Effective Aid               respondents felt that the SRF      relationships needs to be borne in mind,
                            was successful in delivering       particularly given the frequent staff rotation.
                            more efficient and effective        The SRF Administration Unit should be
                            aid and technical assistance.      kept up-to-date on staff changes by the
                             Progress in this area            respective World Bank offices so as to brief
                            depends to a great extent on       new TTLs on the special features of the SRF
                            personal relationships between     approach.
                            members of the local
                            development partners.
Other survey-based
issues                      Assessment                         Recommendations
In-country donor             The statisticians have been       Emphasize the coordinating role of the
statisticians               an almost unqualified success      statisticians, both between producers and
                            in facilitating the system-wide    users of statistics and among development
                            approach and helping               partners.
                            coordinate donor activities.        Fund the post of in-country donor
                             The fact that the statistician   statistician for a substantial period of time.
                            represented a major donor was       Consider more than one statistician in
                            seen as having a positive          larger SRF projects subject to funding
                            impact on their effectiveness.     availability.
                                                                Consider developing an exit strategy for the
                                                               IDS in future SRF projects.
                                                                Explore different implementation models
                                                               for the IDS.
Issues related to the SRF    The SRF approach is               While retaining the country focus of the
Charter                     certainly broad and flexible       SRF approach, the SRF Council should
                            enough to have a significant       explore the possibility of extending the SRF
                            impact in each of the diverse      to regional initiatives including introducing a
                            situations represented by the      regional dimension to country projects.
                            three implementing countries.       The Council should promote the sharing of
                             A small majority of              experiences across countries.
                            respondents considered that         Take steps for the Charter to be publicized,
                            the expectations of the SRF in     so that countries and institutions become
                            terms of its impact and timing     more knowledgeable about the SRF initiative
                            were realistic.                    and the approach and principles underlying it.
                             A rich vein of suggestions       This action could be taken in conjunction
                            for regional activities was put    with more visibility of the SRF on the World
                            forward, featuring south-south     Bank internal and external websites.
                            exchange of experiences and
                            the sharing of best practices
                            and expertise.
SRF governance               The majority of respondents       The actions already identified by the SRF
arrangements and            in the implementing countries      Administration Unit to improve SRF
operational practices and   rated their experience in          governance and operational issues, including
procedures                  implementing the grant, in         efforts to reduce administrative barriers for
                            terms of reporting                 project implementation, should continue to be
                            arrangements and support           pursued.
                            from Bank staff, as either very     Extend the support to implementing
                            or somewhat positive.              agencies in procurement, financial
                             Problems faced included          management and overall project management
                            inadequacy of counterpart          to World Bank staff where necessary.


                                                      14
                         government budgetary              Endeavor to ensure greater continuity in
                         support, a lack of               post of TTLs and other staff assigned to SRF
                         coordination, low levels of      project implementation.
                         capacity, and overly              Promote and pursue proactive lesson
                         bureaucratic processes on the    learning and experience sharing among the
                         part of both the Bank and        pilot countries.
                         national administrations.         Modify SRF guidelines to TTLs to stress
                                                          the point that the coverage of broader SRF
                                                          issues, as noted in the generic SRF Results
                                                          Framework, needs to be taken into account
                                                          during project supervision, so as to be able to
                                                          respond to SRF requirements.

Other issues              Respondents in all countries    The SRF Council should re-examine the
                         expressed the wish that SRF      current notional resource allocation ceiling
                         funding should continue,         and consider upward flexibility in specified
                         citing achievements to date      circumstances
                         and tasks yet to be addressed




Insights and proposals on specific issues assuming the extension and
expansion of the SRF approach
43.    Based on the main conclusion of this evaluation that the SRF approach should be
extended and expanded, the Evaluation Team, upon the request of the SRF Administration
Unit, has undertaken additional work to provide insights and proposals on three important
issues which have significant bearing on the future of the SRF approach. These issues are a)
country selection, b) the results framework, and c) ways to enable greater flexibility in project
implementation and to enhance greater ownership by countries and the World Bank
operations units.
44.     By comparison to the ‘recommendations’ presented above which are based on a
clearly defined approach to data collection, the ‘proposals’ suggested below are based on
more limited underpinnings including the review of existing documents on the SRF-CF and
discussions and insights shared among the members of the Evaluation Team. But assuming
that the SRF approach will be extended and expanded, it is hoped that the proposals
summarised in Table 2 would, at least in part, contribute to a more methodical approach to
country selection, to a clearer approach to the design and monitoring of results frameworks,
to greater flexibility in project implementation and to greater ownership of the SRF projects.




                                                  15
                                        Table 2
Proposals on specific issues assuming the extension and expansion of the SRF approach
                                     - A Summary
    Issues                        Assessment                                      Proposals
Country            While country selection principles are       Fragile states versus other IDA
selection         clear, the SRF Charter is not sufficiently    countries. Based on the current
                  specific to help the actual decision          classification by the World Bank which
                  process and pilot country selection was       includes 36 fragile states out of 82 IDA-
                  based on a compromise between                 eligible countries, it is suggested that
                  analytical and political considerations.      future SRF funding may roughly be
                   The SRF approach, as highlighted in         allocated 1/3 to fragile states and 2/3 to
                  the annual reports, revealed a continuing     other countries.
                  focus on difficulty, variety and fragility     Open competition versus ‘by invitation’.
                  for the selection of countries. The           As the generally positive reactions to the
                  positive feedback of the SRF from all 8       SRF approach become better known,
                  pilot countries including post-conflict       which would normally be expected to
                  countries appears to confirm the original     enhance the attractiveness of the SRF-CF
                  belief that the SRF approach does work        as support for statistical capacity building,
                  in all country circumstances although         it is the opinion of the Evaluation Team
                  more care and support should be               that open competition should be the
                  provided to fragile states.                   primary option for SRF funds allocation
                   All SRF pilot countries were ‘invited’      going forward (while acknowledging that
                  to apply for SRF grants, allowing for         there may still exist justification for
                  greater subjectivity compared to an           specific countries to be ‘invited’ to apply).
                  ‘open competition’ approach among all          Country selection criteria. The
                  IDA countries where defined criteria and      Evaluation Team believes that a ‘two -step
                  prerequisites play an important role.         procedure’ would allow for a more
                                                                practical approach to country selection for
                                                                future SRF funding. The first-order
                                                                criteria would consist of prerequisites
                                                                while the second-order criteria would help
                                                                to differentiate countries in terms of their
                                                                eligibility for SRF funding. This two-step
                                                                approach would apply to both regular
                                                                IDA-eligible countries and to fragile
                                                                states, with some minor adjustments for
                                                                the latter.
The SRF            Translating the generic results              A more systemic consideration of the
generic results   framework into specific indicators which      two results frameworks. A useful way to
framework and     are measurable and which can be               help bridge the gap between the two
country           monitored over time has proven to be          results frameworks is to view the SRF
applicability     much more challenging than originally         generic results framework as an effort to
                  expected with data availability being the     monitor a medium- to long-term, system-
                  most critical constraint. While the           focused effort to sustainably develop the
                  approach adopted by the SRF                   statistical capacity of countries, while
                  Administration Unit to delete several         specific project M&E mechanisms
                  indicators including most of those            monitor time-bound, data and action-
                  related to financial resources for            focused operations. Much more thinking
                  statistics may be justified on the basis of   is required to translate the above into
                  data unavailability, without information      operational practices.
                  on resources, there is the risk that the       Greater efforts to obtain information on
                  sustainability of support provided by the     budgetary commitments and support.
                  SRF projects may not be assured.              Based on the field mission to Nigeria and
                   There has been limited success by the       Rwanda, the Evaluation Team believes
                  project teams in blending the indicators      that information on resources for statistics
                  of the generic results framework with         is available but does require special
                  country priorities based on individual        efforts to monitor. The Team proposes

                                                       16
                 country NSDSs.                                the re-introduction of some measure of
                  The results frameworks of the pilot         budgetary resource monitoring, while
                 projects have a strong focus on the           acknowledging that various challenges
                 production of data and their accessibility.   must be overcome including access to
                  World Bank’s supervision mission            information on resources provided by
                 reports show a relatively narrow focus        development partners.
                 on specific project development                Going beyond the production of and
                 objectives and intermediate results           accessibility to statistics and highlighting
                 indicators and limited efforts by             user-oriented awareness raising activities.
                 supervision teams to attempt to cover the     It would be useful for future SRF projects
                 broader indicators of the SRF generic         to have specific provisions for the active
                 results framework.                            support of other government agencies
                                                               outside the NSO as well as users of all
                                                               sorts and local development partners. This
                                                               would include revising the content of the
                                                               new indicator of the generic results
                                                               framework -- the number of government
                                                               staff trained under the SRF -- which
                                                               should be supplemented by ‘total number
                                                               of persons trained’ to reflect training of
                                                               users and emphasize ‘type of training’ to
                                                               distinguish technical training from user-
                                                               oriented and other types of training.

Greater           The nomination of experienced and            On World Bank procedures. More
flexibility in   committed TTLs and local support staff        awareness of and training in SRF
project          was seen by respondents to the                principles, norms and procedures was
implementation   questionnaire survey as key to successful     needed on the part of both Bank staff and
and to enhance   project implementation.                       government officials in the SRF project
greater           The questionnaire survey showed that        team.
ownership by     ‘ownership’ is most pronounced among           Greater ownership by countries and the
countries and    NSOs and is much less evident among           World Bank. Discussions on country
the World        the other government agencies and the         ownership, which is at the core of the SRF
Bank             users or potential users of statistics.       approach, need to highlight the importance
operations        The Evaluation Team’s impressions           of the SRF being ‘owned’ by a broad range
units            indicate a wide range of interest and         of stakeholders and not exclusively by the
                 involvement by World Bank country             government statistics office. The
                 teams in the SRF projects.                    promotion of more systematic dialogue
                  The review of country experiences           between producers and users of statistics
                 shows that there may well be a case for       would go a long way in promoting
                 linkage of SRF grants with IDA credits        ownership for local stakeholders. Having
                 where the IDA funds are meant to              the degree of World Bank support to
                 address high-level, non-technical             statistical capacity building in the country
                 concerns, while more technical topics are     as a prerequisite for country selection
                 focused on in the SRF project. Properly       could help in improving the situation.
                 combined, the two could in principle be        Linkages with matching IDA credits.
                 very effective.                               More in-depth assessment of the
                                                               experiences of Ghana and Nigeria where
                                                               efforts have been made to combine the
                                                               SRF with IDA funds -- in parallel for
                                                               Ghana and sequentially in the case of
                                                               Nigeria.




                                                      17
List of acronyms and abbreviations

AfDB             African Development Bank
Afristat         L’Observatoire Economique et Statistique d’Afrique Subsaharienne
ASEAN            Association of Southeast Asian Nations
AU               African Union
BBSC             Bulletin Board on Statistical Capacity of the World Bank
BOP              Balance of Payments
CIDA             Canadian International Development Agency
CPI              Consumer price index
CSO              Central Statistics Organization (Afghanistan)
DECDG            Development Data Group (of Development Economics, World Bank)
DfID             Department for International Development (UK)
DG               Director General
DHS              Demographic and Health Surveys
DP               Development partner (Rwanda context)
DRC              Democratic Republic of Congo
EC               European Commission
ECOWAS           Economic Community of West African States
ESSPIN           Education Sector Support Program in Nigeria
FAO              Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GDP              Gross domestic product
GoR              Government of Rwanda
ICT              Internet and communication technology
IDA              International Development Association (of the World Bank group)
IDS              In-country donor statistician
IES              Income and Expenditure Survey
ILO              International Labor Organization
IMF              International Monetary Fund
IMIS             Integrated Management Information System
IPAR             Institute of Policy Analysis and Research of Rwanda
ISR              Implementation Status and Results (World Bank)
KIST             Kigali Institute of Science and Technology (Rwanda)
L2A              Listening to Africa project
Lao PDR          Lao People's Democratic Republic


                                               18
LDP       Local development partner
LSMS      Living Standards Measurement Survey
MAPS      Marrakesh Action Plan for Statistics
MDAs      Ministries, Departments and Agencies
MDG       Millennium Development Goal
M&E       Monitoring and evaluation
MfDR      Managing for Development Results
MICS      Multiple Indicators Cluster Survey (UNICEF)
NBS       National Bureau of Statistics (Nigeria)
NCCS      National Consultative Committee on Statistics (Nigeria)
NGO       Non-governmental organization
NISR      National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda
NPopC     National Population Commission (Nigeria)
NSBS      Niger State Bureau of Statistics
NSDS      National Strategy for the Development of Statistics
NSO       National statistical office
NSS       National statistical system
OECD      Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OGA       Other government agency
ONU       Other national user
OPM       Oxford Policy Management
PARIS21   Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21st Century (OECD-
          based)
PDO       Project Development Objective
PPI       Producer price index
PRC       National poverty reduction or MDG coordination unit
PRESS     Partner Report on Support to Statistics (PARIS21)
SBS       State Bureau of Statistics (Nigeria)
SCCS      State Consultative Committee on Statistics (Nigeria)
SCI       Statistical Capacity Indicator
SC/NPG    Steering Committee/National Partnership Group (Rwanda)
SDDS      Special Data Dissemination Standard (of the IMF)
SPARC     State Partnership for Accountability, Responsiveness and Capability
          (Nigeria)
SRF       Statistics for Results Facility
SRF-CF    Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund

                                        19
SSA      State Statistical Agency (Nigeria)
TORs     Terms of reference
TTL      Task team leader
UEMOA    Union économique et monétaire ouest Africain (Economic and Monetary
         Union of West Africa)
UN       United Nations
UNAIDS   Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
UNDP     United Nations Development Programme
UNESCO   United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNFPA    United Nations Population Fund
UNICEF   United Nations Children's Fund
UNIDO    United Nations Industrial Development Organization
US AID   United States Agency for International Development
USS      User satisfaction survey
WB       World Bank
WHO      World Health Organization




                                    20
I.     Introduction
       i) Background and overview

1.      The World Bank is conducting an independent evaluation of the Pilot Phase of the
Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF). The main purpose of the evaluation is
to assess the experience of the programs in the pilot countries, to identify achievements to
date, and to recommend any changes in policies and practices that may be necessary in order
to improve results.
2.      The Statistics for Results Facility (SRF), which began its pilot phase in 2009 with
support from UK/DfID and the Netherlands, is a multi-donor initiative designed to provide
finance for investment in statistical capacity building in the poorest countries, act as a catalyst
in mobilizing additional resources, and improve the effectiveness of financial and technical
assistance. In terms of outcome, the objective of the SRF and of the Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF)
is to support the capacity building of developing countries to improve the production,
availability, and use of official statistics as a basis for evidence-based policy formulation and
decision making. In more practical terms, the SRF was designed to support the preparation
and effective implementation of national frameworks for the development of statistics such as
the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics or NSDSs.
3.      Compared to previous efforts to help build statistical capacity in developing countries
which were designed more narrowly, the SRF was established on the broader principles of
Managing for Development Results process (MfDR) and of the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness which, together, aim to: (i) ensure effective ownership and leadership by
countries in developing their national statistical systems; (ii) promote the alignment of donor
support using national framework for statistical development (such as NSDSs); (iii)
harmonize donor practices; (iv) support developing country efforts to generate better statistics
and use them to support evidence-based decision making; and (v) promote mutual
accountability by monitoring the implementation and outcomes of NSDSs while recognizing
that building sustainable statistical systems is a long-term effort.
4.      Drawing on lessons learned from sector-wide approaches used successfully in sectors
such as health, education and agriculture, the SRF promotes a system-wide approach to
strengthening national statistical systems. In particular it stresses the provision of support to
a country-owned and -led program to develop a national statistical system using country
systems and procedures for implementation. A system-wide approach also helps to promote a
stronger focus on strategic issues and coordination and to support a dialogue across the
national statistical system involving line ministries and sub-national entities where
applicable. At the same time, a system-wide approach provides the framework for aligning
donor support with country priorities and harmonizing donor support for more effective
capacity building.
5.      The experience gathered from pilot countries prior to this evaluation exercise suggests
that the system-wide approach is likely to be more successful when the following conditions
are in place:
          A well-prepared NSDS that takes into account the needs of the most important
           data-producing agencies and main data users;
          Strong leadership of the statistical system by the government and a general
           consensus on priorities both in terms of objectives and actions;
          Agreement on a medium- to long-term approach to statistical capacity
           building;

                                                21
          Due considerations to institutional reforms, human development issues, and
           technical challenges;
          A partnership for statistical support to improve donor coordination and the
           identification of a lead donor; and
          Recognition of the need to support and strengthen the dialogue between data
           providers and users.
6.      For the above elements to be in place, specific capacity building will be needed both
in participating countries and within the development partner local agencies. For participating
countries, this includes: the political will and national leadership to improve statistics;
effective financial management capacity; and adequate institutional and professional
expertise. In many countries technical assistance may be needed in some or all of these areas.
In addition, central statistical agencies will need to have the capacity to lead the reform
process while, at the same time, being able to maintain their regular work programs. For local
donor agencies, a genuine effort for technical and financial support coordination with a lead
donor has proven to be critical for success.

       ii) The pilot phase

7.      The pilot phase of the SRF-CF was set up to provide financial and technical support
to a limited number of countries that either had weak statistical capacity or had recently
emerged from conflict. Experience drawn from these countries was expected to help to
identify elements of the SRF approach that work well and the necessary modifications needed
to improve the impact of the SRF approach. An evaluation of the pilot countries and
recommendations for modifications to the approach of the SRF are expected to provide the
basis for extending the role of the Catalytic Fund in providing support for statistical capacity
building to other countries. In the meantime, non-pilot countries will be encouraged to make
investment in their statistical systems in line with the SRF principles.
8.       The SRF-CF Council is responsible for determining the criteria by which countries
were identified for the pilot phase to receive grants from the SRF-CF or technical assistance.
The criteria included primarily the level of statistical capacity and the extent of the country's
commitment to the SRF principles. In line with the SRF Charter, the Council identified five
countries that were invited by the Bank to submit applications for assistance during the pilot
phase, namely Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Ghana, Nigeria, and
Rwanda -- all IDA-eligible countries. These five countries represented various levels of
statistical development, diverse statistical systems and different problems and concerns. Two
of the countries – Afghanistan and DRC – were included on the basis of their status as fragile,
post- conflict states which posed particular problems relating to the development of statistical
capacity building.
9.     Following a decision in November 2010 to expand the pilot phase, the SRF-CF
Council agreed to invite three more countries -- Lao PDR, Senegal and Ethiopia -- to apply to
the SRF pilot phase. In light of new approaches and technologies that had emerged since the
SRF inception, the pilot phase was also extended to fund testing the use of innovative
approaches to data collection. In January 2013, the Council furthermore approved funding
for the 'Listening to Africa' project (L2A), a project aimed at piloting t he use of cell
phones to gather high frequency household level data in three African countries,
Cameroon, Malawi, and Senegal. Given the very early stage of preparation, this 2-
year project was not covered in this evaluation.
10.    As a general approach, the steps involved in the application for SRF support include:

                                               22
             The requirement that the country either has a statistical strategy for statistical
              development in place or under development, with high-level political
              endorsement;
             A formal request to the SRF-CF from the government seeking support for the
              implementation of the NSDS together with a broad proposal on the use of or plan
              to adopt a system-wide approach;
             The identification of budgetary resource requirements for statistics and multi-year
              national resource frameworks, such as medium-term expenditure frameworks
              where they exist;
             The initiation of a dialogue with local donor representatives;
             An agreement to the SRF principles by all or at least a core set of local donors
              who have expressed interest in providing support for statistical capacity building,
              and the identification of a lead donor to assist in coordinating the dialogue with
              the government; and
             The identification of existing initiatives in statistics and a clear understanding of
              how these support the implementation of the NSDS.
11.     Experience learned on the original five countries has led to some effort to simplify the
application and approval procedures for SRF projects. As of October 2013, four projects in
Afghanistan, Lao PDR, Nigeria and Rwanda are under implementation. The Lao PDR project
has just begun implementation. The Ghanaian project still awaits parliamentary approval and
the signing of legal documents by the Government to become effective. The DRC project is
in the negotiation stage while the remaining three projects (Ethiopia, L2A, and Senegal) are
at different stages of preparation (see Box 1).

                             Box 1: Status of pilot projects, as of October 2013

       Afghanistan ($14 m)         Implementation                 Effective since March 2011

                                                                  Negotiation expected in December
       DRC ($11.8 m)               Project finalization           2013

       Ethiopia (10 m)             Project preparation            Project appraisal in June 2013
                                                                  Subject to Parliamentary approval
       Ghana ($10 m)               Awaiting effectiveness

       Lao PDR ($8 m)              Implementation                 Effective since July 2013
                                                                  Concept note approved June 2013
       L2A ($1.8 m)                Project preparation

       Nigeria ($10 m)             Implementation                 Effective since June 2011
       Rwanda ($10 m)              Implementation                 Effective since June 2012
                                                                  Concept review in September 2013
       Senegal ($2.2 m)            Project preparation


       iii)    The evaluation: rationale, objectives, and intended outcomes

12.   According to the SRF Charter, once the projects in the pilot countries are well
underway, progress towards achieving results using the SRF approach would be evaluated

                                                     23
and assessed to learn what worked well and what elements would require modifications to
increase its impact. With the evidence from the assessment, the SRF could then be more
confidently expanded to include additional countries. The main purpose of the evaluation
would be to assess the experience of the pilot projects, to identify the achievements and
challenges and to recommend changes in policies and practices in order to improve results.

13.    The terms of reference (TORs) for the evaluation of the SRF-CF pilot phase were
discussed and agreed with donors in the spring of 2013, with the aim of assessing:
       a) How successfully the SRF-CF has achieved its objectives particularly in:
                i)     Promoting a system-wide approach in statistics at country level;
                ii)    Increasing resources for implementing country owned National
                       Statistical Plans;
                iii)   Linking improvements in the statistical system to the needs of national
                       and sectoral monitoring frameworks and promoting an improved
                       national dialogue and partnership between statistics users and
                       statistical producers; and
                iv)    Delivering more efficient and effective aid and technical assistance for
                       strengthening statistical systems and results measurement, through
                       better coordination and alignment to agreed national statistical plans
                       (such as NSDSs) and through better alignment to the Paris Declaration
                       on Aid Effectiveness;
       b) The impact of the in-country donor statisticians in helping countries reach the SRF
          objectives;
       c) How the governance arrangements and operational practices and procedures are
          working; and
       d) To recommend what changes may be needed to enable the SRF-CF to reach its
          objectives (as amended).




                                              24
II.    Methodology and conduct of the evaluation

       i) Scope of the evaluation

14.      The period covered by this evaluation is relatively short -- since the establishment of
the SRF pilot phase in 2009 -- and only four of the nine pilot projects are under full
implementation, with the Lao PDR project becoming effective while the evaluation was
underway. Thus the assessment, as described under the objectives detailed above, focuses
more on processes and outputs than on final outcomes, which would have required an
investigation into the broader practice of evidence-based policy-making based on improved
statistical information. Based on discussions the evaluators have had with eight of the nine
teams in charge of the preparation and implementation of the country-based pilot projects, a
list of questions was identified to address specific demands for information related to the
broad areas of inquiry agreed by the SRF donors. Drawing on the findings of the field visits
to Nigeria and Rwanda as well as discussions with PARIS21 staff, these questions were
refined and other questions added to help further explore lessons from the pilot projects. The
thrust of the questions is discussed in more detail below.

       ii) Methodology and design of the evaluation

15.      The questions designed for the assessment of how successful the SRF has been in
achieving its intended objectives can be logically grouped into three categories. The first
group of questions relates to outputs and practices engendered by the SRF-CF approach,
namely: (i) the promotion of a system-wide approach in statistics at the country level; (ii) an
increase, actual or potential, in the resources in the pilot countries for implementing their
statistical development plans or strategies; (iii) a linkage of improvements in the statistical
system to the needs of national and sectoral monitoring frameworks; and (iv) the promotion
of an improved national dialogue and partnership between statistics users and producers. The
second group of questions refers more specifically to inputs and contributions to the above
objectives made possible by the SRF approach, namely: (i) the delivery of more efficient and
effective aid and technical assistance for strengthening statistical systems; and (ii) the impact
of the in-country donor statisticians. The third set of questions covers broad governance
issues related to the SRF Charter and to arrangements and operational practices and
procedures for the preparation and implementation of pilot projects. These three sets of
questions are summarized in the following paragraphs.
16.     Group I: Outputs and practices engendered by the SRF-CF approach
           a) The role played by the SRF in helping to promote a system-wide approach in
              statistics at the country level, which covers issues such as: i) the degree of
              inclusiveness in the formulation and implementation of the national strategy
              for the development of statistics (NSDS); ii) the degree of acceptance by local
              development partners of a system-wide approach which is led and owned by
              the government; and iii) the extent of the challenge that the system-wide
              approach imposes on countries, especially those with weak human and
              institutional capacity.
           b) The role played by the SRF in helping to increase resources for
              implementing country-owned national statistical plans and strategies,
              which covers issues such as: i) the impact on government budgetary
              resources for statistics and on contributions by donors; ii) the extent to
              which SRF funds should be used as core finance for NSDS implementation;

                                               25
              and iii) more specifically for the World Bank, the relationship between the
              SRF Catalytic Fund and IDA funding.
          c) The role played (currently or potentially) by the SRF in linking statistical
             improvements to the monitoring of the MDGs and other country-specific
             needs and priorities (including sectoral projects), which covers issues such as:
             i) i) evidence that the SRF has led to improvement in the production, quality
             and timeliness of data; and ii) instances where the SRF has helped to enhance
             the accessibility and usability of data (through, for example, 'open data' and
             web-based initiatives).
          d) The role played by the SRF in helping to promote an improved national
             dialogue and partnership between users and producers of statistics which
             covers issues such as: i) evidence that the SRF has led to efforts to enhance the
             capacity of data users (e.g., through the training of journalists); and ii) the
             experience with user satisfaction surveys, which are a requirement under the
             SRF approach.
17.    Group II: Inputs and contributions to the above made possible by the SRF approach
          a) The role played by the SRF in helping to deliver more efficient and effective
             aid and technical assistance for strengthening statistical systems and results
             measurement through better alignment to the Paris Declaration on Aid
             Effectiveness, which covers issues such as: i) the extent to which the SRF has
             had any impact in better aligning support for statistical capacity building to the
             NSDSs; and ii) evidence that the SRF approach has led to improved donor
             coordination at the local level.
          b) The impact of the in-country donor statisticians in helping to reach the SRF
             objectives.
18.    Group III: SRF governance arrangements and operational practices adopted by the
       World Bank
          a) Broad issues related to the SRF Charter such as: i) the realism of the
             expectations placed on the SRF both in terms of impact and timing; ii) the
             practice of inviting selected countries, including post-conflict countries
             with very weak statistical capacity, to apply for SRF grants (rather than
             having countries      compete for SRF funds) and how this may have
             impacted the SRF approach; iii) the setting of the usual amount of SRF
             funding at US$10 million irrespective of country size or stage of statistical
             development and iv) the possible extension of the SRF, hitherto
             comprising almost exclusively country-specific projects, to regional
             initiatives and operations;
          b) The impact of current World Bank operational practices and procedures on the
             implementation of the SRF, which covers issues such as: i) the ease or
             otherwise of the SRF grant approval and disbursement process; ii) the degree
             of attention paid by Bank line management to SRF projects; iii) the possible
             advantage of making SRF grants part of a larger Bank project; and iv)
             experience with the SRF generic Results Framework.
19.     The above issues and questions provided a common framework for the evaluation,
and were addressed by the Evaluation Team through a combination of methodologies. These
included in-depth discussions with Task Team Leaders and in-country statisticians, field
visits to Nigeria and Rwanda, and the administration of questionnaires. In addition, desk

                                             26
studies were undertaken of various World Bank reports and working documents from pilot
countries. A review based on World Bank reports was conducted to i) categorize the
characteristics of the SRF approach by item across countries and ii) provide an assessment of
progress over time from the project preparation period to the most recent information
obtained from the questionnaires. A list of the major source documents consulted appears in
Annex 7.
20.      At the start of the evaluation in May 2013, SRF projects were actually under
implementation in only three countries (see Box 1); this rather limited implementation
experience posed significant challenges in drawing conclusions from the assessment. To
partly remedy this lack of information, the Evaluation Team attempted to make extensive use
of a questionnaire covering the questions and issues detailed above, along with some general
questions relating to the principles underlying the SRF. For countries in which the SRF
projects are not yet under implementation, the Team hoped that the questionnaire would
provide useful information on the readiness of pilot countries to adopt the SRF-CF approach
to statistical capacity building.
21.     The fact that the questionnaire had to address a range of situations with respect to
implementation status and other factors, such as the presence or absence of an in-country
donor statistician, had an impact on its design. Thus questions were often couched in terms
of potential as well as actual effects in the countries of the SRF approach, and respondents
were frequently given the option of signaling their uncertainty about the impact of the SRF
project, or of indicating that it was too early to judge the effect of SRF-related activities – an
entirely reasonable position to take in countries where the SRF project had yet to commence.
The master questionnaire designed is shown in Annex 1 (in its English version; it was
translated into French for DR Congo and Senegal). Given the likelihood that some
respondents would not be very familiar with the Statistics for Results Facility, the
questionnaire as administered to respondents was accompanied by a short introduction to the
SRF – this also appears in Annex 1.
22.    The Evaluation Team recognized that there were several different groups of
stakeholders involved in the SRF and categorized them as follows:
         World Bank task team leaders (TTL);
         Primary recipient agencies of the SRF grant, usually national statistical offices
          (NSO);
         Other agencies within government involved in producing and/or using statistics,
          including line ministries, central banks, ministries of finance etc. (OGA);
         Other national users of statistics such as the media, researchers, academia,
          chambers of commerce and other civil society organizations (ONU);
         In-country donor statisticians (IDS);
         Local bilateral and multilateral development partners with an interest in supporting
          statistics (LDP); and
         National poverty reduction or MDG coordination units (PRC).
23.    Slightly different versions of the master questionnaire were formulated for
administration to the various stakeholder groups identified above. The purpose was not only
to reduce the response burden but also to attempt to restrict questions to those which each
stakeholder group might reasonably be expected to have knowledge of and an opinion on; for
example, specific questions such as the relationship of the SFR grant to other World Bank
funding were dropped for some groups of stakeholders. It was also hoped that the
questionnaire would, besides providing feedback on the relevance and effectiveness of the


                                               27
SRF, also help to enlighten the evaluators on the dynamics of relationships between various
users of data and the national statistical offices.

24.    The questionnaires as administered were also made country-specific, citing where
possible the title of the national statistical development strategy and the name of the national
partnership group or other institutional mechanism in the field of statistics, as well as the
name of the in-country donor statistician where one was present. While most of the questions
were framed as multiple choices, the questionnaire also encouraged the provision of written
comments and elaborations on the various themes addressed.

           iii)     Conduct of the evaluation

25.     The evaluation commenced in mid-May 2013 and a member of the Evaluation Team
undertook an inception mission to World Bank Headquarters towards the end of May; an
inception report was subsequently submitted to DECDG. Telephone interviews were held
with Task Team Leaders and in-country statisticians from late May to the end of July, as
opportunities arose (those contacted are listed in Annex 6). The Evaluation Team conducted
a field mission to Nigeria and Rwanda, coupled with a visit to offices of PARIS21 and the
OECD in Paris, from 12 to 27 June 2013 (see Annexes 3 and 5). One member of the Team
also visited DfID Headquarters in East Kilbride, United Kingdom, on 24 July 2013.

26.     After finalizing the master questionnaire, the Evaluation Team sought the assistance
of the Task Team Leaders and in-country donor statisticians in drawing up lists of potential
respondents to the questionnaire in each country. It is important to note that of the seven
categories of stakeholders (see paragraph 22 above) only the Task Team Leaders and in-
country statisticians were readily identifiable1. For the other categories, the Team requested
that persons and agencies involved in the implementation or preparation of the SRF project,
or those active in the NSDS or national institutional mechanisms in the field of statistics, be
identified along with their email addresses. TTLs or in-country statisticians were also
requested to designate a team assistant in the World Bank office, not directly involved with
the SRF project, who could follow up with non-respondents and deal with any questionnaires
that were returned in hard copy form.
27.     The process of drawing up the lists of potential respondents took some time and was
not completed until the middle of August 2013. Consequently the dispatch of the
questionnaires became a drawn-out exercise covering some six weeks. Given the
considerable difference in the size of the countries and the status of implementation of the
respective SRF projects, it was to be expected that the length of the respondent lists would
vary: from 23 in DR Congo to 74 in Nigeria, with a median of 40. These differences need to
be borne in mind when comparing response rates. In addition, the composition of the lists
also varied considerably: in two countries, there were very few other government agencies
(OGA) on the list, while four countries provided hardly any or no stakeholders in the
category of other national users (ONU). No doubt this reflects to some extent the stage of
development of the official statistical community in the countries concerned, and the degree
of inclusiveness of the process of developing the respective national strategies for the
development of statistics.
28.     Significant problems were encountered in soliciting responses from questionnaire
recipients. This was due to a number of factors including invalid email addresses, the


1
    In fact, during the period of the evaluation, there was some turnover of TTLs of the SRF projects.

                                                         28
absence of many recipients on summer leave,2 rapid turnover of personnel with consequent
loss of institutional memory (particularly among local development partners), a reported lack
of knowledge about the SRF and, in some countries, objections to the concept of evaluating a
project which had not yet commenced.3
29.     After a number of reminders from the Evaluation Team and active follow-up by the
respective World Bank team assistants and by DECDG, and in some cases the TTLs and in-
country statisticians, a total of 110 responses were received by the Team, representing an
overall response rate of 36 per cent. In a few instances, the Team noted that individual
replies had been provided on behalf of multiple recipients in the same agency, thus implying
a slightly wider coverage of respondents than the figures would otherwise indicate. For the
purposes of analysis, Afghanistan, Nigeria and Rwanda were termed ‘implementing
countries, and the remainder ‘pipeline countries’. The responses by country and by
stakeholder group are shown below:

                                                   Table 3
                                   Questionnaire response rates by country

                                                   Questionnaires                       Response rate
                                            Dispatched         Received                  (per cent)

      Afghanistan                               43                  19                       44
      Nigeria                                   70                  20                       29
      Rwanda                                    38                  18                       47

      All implementing countries                151                 57                       38

      DR Congo                                  22                   6                       27
      Ethiopia                                  38                  13                       34
      Ghana                                     32                  10                       31
      Lao PDR                                   33                  14                       42
      Senegal                                   28                  10                       36

      All pipeline countries                    153                 53                       35

      All SRF countries                         304                110                       36

      Note: excludes questionnaires dispatched to invalid email addresses

      Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




2
  Other evaluations, including those of the Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building, have observed that it
was difficult to contact World Bank and other agency staff during July and August.
3
  When the opportunity presented itself, the Evaluation Team stressed that the assessment was focusing on the
approach to the SRF rather than on the progress of the individual country projects; they pointed out that several
of the questions related to the prerequisites or conditions that are supposed to be in place for the SRF approach
to be successful, and that these should be relevant even in countries just embarking on the SRF. Nonetheless,
there is no doubt that this factor dissuaded some questionnaire recipients from responding.


                                                       29
                                           Table 4
                    Questionnaire response rates by stakeholder group

                                                      Questionnaires       Response rate
                                                 Dispatched     Received     (per cent)

 TTL    Task Team Leaders                             13           12           92
 NSO    Primary recipient agencies                    69           41           59
 OGA Other government agencies                        83           19           23
 ONU Other national users                             23               5        22
 IDS    In-country donor statisticians                 4               4        100
 LDP    Local development partners                    109          29           27
 PRC    Poverty reduction or MDG units                 3               0         0

        All stakeholder groups                        304         110           36


 Note: excludes questionnaires dispatched to invalid email addresses

 Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013


As noted earlier, the questionnaire encouraged recipients to provide additional comments on
the particular topics covered by the survey as well as on any other aspect of the SRF. Over
1000 comments were received, and contributed significantly to the understanding of the
Evaluation Team of the issues involved.
30.     Analysis of the completed questionnaires continued into September 2013 and report
writing proceeded concurrently. Given the lack of any responses from the PRC group, it was
decided to exclude them from the tabulations. Following completion of the draft report by
end-October 2013, comments were received from DECDG requesting further input from the
Evaluation Team on selected issues. This material was incorporated into the Team’s final
report in February 2014. One member of the Evaluation Team was scheduled to present the
final report on the evaluation at a side event to the United Nations Statistical Commission in
early March 2014.

       iv) Limitations to the evaluation

31.    In reaching its findings and preparing its conclusions and recommendations, the
Evaluation Team has drawn not only on the quantitative analysis of the questionnaire
responses but also on the numerous comments supplied by respondents, as well as the in-
depth discussions with the Task Team Leaders and the in-country statisticians, the field visits
to Nigeria and Rwanda, and the desk study of documentation. To the extent possible, the
Team has attempted to verify the findings and recommendations of this assessment with key
stakeholders, and in particular with World Bank TTLs, in-country donor statisticians, the


                                                 30
heads of the primary recipient agencies and PARIS21 colleagues who have extensive
familiarity with NSDSs and resource mobilization for support to statistics.
32.     Nevertheless, it was clear from the outset of the evaluation that drawing conclusions
from the experience of a relatively small group of countries, a majority of which had not
commenced implementation of their SRF projects, would present a significant challenge. In
view of this and in the light of the response to the questionnaire, detailed in Tables 3 and 4
above, care needs to be exercised in interpreting the findings of the evaluation. In particular,
the Evaluation Team draws attention to the widely differing response rates among the various
stakeholder groups, and to the likelihood that different groups may have different ‘stakes’ in
the outcome of the assessment. Comparisons between countries also need to be undertaken
with care, because of the different mix of respondents from each country. These points need
to be borne in mind when considering this report.




                                              31
III.   Main findings

       i) Promoting a system-wide approach in statistics at the country level

33.      The SRF promotes a comprehensive system-wide approach to strengthening national
statistical systems, which is defined broadly as the country having a clear nationally owned
strategy for statistics with arrangements for resources, broad consultation mechanisms that
involve all stakeholders, mechanisms for dialogue, coordination, and monitoring and
evaluation
34.      Over 70 per cent of respondents in the countries which have started SRF
implementation believe that the SRF-CF is at least somewhat successful in promoting a
system-wide approach to statistics in the respective countries (see Table 5 below and Table
II.5 in Annex 2). That figure rises to around 80 per cent when respondents who feel
optimistic in this regard are added in. The equivalent figure for countries where
implementation has yet to fully commence is 50 per cent, with 43 per cent of respondents in
the pipeline countries feeling that it is too early to judge. In the implementing countries, the
national statistical office respondents were more sanguine than others about the SRF’s
success in promoting the system-wide approach. Task Team Leaders and in-country
statisticians were noticeably more cautious than other respondents in coming to a conclusion
on this issue.
35.     Among the implementing countries, contributory factors to the perceived success of
the SRF project in promoting the system-wide approach included SRF support for the
operationalization of clear prioritized statistical development strategies (in Nigeria primarily
at the state level), the alignment of donors (with some exceptions) behind those strategies,
and the promotion by the SRF of dialogues between the national statistical office and
development partners and among government institutions. SRF support has also helped
foster technical and other coordination mechanisms and coordinated development initiatives,
although it was noted that more needs to be done.
36.      SRF projects have also helped strengthen a system-wide approach through capacity
building of the statistical systems at national (and in Nigeria, state) level through the
implementation of various activities including training and the availability and practical use
of information technology. That support has to date been primarily through the national
statistical office, although in Nigeria it has been successfully used to bring the National
Population Commission and the National Bureau of Statistics into closer collaboration (see
Annex 3).
37.      In Rwanda some respondents noted that the late arrival of the SRF monies into the
existing basket fund operation for statistics made it difficult to assign credit to the SRF for
facilitating a system-wide approach, although the clear recognition in the upcoming NSDS2
of the need to strengthen the capacity of the major data-producing MDAs will provide that
opportunity in the near future. Other reported factors which hampered the SRF’s potential
for promoting the system-wide approach included delays in the twinning partner procurement
process in Afghanistan, and mixed experience at the state level in Nigeria.
38.    In the pipeline countries, where many respondents understandably noted that it was
premature to draw conclusions, some nevertheless saw reasonable promise in the SRF’s
potential to promote a system-wide approach to statistics.




                                              32
                                                               Table 5
                                Success of the SRF-CF in promoting a system-wide approach



1E Overall, how successful do you                                        Barely                       Too
consider the SRF-CF to be in                                         successful or       Promises    early
promoting a system-wide approach to     Very       Somewhat         not successful at      to be       to      No       Total
statistics in [name of country]?      successful   successful              all          successful   judge   answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                    19              22               4                5         7        0         57
Pipeline countries                        7               8                1               12         23       2         53


All SRF countries                         26              30               5               17         30       2        110


Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                    33              39               7                9         12       0
Pipeline countries                        13              15               2               23         43       4


All SRF countries                         24              27               5               15         27       2


Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                       25              17               0                0         58       0         12
NSO                                       32              22               2               22         22       0         41
OGA                                       26              32               11              16         16       0         19
ONU                                       20              60               0               20         0        0         5
IDS                                       ..              ..               ..               ..        ..       ..        4
LDP                                       10              31               7               14         31       7         29


Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed


Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                          33
                   a) Inclusiveness of the NSDS
39.     The requirements for developing a system-wide approach to statistical development at
the country level include a well-prepared statistical strategy in place or being developed, with
high-level political endorsement. Although the Evaluation Team did not make any detailed
study of the national statistical development strategies of the countries in which the SRF is
operating or is scheduled to operate, it did seek to determine the degree of inclusiveness of
the approach to formulating each NSDS. Inclusiveness in this context refers both to the
participation of key stakeholders and the coverage of important sectors.
40.     The SRF prerequisite of an inclusive NSDS was felt to be met at least to some extent
by 85 per cent of all respondents, with over half (53 per cent) indicating that the process was
very inclusive (see Table II.1 in Annex 2). Ethiopia and Afghanistan fell somewhat below
that figure, while respondents from Senegal were unanimous that the NSDS had been
formulated in a very inclusive manner, and added comments to that effect. Among
stakeholder groups, three-quarters of TTLs and national statistical offices felt the process had
been very inclusive; other groups were significantly less positive, with over a quarter of local
development partners indicating uncertainty on the matter.

                   b) Role of development partners
41.    Some 63 per cent of respondents who were not development partners noted that
development partners with an interest in supporting statistics very much agreed with the
development of a system-wide approach (see Table II.2 in Annex 2). When those who
somewhat agreed were added in, the figure rose to 90 per cent; indeed nobody opposed the
notion. That being said, confidence in developing partners very much agreeing with the
system-wide approach was considerably less than average in Ethiopia and Afghanistan.
42.     When a similar question was posed to the development partners themselves, support
for the development of a system-wide approach was less pronounced, but nevertheless fully
80 per cent of development partners subscribed to this view at least to some extent (see Table
II.3 in Annex 2). Local development partners in the implementing countries were generally
more positive than those from the pipeline countries, so it is possible that enthusiasm for the
approach will increase among development partners as implementation gets under way.
43.     Local development partners, in both implementing and pipeline countries, identified
two groups of problems when asked about difficulties they might face in being involved in or
supporting the development of a system-wide approach. One group of issues concerned
limitations on the part of national institutions: limited technical and human resource
capacities in national statistical offices, difficulties of coordination among government
agencies, and a lack of commitment from some government partners; in one case a lack of
consultation was cited as the reason for minimal involvement of a donor agency in the
country’s system-wide approach.
44.    A second set of difficulties, at least as large as the first, related to development
partners themselves. Local donor agencies sometimes lacked in-house organizational
capacity, as well as technical expertise in the field of statistics, which was not a focal area for
some donors. Constant turnover among development partner staff (including in some
instances Task Team Leaders of SRF projects) was also an issue, inhibiting the development
of a common understanding and purpose in relations with the national statistical leadership.
There was, in addition, an admitted lack of harmonization and coordination among some
development partners, who were tied to their own statistical support agendas; in one case an



                                                34
agency’s own mandate and financial arrangements meant that it could work only with the
national statistical office rather than the broader statistical system.

               c) Challenges to the system-wide approach
45.    Despite some positive findings about the success of the SRF in promoting a system-
wide approach, the survey results did not suggest that implementation of such an approach
would be a straightforward task. To the contrary, 35 per cent of respondents indicated that a
system-wide approach would pose a significant challenge and another 45 per cent a moderate
challenge. Only 15 per cent of respondents overall indicated that a system-wide approach
would not pose any significant challenge in their countries (see Table II.4 in Annex 2). That
proportion varied somewhat among both implementing and pipeline countries, with Rwanda
and Ghana predicting the fewest problems and respondents in DR Congo, Lao PDR, Nigeria
and Senegal citing the greatest challenges. Among stakeholder groups, Task Team Leaders
were the most likely to rate the system-wide approach as a great challenge.
46.      The lack of a data culture in society and limited capacity of the national statistical
system, often of the national statistical office but almost inevitably of other government
agencies, line ministries and provincial and local administrations, were again cited by
respondents as a challenge to the establishment of a system-wide approach. In some
countries, fragmented legislative structures for statistical work, highly decentralized
statistical systems, and a lack of harmonized statistical procedures and processes also
provided obstacles. The capacity of statistical offices in many countries was adversely
affected by uncompetitive salaries and high turnover.
47.     Even where assistance was being brought to bear, for example through twinning
arrangements, it was felt that a lack of institutional, management and coordination capacity
in the national statistical office may still limit the effective achievement of a system-wide
approach. It was pointed out that the development of such an approach could be challenging
not only as concerns implementation but also in terms of conceptualization, and of
prioritization of user needs and management of user expectations. On a practical level,
managing different procurement procedures in a multi-donor environment could also be
problematic.
48.     A shortfall of political will and commitment in some countries was also seen by
respondents as hampering the development of a system-wide approach. Contributing factors
were the weak collaboration of agencies within the statistical system, and the failure of
government to take a leading and sustained role in mobilizing funding for statistics including
infrastructure and ICT facilities; it was noted that the effective implementation of a system-
wide approach demanded resource availability over the medium and long term. In Nigeria,
challenges were also seen in the relative autonomy of the states and the slow pace of strategic
planning in statistics in some of them.
49.     In addition to the problems mentioned earlier by local development partners, the past
(and sometimes present) practice of different development partners supporting different line
ministries also created difficulties. Not infrequently, development partners lacked an overall
vision, and pressure for short-term results still often favored one-off survey activities rather
than system-wide development. The separate development of project-related data collection
mechanisms and databases, project teams working in parallel to the civil service (and
sometimes poaching its best talent), and the fact that much if not most funding for statistics
came from donors not government, also militated against the system-wide approach. In a
large country like Nigeria, where donors tended to focus their statistical activities in different
sets of states, parallel systems could be created.

                                               35
        ii) Increasing resources for implementing national statistical plans

50.     As the name of the SRF Catalytic Fund indicates, the initiative was designed in part to
help mobilize additional resources from other sources for the implementation of country-
owned national statistical plans and statistical development strategies. While acknowledging
that levels of funding for strategy implementation, from both government and development
partners, were difficult to measure exactly 4 , the Evaluation Team designed a number of
questions to attempt to gauge the extent to which this SRF objective was being met in the
pilot phase countries.

51.     Half of all respondents considered that the SRF-CF had been either very successful or
somewhat successful in increasing resources for implementing national statistical
development strategies.       However, that figure included pipeline countries where,
unsurprisingly, as many as 47 per cent of respondents indicated that it was too early to judge
(see Table 6 below and Table II.16 in Annex 2). When looked at from the more realistic
perspective of implementing countries alone, 72 per cent stated that the SRF-CF had been at
least somewhat successful in attracting supplementary resources; in Afghanistan, that figure
rose to 90 per cent. On this issue, there were no particularly large differences of opinion
among the various stakeholder groups.
52.     In commenting on this topic, respondents cited some specific instances where
additional resources had been found for implementing survey activities within the NSDS, as
well as support for capacity building and coordination related to the NSDS. In several cases
the increase in resources could be traced to particular activities funded or promoted by the
SRF, including statistical advocacy leading to greater awareness of the important role played
by statistics, and institutional improvements in the pilot states of Nigeria. Positive results
from SRF projects, along with the secure nature of SRF funding, were stated to be
instrumental in helping to build confidence in both influential government agencies and
among other development partners, opening up the actual or potential flow of resources.
However, as noted earlier, there was a delay in the arrival of the SRF funds in Rwanda, and
some respondents felt that the SRF’s catalytic potential would be fully put to the test only
during the course of the upcoming NSDS2.

                 a) Effect on domestic resources

53.     The questionnaire attempted to obtain details of the effect on domestic and external
resources of the decision of each country to enroll in the SRF pilot phase. Regarding
domestic resources for statistics, 39 per cent of all respondents indicated that funding had
already increased. Interestingly, this figure was slightly higher for pipeline countries than for
implementing countries (see Table II.6 in Annex 2), but it must be noted that there was a very
wide variation among countries and a significant proportion of respondents (30 per cent
overall) who were not sure of the domestic resource situation. In Rwanda, respondents
specifically noted that the increase in domestic resources for the NSDS had preceded the
arrival of the SRF funding.




4
 The original indicators on increased resources have been dropped from the current version of the SRF Results
Framework.

                                                     36
                                                                  Table 6
           Success of the SRF-CF in increasing resources for implementing national statistical development strategies

2I Overall, how successful do you                                         Barely
consider the SRF-CF to be in increasing                                 successful                 Too
resources for implementing the national                                   or not      Promises    early
statistical development strategy in [name     Very       Somewhat       successful      to be       to      No            Total
of country]?                                successful   successful        at all    successful   judge   answer        responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                         22           19              2            8         6        0              57
Pipeline countries                              9            5              0           12         25       2              53

All SRF countries                              31           24              2           20         31       2             110

Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                         39           33              4           14         11       0
Pipeline countries                             17            9              0           23         47       4

All SRF countries                              28           22              2           18         28       2

Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                            33           17              0            8         42       0              12
NSO                                            29           27              0           22         22       0              41
OGA                                            42           11              5           26         11       5              19
ONU                                            20           20              0           40         20       0              5
IDS                                             ..           ..             ..           ..        ..       ..             4
LDP                                            17           24              3           10         41       3              29

Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.

Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                          37
54.     Nearly half of all respondents did not answer follow-up questions on domestic
resources, presumably because of a lack of knowledge or a view that no increase was
forthcoming or planned (see Tables II.7 and II.8 in Annex 2). Of those who did reply, Task
Team Leaders, in-country statisticians and NSOs were far more likely to report significant
increases than were other government agencies or development partners. What emerges
clearly is that only 10 per cent of respondents attributed increases in domestic resources
directly to the SRF, with a similar percentage indicating that the increase would have
occurred anyway.

               b) Effect on development partner resources

55.      When respondents other than development partners were asked about the performance
of the latter, one third indicated that development partners had already increased resources for
statistical work – a figure that was corroborated by the donors themselves (see Tables II.9 and
A.12 in Annex 2). However, when it came to the future intentions of development partners,
respondents – particularly those from national statistical offices and other government
agencies – were far more optimistic about plans to increase resources for statistics than were
the donors. As was the case for domestic resources, there was a significant ‘don’t know’
component, and follow-up questions on resources of development partners also drew a fairly
high rate of non-response among the other stakeholder groups.
56.      This notwithstanding, around 60 per cent of respondents who were not development
partners indicated that donors had increased, or planned to increase, resources for statistics to
at least a moderate degree. The equivalent figure among donor respondents was only 27 per
cent, with the rest not replying to that question (see Tables II.10 and II.13 in Annex 2). In
similar vein, 20 per cent of respondents in other stakeholder groups considered that
development partner increases in resources were directly attributable to the SRF, with another
22 per cent citing indirect attribution; in stark contrast, only 2 donor respondents (7 per cent)
attributed their increases to the SRF (see Tables II.11 and II.14 in Annex 2). Whatever the
situation, it is clear that the direct effect of the SRF on increases in resources for statistics in
the pilot countries, both from domestic and external sources, has so far been quite modest.
57.     A further issue which has emerged clearly is a significant divergence of views about
the plans of development partners with regard to future disbursements for statistics. With
most donor countries facing budget constraints, their increased reluctance to discuss the
future availability of funding is understandable. There would nevertheless seem to be scope
for the freer exchange of information within national partnership groups and similar bodies,
so that a much clearer idea can be gained of the future availability of funding for the
implementation of national statistical development strategies.

               c) The SRF as possible core finance for NSDS implementation

58.     The Evaluation Team’s questionnaire also elicited opinions on whether SFR funds
should be seen as core finance for implementing the respective national statistical
development strategies (see Table II.15 in Annex 2). More than half of all respondents
replied in the affirmative, and the figure rose to 60 per cent in the implementing countries,
although respondents in Nigeria were markedly less enthusiastic than those in Afghanistan
and Rwanda.
59.    In support of the majority view that SFR funding should constitute core finance for
NSDS implementation, respondents stated that government resources for statistical work
were often very inadequate; many if not all SRF countries did not possess sufficient domestic

                                                38
resources to fully finance their NSDS. In addition, resources from other development
partners were in many instances also limited, and in some cases donors were seen to have
changing and inconsistent agendas; moreover they often financed particular surveys or
training courses. In that environment the SRF was seen as central and sustained core funding
for broader, more fundamental issues such as institutional development (especially in post-
conflict countries), capacity building, ICT and statistical infrastructure, and the statistical
capacity of line ministries, thus helping to institutionalize a system-wide approach to
statistics through the NSDS.
60.      Elsewhere, it was noted that the SRF resources were being utilized for the collection
and dissemination of data in line with the NSDS and its priorities. In situations where the
SRF was financing equipment, it was felt that recurrent funding to maintain it should also be
included, as regular government funding was not always sufficient for this purpose. In at
least one pipeline country, SRF funding for NSDS implementation was seen as helping move
the process forward and contributing to future resource mobilization from other sources; in
addition, since the NSDS would provide the overall statistical development framework for
government and development partners, it was important that the SRF be closely associated
with it.
61.      Those respondents who commented that SRF funds should not be used as core
finance for the NSDS were in a minority, although they were more likely to articulate their
views than those who were in favor. Their objections were essentially on two grounds. First,
in countries such as Nigeria and Ghana, and in Senegal where the allocation is very modest,
SRF funding is seen to comprise only a very small proportion of total requirements for
statistical development and NSDS implementation, and thus cannot have the necessary
impact to be viewed as core finance. In this context, the Evaluation Team notes that while the
SRF grants may be limited relative to the needs of NSDS implementation, they are generally
much larger than what has been provided for statistical capacity building from other sources,
either bilateral or multilateral.
62.     Second, and an opinion expressed more frequently5, is that core financing for the
NSDS should be the responsibility of the government for purposes of ownership and
sustainability, given that all national development goals were anchored on evidence-based
planning, and assuming that the SRF funding would not be provided indefinitely. In Nigeria
and Ghana at least, it was felt that adequate internal resources could be mobilized for the
proper funding of the statistical agencies, but the political will might not be present; the SRF-
CF should remain in a catalytic role, as its title specifies, creating an appropriate environment
for improved data production and dissemination.
63.     While giving varied replies to the question, a number of respondents emphasized the
importance of the SRF funding being catalytic in the short to medium term, in the sense of
producing results in a selected number of key critical areas. That could help boost the profile
of statistics and demonstrate why they are important, thus providing a platform for
government and other donors to join and contribute their support over a longer timeframe.
64.     Among the respondents who were undecided on the issue, the view was expressed
that much depended on how well the SRF was managed and the extent to which the
provisions of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness could be implemented. While an
objective of the SRF was to stimulate the flow of resources from other sources, the danger of
the government actually reducing funding for statistics when donor finance increased was
mentioned by one respondent, although there was no evidence that that had happened in

5
    Particularly among respondents in Ghana.

                                               39
respect of the SRF. In addition, a respondent in one country expressed the view that, outside
the SRF, budgetary resources for statistics were being decreased and were unlikely to
increase in the medium term.
65.      In commenting on this question, respondents from Rwanda made frequent reference
to the existing basket fund for statistical work, to which the SRF funds were added in 2012
(see Annex 3 for more details). The Evaluation Team notes that the dynamic statistical
leadership evident in Rwanda, along with a strong results focus within government, has
provided an environment conducive to the establishment and smooth operation of the basket
fund. It nevertheless was impressed by the efficacy of this vehicle, which appears to be
unique in the field of statistics, and was encouraged by suggestions elsewhere that other
development partners might use the SRF (or a window in it) to channel their own resources
for statistical development.

                 d) Optimal relationship between the SRF-CF and IDA funding

66.     In answering this question, and while recognizing that the optimal relationship might
be country-specific, respondents most commonly mentioned complementarity. Ideally, SRF
and IDA programs would be prepared jointly; such coordination and linkage would avoid
duplication of support and help ensure a wider, more coherent approach to statistical
development. 6 In larger countries especially, SRF finance could be used as counterpart
funding or to leverage larger-scale IDA lending, which was seen as critical support for the
overall success of SRF-CF funded projects; IDA funding should build on SRF work and
support the priority activities it identified. Where IDA terms were stringent, linking SRF and
IDA finance could make investment in statistics (and particularly in statistical systems) a less
unattractive proposition. It was felt important that IDA funding for statistics should be more
strategic, possibly eschewing support for stand-alone surveys in favor of longer-term
strengthening of statistical systems.

        iii) Linking statistical systems to the needs of national monitoring
             frameworks

67.    One of the aims of the SRF Catalytic Fund is to explicitly link improvements in the
capacity and outputs of the statistical system with the requirements of existing national
monitoring frameworks, such as those for the Millennium Development Goals and poverty
reduction strategies, as well as of sectoral frameworks in each country.
68.     The most frequent answer overall to this question, as posed in the Evaluation Team’s
survey, was that it was too early to judge the performance of the SRF against this criterion.
But in the implementing countries, some 60 per cent of respondents felt that the SRF was
being at least somewhat successful in fostering this linkage (see Table 7 below and Table
II.20 in Annex 2), and the figure rose to 75 per cent in Nigeria. In these implementing
countries, local development partners were more likely than other stakeholder groups to
withhold judgment on this aspect of the SRF.




6
  In the case of Ghana, however, the linkage of the two programs caused the SRF project to be delayed. One
element of the IDA credit is to support implementation of institutional reforms including staff redundancy, for
which parliamentary approval has yet to be granted. However, the main reason for the delay was the decision by
the Ministry of Finance not to sign any more loans for the time being due to the worsening fiscal environment.

                                                      40
                                                               Table 7
        Success of the SRF in linking improvements in the statistical system to the needs of monitoring frameworks


3D Overall, how successful do
you consider the SRF to be in
linking improvements in the                                         Barely
statistical system to the needs of                                successful                   Too
national and sectoral monitoring                                    or not        Promises    early
frameworks in [name of                 Very       Somewhat       successful at      to be       to      No       Total
country]?                            successful   successful          all        successful   judge   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                  19           16                  3           8         10       1            57
Pipeline countries                       6            5                  1          11         24       6            53

All SRF countries                       25           21                  4          19         34       7            110

Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                  33           28                  5          14         18       2
Pipeline countries                      11            9                  2          21         45      11

All SRF countries                       23           19                  4          17         31       6

Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                     25            8                  0          17         42       8            12
NSO                                     24           20                  2          20         34       0            41
OGA                                     26           26               11            26         5        5            19
ONU                                     40           60                  0           0         0        0            5
IDS                                      ..           ..                 ..          ..        ..       ..           4
LDP                                     14           10                  3          14         41      17            29

Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed

Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                           41
69.      Some comments by respondents (in Afghanistan as well as in the pipeline countries)
echoed the above sentiment that this question was premature, and others did not directly
address the linkage between improvements in statistical systems and monitoring frameworks.
However, several respondents did cite SRF-supported priority, large-scale surveys and other
activities that were directly providing high quality data for monitoring frameworks on the
MDGs and on poverty and other economic and social phenomena. Improvements to
administrative information systems and the creation of a data bank were also mentioned as
assisting monitoring systems. In other instances the stimulus provided by the SRF process to
collaborative effort between the statistical office and other stakeholders, to NSDS
implementation, and to the mainstreaming of the strategy into the national developmental
agenda, was seen as having a positive effect on national and sectoral monitoring and
evaluation frameworks.

               a) Internalization of the MDGs and poverty reduction targets

70.     The Evaluation Team’s survey showed that just over half of all respondents
considered that monitoring the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and/or
poverty reduction targets had been entirely or almost entirely incorporated into the respective
national monitoring frameworks (see Table II.17 in Annex 2). But that figure varied
dramatically between countries, from 94 per cent in Rwanda and 80 per cent in Ghana to 30
per cent in Nigeria and a mere 16 per cent in Afghanistan. Nevertheless, when those who felt
that a degree of incorporation existed were added in, over four-fifths of respondents in both
implementing and pipeline countries replied positively to this question and this held for all
the stakeholder groups except other government agencies.

               b) Enhancing the production, quality and timeliness of data

71.    The views of questionnaire respondents were sought on how the SRF had affected
two broad facets of improved statistical output: the production, quality and timeliness of data,
and their accessibility and usability.
72.     In the implementing countries, half of all respondents considered that the SRF had
played a very significant role to date in enhancing the production, quality and timeliness of
data, and that figure rose to nearly 80 per cent when those who felt that it had played some
role were added in (see Table II.18 in Annex 2). Again, though, there were significant
differences among the implementing countries: the SRF was seen to play a very important
role in Nigeria and Rwanda, but very much less so in Afghanistan where many activities
were just starting. In the pipeline countries the impact to date of SRF activities was
understandably much smaller, while among the stakeholder groups the statistical office
respondents were markedly more likely to assign the SRF a very significant role.
73.      Invited to give examples of enhancements in the production, quality and timeliness of
data, respondents in the implementing countries referred in many cases to general factors
facilitated by the SRF funding, including human and institutional capacity building in the
national statistical offices, cooperation among data producers (including between federal and
state levels in Nigeria), development of sectoral statistical strategies for line ministries, the
provision of consultative mechanisms, and coordination of the national statistical system.
More specific examples cited included the successful conduct of key statistical operations
(especially in Rwanda, although it was pointed out that under the principles of the basket
fund, the SRF and other donor contributions were individually untraceable). Also mentioned
were improvements in the CPI, the operationalization of common templates for data
production in Nigeria, publication and dissemination activities including website

                                               42
enhancements, and the provision of equipment including vehicles, generators and computers
which helped improve the timeliness of data. In the pipeline countries, comments were by
and large restricted to expectations surrounding stakeholder awareness, staff training,
equipment and technologies, as activities had yet to commence.

               c) Enhancing the accessibility and usability of data

74.     The impact of the SRF in enhancing the accessibility and usability of data in the
implementing countries was reported to be somewhat less than for the production, quality
and timeliness of data; nevertheless 42 per cent of respondents in the implementing countries
reported that the SRF had played a very significant role to date, and another 30 per cent
indicated that it had played some role (see Table II.19 in Annex 2). Differences among the
three countries were still present but less pronounced, as were the differences among
stakeholder groups. For pipeline countries, as with the previous question, uncertainty about
the SRF’s role in improving accessibility and usability was the most common response.
75.     Enhancements reported by respondents in the implementing countries included, in
general terms, the encouragement of open data initiatives, the promotion of transparency, and
awareness raising about statistics (particularly among other government agencies and at sub-
national levels). Very detailed information was provided about the improved timeliness and
frequency of key economic statistics in Rwanda which, along with the successful execution
of major statistical operations, provided users with a sounder appreciation of the status of
different sectors of the economy and a better basis for evidence-based policy and decision
making.
76.      Specific SRF-supported activities among the implementing countries which have led
to heightened data accessibility and usability included improvements to dissemination and
publication of statistics (most notably through increased computerization and upgraded
statistical office websites), the creation of data portals containing raw survey datasets, media
training for statistical office staff, workshops for journalists, the production of brochures for
users, and the development of a compendium of standards (in Nigeria). Respondents in the
pipeline countries mentioned preparatory activities including awareness-raising among policy
makers, the promotion of statistical data to users, and website re-design, which could be
attributed at least in part to the SRF.

       iv) Promoting dialogue between statistics users and statistical producers

77.      An important requirement of the system-wide approach espoused by the SRF is the
promotion of an improved dialogue between actual and potential users of statistics and
statistical producers, as part of a government-led mechanism for stronger coordination and
partnership across the national statistical system. The Evaluation Team asked respondents
how successful they thought the SRF was in promoting such a dialogue.

78.     In the implementing countries, a quarter of all respondents felt that the SRF was very
successful in this regard, and a further 32 per cent rated it as somewhat successful (see Table
8 below and Table II.24 in Annex 2). Another 23 per cent (and as many as 39 per cent in
Rwanda) felt that it promised to be successful, perhaps indicating that the promotion of a
dialogue between users and producers is a longer-term activity than some others. In the
pipeline countries, over half the respondents either felt that it was too early to judge on this
issue, or failed to answer the question. In so far as producers and users of statistics could be
distinguished from among the stakeholders responding, it appeared that the two groups held
quite similar views on the success of the SRF to date in promoting a dialogue between them;

                                               43
however, the only respondents stating that the SRF was barely or not successful at all in this
regard seemed to be users.
79.    Commenting on the user-producer dialogue, respondents from implementing
countries indicated that it had been furthered in many cases by workshops, seminars and
consultative meetings organized under the SRF, which had been well attended by a wide
range of stakeholders including high-level Government users. The development of survey
instruments, the conduct of surveys and the dissemination of survey results under the
sponsorship of the SRF-CF had also contributed to generating collaboration and dialogue
between producers and users. In Rwanda, regular steering committee meetings and sector
working groups involving all relevant stakeholders were proving successful and productive.
80.    However, respondents also stressed that continuous attention needed to be paid to
maintaining the momentum of user-producer dialogue, in order to enhance coordination and
increase awareness among users. Improving the quality of data was seen as very important in
building the confidence of users. Even where considerable progress had been made in data
dissemination and in improving the accessibility and usability of statistics, greater publicity
and outreach were needed to keep non-core data users, such as those in research and
academic institutions and the media, abreast of developments.

                 a) Functioning of existing institutional mechanisms

81.      Overall, only some 27 per cent of all respondents felt that institutional mechanisms in
the field of statistics in their respective countries functioned well (see Table II.21 in Annex
2).7 That figure would have been lower still had not Rwanda registered 67 per cent, and in
fact in three pipeline countries 10 per cent or fewer respondents viewed such mechanisms as
functioning satisfactorily. In all, some 41 per cent of respondents considered that
institutional mechanisms were functioning only to some extent, and 22 per cent that they
were functioning badly (if at all). Taking the responses to this question together with the
Evaluation Team’s observations in Nigeria and Rwanda, it seems reasonably clear that in
these two countries , the SRF has been having a positive impact on the workings of the
respective national (and in Nigeria, state) mechanisms bringing together users, producers and
other stakeholders in the statistical arena.




7
  Where possible, a specific mechanism was mentioned in each country’s questionnaire.           They included
consultative committees, NSDS steering committees, national partnership groups, and the like.

                                                     44
                                                   Table 8
         Success of the SRF in promoting an improved dialogue between users and producers of statistics

4D Overall, how successful do you
consider the SRF to be in                                          Barely
promoting an improved national                                   successful                 Too
dialogue and partnership between                                   or not      Promises    early
users and producers of statistics in     Very       Somewhat     successful      to be       to      No       Total
[name of country]?                     successful   successful      at all    successful   judge   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                    14           18            5           13         5        2         57
Pipeline countries                        5             6            1           13         21       7         53

All SRF countries                         19           24            6           26         26       9        110

Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                    25           32            9           23         9       4
Pipeline countries                        9            11            2           25         40      13

All SRF countries                         17           22            5           24         24       8

Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                       33           17           0            17         25      8          12
NSO                                       17           20           0            34         24      5          41
OGA                                       16           21           16           26         16      5          19
ONU                                       20           40           0            20         0       20          5
IDS                                       ..            ..          ..           ..         ..      ..          4
LDP                                       10           24           10           14         28      14         29

Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.

Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      45
                  b) User satisfaction surveys

82.     Periodic user satisfaction surveys are a requirement under the SRF, and since their
status in each country is known, the question on this topic aimed mainly to elicit the
experience of respondents with such surveys and to gather information on action
subsequently undertaken.8 However, the replies also served to illustrate the degree to which
respondents were familiar with the situation in their own country. On this measure,
respondents from Ghana, Rwanda and Senegal were the best informed (see Table II.22 in
Annex 2). Altogether, over a third of respondents were not sure of the situation with regard
to a user satisfaction survey, to which could be added a further 7 per cent who gave an
incorrect answer. Of even more concern, in the countries where surveys had already been
conducted, some 77 per cent of respondents in what could be considered the main user
groups (OGA and ONU), and 55 per cent of local development partners, either professed
ignorance about the status of user satisfaction surveys in their respective countries or gave an
inaccurate answer9. It seems clear that almost all implementing agencies should make much
greater efforts to inform other stakeholders of their plans for user satisfaction surveys, and to
publicize the results of those surveys which have already been conducted.
83.    Respondents’ experience with user satisfaction surveys naturally varied widely from
one country to the next, and the Evaluation Team considers that it is not worthwhile to try to
summarize the results of those surveys already undertaken (Annex 7 lists the relevant survey
documentation). In general a degree of satisfaction was expressed about the utility of the
surveys conducted, and in at least one case local development partners were involved in the
data analysis and report writing.
84.     According to respondents, the action most commonly taken as a result of user
satisfaction surveys was awareness raising among government agencies, development
partners, research institutions and others concerning the availability and use of statistical data
and the key role of the statistical office itself; as seen from the above, such action is certainly
needed. Publication of a compendium of statistical standards, adjustments in data collection
instruments and improvements in data dissemination, including through CDs and websites,
were also cited as resulting from the surveys. In Rwanda, the program implications of the
survey findings are being incorporated into annual plans of action and the future NSDS2.

                  c) Enhancing the capacity of data users

85.     Some 44 per cent of respondents in the implementing countries considered that there
had already been efforts under the SRF to enhance the capacity of data users; 12 per cent
thought that such efforts had not yet been made, but were planned for the future (see Table
II.23 in Annex 2). Over one-third of respondents stated that they were unsure of the situation
with regard to efforts to enhance the capacity of data users; that was understandable in the
pipeline countries, but strikingly it held true in two of the three implementing countries also.
Again, the stakeholder groups most closely identified with users of statistics were the least




8
  As of September 2013, user satisfaction surveys have been conducted in Afghanistan, Ghana, Nigeria (national
and state levels) and Rwanda, and are planned in Ethiopia, Lao PDR and Senegal.
9
  More understandably, those figures rose in the countries yet to undertake user satisfaction surveys: to 100 per
cent of OGA and ONU respondents, and 73 per cent of local development partners.

                                                       46
well informed about the activities being undertaken for their purported benefit. Action to
remedy this lack of awareness would seem to be clearly warranted.10
86.     SRF-supported training in various forms was reported by many respondents in the
implementing countries and by a few in pipeline countries as preparatory activities got
underway. Users receiving training included central and state/provincial government
officials, university students, the media, and civil society organizations. Examples of the
type of training being imparted were seminars for journalists (in both the public and private
sectors) on statistical reporting and statistical literacy, for sectoral data users on the
interpretation of statistical findings for policy development, and for researchers on micro data
access tools. Among the many other activities designed to enhance the capacity of users
were stakeholder workshops, high level fora with ministerial participants, Bank-facilitated
informal dialogue between the statistical office and other ministries, television and radio
programs, and other advocacy and outreach efforts to explain the importance of statistics.
These efforts notwithstanding, it was recognized by several respondents that more needed to
be done to keep pace with users’ needs and expectations.

        v) Delivering more effective aid through coordination of development
           partners

87.      The SRF-CF aims not only to provide an increase in the financial resources for
statistical development, but also to promote and support efforts to improve the effectiveness
of those resources, specifically by applying the principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness to statistical projects and programs. SRF objectives include the alignment of
donor support for statistical capacity building with the country-led national statistical plan or
development strategy, and the better coordination of development partner programs within
that framework.
88.     The Evaluation Team’s survey showed that in the implementing countries, 28 per cent
of respondents felt that the SRF was very successful in delivering more efficient and effective
aid and technical assistance for strengthening statistical systems and results measurement,
and a further 37 per cent thought it was somewhat successful (see Table 9 below and Table
II.27 in Annex 2). There were fairly substantial differences among the three implementing
countries, probably reflecting to some extent the position in each country prior to the SRF
intervention. Respondents in Nigeria were the most positive in this regard, while nearly half
those in Afghanistan felt that the SRF was somewhat successful in delivering more effective
assistance; in Rwanda, some 44 per cent of respondents were non-committal on the issue.
89.     Predictably, nearly half of all respondents in the pipeline countries felt that it was too
early to judge the success of the SRF in meeting this objective, although those in Lao PDR
were much less inclined to select this option -- possibly because implementation was getting
underway at the time of the evaluation. Among the stakeholder groups in both the
implementing countries and overall, local development partners were only slightly less
positive than national statistical office respondents in ascribing a degree of success to the
SRF in the better delivery of aid and technical assistance.




10
  It is of course possible that those statistics users who returned the questionnaire were more than usually
unaware of the efforts being made under the SRF to assist them. The Evaluation Team considers this
improbable; from various indications including correspondence with potential respondents who eventually failed
to submit a questionnaire, the bias is likely to be in the other direction.

                                                     47
                                                    Table 9
             Success of the SRF in delivering more effective aid for strengthening statistical systems

5C Overall, how successful
do you consider the SRF to
be in delivering more
efficient and effective aid and
technical     assistance      for                               Barely
strengthening         statistical                             successful                 Too
systems        and       results                                or not      Promises    early
measurement in [name of               Very       Somewhat     successful      to be       to      No       Total
country]?                           successful   successful      at all    successful   judge   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                 16           21            2           10         6        2         57
Pipeline countries                     6            6             0           12         25       4         53

All SRF countries                      22           27            2           22         31       6        110

Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                 28           37            4           18         11       4
Pipeline countries                     11           11            0           23         47       8

All SRF countries                      20           25            2           20         28       5

Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                    33           8             0           8          42      8          12
NSO                                    20           24            0           27         27      2          41
OGA                                    32           16            5           32         11      5          19
ONU                                    0            60            0           0          20      20          5
IDS                                    ..           ..            ..          ..         ..      ..          4
LDP                                    10           31            3           14         34      7          29

Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.

Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                         48
90.     In their comments on this question, respondents in the implementing countries
frequently made reference to the fact that the SRF project addressed the overall statistical
system in each country (in one instance providing the only external funding for the NSDS),
and provided a good platform for development partners to share information and experiences,
become aware of what others were doing, and plan and channel their support to statistics.
Coordination of assistance had improved, although in at least one country there was further
scope for improvement and a reduction in duplication; in addition, it was pointed out that the
effectiveness and efficiency of aid disbursement could be difficult to measure. In Rwanda, as
mentioned elsewhere, respondents considered that the SRF could make an impact by
mobilizing and coordinating further support and aligning it towards the upcoming NSDS2.
As expected, there were few comments from pipeline countries, but respondents in Ethiopia
referred to the SRF’s promise in terms of improving technical expertise, user-producer
relations, and awareness among data providers of the importance of statistics.

               a) Aligning support for statistical capacity building to the NSDS

91.      Overall, 35 per cent of respondents in the implementing countries considered that the
SRF had already had a positive impact on aligning support for the respective national
statistical development strategy (see Table II.25 in Annex 2); Rwanda registered a lower
figure of 22 per cent, probably reflecting the later arrival of the SRF funds compared to
Afghanistan and Nigeria. 53 per cent of respondents in implementing countries, and 81 per
cent of those in pipeline countries, considered that the SRF had the potential to make a
positive impact; only in the Lao PDR was there an appreciable degree of uncertainty about
the efficacy of the SRF in this regard.

               b) Better donor coordination of statistical capacity building

92.      In general, responses to the question of whether the SRF approach was leading to
better donor coordination closely mirrored those to the issue of aligning statistical capacity
building to the NSDS. Thus, 37 per cent of respondents in implementing countries stated
that the SRF approach had already led to better donor coordination of statistical capacity
building, and a further 53 per cent thought that it had the potential to do so (see Table II.26 in
Annex 2). In the pipeline countries, positive responses also approached this 90 per cent
figure. A handful of development partners were the only respondents to record an opposing
view, namely that the SRF had not improved or would not improve donor coordination; in
this regard it was noted that contention could arise when most donor institutions followed
their own monitoring and reporting mechanism rather than fully supporting a common
nationwide approach. The Evaluation Team felt that the number of development partners
active in statistics in each country, and the ease or otherwise of gathering them together for
meetings organized by the lead donor, were also practical factors affecting coordination of
statistical capacity building.
93.     It was again pointed out that in Rwanda, the existence of the basket fund meant that
the SRF could not claim full credit for the success being achieved, and it was noted that in at
least one country, the improvement in coordination of development partners was mainly due
to the efforts of the in-country donor statistician (for more details see the following section).

       vi)   Impact of the in-country donor statistician

94.    The SRF approach relies on government and partners working together to provide
coordinated support to implement national statistical strategies through the creation or

                                               49
strengthening of national partnership groups in statistics. The SRF Charter also calls for an
in-country donor statistician to be identified to assist the partnership group in technical
matters and to promote the use of a system-wide approach. At the time of this report,
statisticians were working with the SRF projects in Afghanistan, DRC, Ghana and Nigeria,
and the Evaluation Team posed a number of questions to respondents in these four countries
to try to ascertain the impact of the in-country donor statisticians in helping to achieve the
SRF’s objectives.

                 a) Usefulness of the in-country donor statistician
95.      In all three countries where the statisticians have been working for some time, there
was consensus, with just one exception, that they have had a very significant positive impact
on the successful implementation of, or preparation for, the respective projects – both in
terms of the role of the statistician and their personal contributions, which some respondents
described as committed and passionate in support of the SRF objectives. The Evaluation
Team’s survey found that the statisticians have been providing excellent support and
guidance to the national statistical offices concerned; very good relationships have been built
up and the statisticians’ advice has been taken on board. In at least one instance the
statistician had been instrumental in influencing important institutional change, and in one
country it was reported that having an expatriate rather than an indigenous donor statistician
was contributing to the project’s success.
96.     The statisticians have also played an important, sometimes crucial, role in facilitating
the system-wide approach, coordinating donor activities in statistical capacity building and
M&E, proactively leading the respective development partner groups, and maintaining good
relations with other donors (again with one reported exception). In the DRC, expectations
are high that the in-country donor statistician will be able to make a very useful contribution,
for example in terms of advocacy and dialogue with government and donors, in what is
recognized as a challenging situation.

                 b) Impact on the statistician’s effectiveness of representing a major donor
97.     There was widespread agreement among respondents that the fact that the in-country
donor statistician represents a major donor had a positive impact on the incumbent’s
effectiveness, especially where the statistician’s agency was also the lead donor in the
national partnership group. 11 It was felt that this connection gave the statistician more
influence among donor colleagues, and helped to ensure the active participation of other
stakeholders. Respondents also commented that the relationship underlined the importance
of statistical development, and helped to ensure the availability of information and of
resources for effective coordination, as well as for statistical capacity building itself.
However, in more than one case it was pointed out that the in-country statistician was
effective in their own right rather than because of the influence of the organization which
they represented.

                 c) Contributions of the in-country donor statisticians to SRF objectives
98.      The Evaluation Team sought feedback on the contributions of the in-country
statisticians to the achievement of various objectives of the SRF as outlined in previous
survey questions, and on whether the balance of their efforts among those objectives was

11
  The in-country statisticians in Afghanistan and Ghana are funded by DfID; the lead donors are DfID in
Afghanistan and the World Bank in Ghana (where the DfID-funded statistician is based in the Bank office). In
DRC and Nigeria the in-country statisticians are funded by the World Bank, the lead donor, and located in its
respective country offices.

                                                     50
appropriate.     Respondents described various contributions made by the in-country
statisticians, as already noted above and including guidance and advice to the statistical
offices, coordination of donor activities, leadership of the development partner group,
advocacy of the importance of the SRF and its role in supporting the NSDS, and general
implementation and preparation of the respective SRF projects including effective targeting
and utilization of funds. In fact, some respondents saw the role of the in-country donor
statistician as pivotal to the success of the project, and needed throughout the SRF project
cycle. The post served as a good interface between the World Bank and the recipient
agencies, providing technical support for the proper implementation of the project. In
Nigeria, the IDS also played a very important clearing-house role for all data used in World
Bank projects. In the DRC, it was suggested that the in-country donor statistician’s presence
should be utilized to develop an effective and sustainable partnership with donors, with the
NSO leading the dialogue.
99.      Discussions with all the current IDSs (Afghanistan, DRC, Ghana and Nigeria) reveal
that office arrangements can influence priority settings among the three main groups of tasks
performed by the IDSs, namely project implementation, coordination and helping the
government strategize its statistical capacity development. While most IDSs are located in
the local office of the lead agency which also finances them, in one case the IDS is financed
by one major donor but based at the local office of a different donor (see footnote 11). This
unique arrangement has helped to lighten the demand on the IDS’s time for project-related
activities and has allowed the IDS to allocate more time for coordination and strategizing
tasks.
100. In general, respondents felt that the statisticians’ contributions to the various
objectives was quite appropriate; while their presence was useful in monitoring project
implementation and providing their agency with feedback on progress made, any
apprehension that the statisticians were overly involved with statistical work specific to their
own agency appeared to have little foundation.

               d) Role of the in-country donor statistician in relation to the NSO
101. Respondents in the four countries where the statisticians are in place were asked
whether they perceived any actual or potential areas of friction or contention surrounding the
role of the in-country donor statisticians in relation to the national statistical system and its
staff. Although there were one or two dissenting voices, a large majority of those replying
indicated that they saw no friction at all; the statistical office staff recognized that the
statisticians contributed to teamwork, were technically capable and provided useful advice on
a professional basis; in addition they maintained cordial relations with all or almost all
stakeholders. In one country the need for direct contact of the in-country statistician with the
heads of statistics-producing institutions was identified, so as to exchange ideas and help
ensure sound data quality and production procedures.

               e) Possible need for an exit or disengagement strategy
102. The Evaluation Team assumed that the post of in-country donor statistician was not a
permanent one, and asked respondents whether they saw the need for an exit or
disengagement strategy to cover the eventual withdrawal of the post.
103. Of those respondents who answered this question more or less unambiguously, about
four-fifths did see the need to have such a strategy in place; it was feared that otherwise a
vacuum would be created, and all the progress made under the project would be undone. It
was suggested that locally recruited government-funded staff, perhaps in the form of a small


                                               51
secretariat, should take over the role in due course in order to maintain some continuity; that
would be preferable to consultants, who might not be able to speak with authority and might
not be so committed or dedicated to building statistical capacity.
104. Emerging very clearly from the responses to this question is a strong sentiment in all
the countries that because of a lack of capacity in statistics, the post of in-country donor
statistician would be needed over a substantial period of time, until sustainable systems for
the production and use of statistics could be established (including at state level in Nigeria).
Long-term commitment was needed both from donors, to fund the post for the duration of the
project, and from the government to maintain it subsequently; ownership and strong
leadership by government was seen as important for sustainability and capacity building. It
was also suggested that the continued engagement of the in-country donor statistician was
needed so long as the implementation of the NSDS remained heavily funded by donors.
105. The Evaluation Team notes that the very substantial differences between SRF country
situations make it impossible to offer a definitive opinion on how long the IDS should stay in
post. Nevertheless, and based in part on the observations of respondents, factors to be taken
into account before deciding on termination of the IDS post could include the degree of
ownership and leadership by government of the statistical development process; the track
record and level of functioning of the national partnership group; the level of cooperation and
coordination among local development partners; the capacity of the World Bank country
office and other Bank departments to support SRF project implementation; and the extent to
which the national statistical strategy is funded from external sources. Some of the elements
mentioned above are closely related to indicators in the generic Results Framework, which
further warrant their close monitoring as part of the SRF project implementation.

       vii) Broad issues related to the SRF Charter (realism of the expectations
            for the SRF, choice of countries, regional project considerations)

106. The Charter of the Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund was drawn up in 2009
and covers all salient points surrounding the objectives, principles, approach, governance
structure and administration of the SRF. The Evaluation Team sought the views of
respondents in most stakeholder groups about selected issues that relate to the Charter.

               a) Expectations for the SRF

107. Only around 3 per cent of respondents overall considered the expectations for the SRF,
in terms of its impact and timing, to be unrealistic (see Table 10 below and Table II.28 in
Annex 2). However, whether the expectations were considered ‘very reasonable’ or
‘somewhat reasonable’ varied considerably from one country to the next. Among the
implementing countries, respondents from Nigeria were more than twice as likely to consider
the expectations for the SRF to be very reasonable than their counterparts from Rwanda and
Afghanistan; in the latter country, views on the realism of the SRF in terms of timing were
coloured by the fact that the project and particularly the twinning process had taken longer to
get off the ground than expected. A similarly wide range of views was observed among the
pipeline countries, although here over a third of respondents did not express a clear view.
Among the stakeholder groups, the TTLs were the most likely to consider the expectations
reasonable, and other government agencies the least.




                                              52
                 b) Significant impacts of the SRF

108. Respondents in the implementing countries recalled answers to earlier questions in
describing the most significant impacts of the SRF in their respective countries (see, for
instance, section III i) above). When looked at in total, the responses illustrated the wide
range of impacts that the SRF was having across the gamut of its objectives. However, the
impacts reported were by no means equally spread across the five objectives covered in this
report.12 Well over half the ‘most significant’ impacts related either to improvements in the
statistical system in terms of data production, quality and usability, or to the promotion of a
system-wide approach. Impacts citing increased resources ranked third, while those
concerning coordination of development partners and enhanced user-producer dialogue were
each cited in fewer than 10 per cent of cases. Moreover, there were large differences between
the countries: over half the impacts mentioned by respondents from Afghanistan related to
the system-wide approach, while 80 per cent of those from Rwanda focused on increased
resources and improvements in data production, data quality and dissemination. Nigerian
responses, which were the most numerous, were more equally spread across the five
objectives, although increased resources were hardly mentioned.




12
  Although there were as many as 70 comments on this question, caution is needed in reaching any firm
conclusions; the respondents were self-selected and from different mixes of stakeholder groups, many
mentioned more than one impact, and it was not always straightforward for the Evaluation Team to categorize
the comments by SRF objective.

                                                    53
                                                      Table 10
                                               Expectations for the SRF


7A. How reasonable or realistic do you                                               I'm
think the expectations for the SRF are in      Very      Somewhat                    not     No       Total
terms of its impact and timing?             reasonable   reasonable   Unrealistic   sure   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                         21           26            2         3        1         53
Pipeline countries                             18           13            1         19       1         52


All SRF countries                              39           39            3         22       2        105


Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                         40           49            4         6        2
Pipeline countries                             35           25            2         37       2


All SRF countries                              37           37            3         21       2


Stakeholder groups:

TTL                                            50           42            0         8        0         12
NSO                                            46           34            2         17       0         41
OGA                                            26           26            0         42       5         19
IDS                                            ..           ..            ..        ..       ..         4
LDP                                            31           41            3         21       3         29


Notes: This question was not posed to the ONU group.
Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed

Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                    54
                 c) Impact of the choice of countries on the SRF approach

109. The SRF-CF Council is responsible for determining which countries can apply for
grants from the SRF, and selection is based on a number of criteria including levels of
statistical capacity and extent of commitment to the SRF principles. Two of the original five
countries – Afghanistan and DRC – were included because they are fragile states emerging
from conflict and present particular problems for statistical development, including having a
weak data culture and little history of data use. Although the terms of reference for the
evaluation touched on the question of country selection only as a background issue, the
Evaluation Team did ask respondents in selected stakeholder groups – Task Team Leaders,
in-country donor statisticians and local development partners – about the extent to which they
thought the choice of countries invited to apply for SRF grants had affected its impact.
110. The survey responses reflected a lack of information on the country selection process
-- nearly half of all respondents either indicated that they were unsure on this issue, or didn’t
answer the question. That figure was lower for respondents in the implementing countries,
where 35 per cent felt that the choice of countries had affected the impact of the SRF
approach to a great extent, and another 22 per cent to some extent. Overall, however, it was
felt that the results from the survey did not warrant tabulation. .

                 d) Possible extension of the SRF to regional operations

111. With the exception of the Listening to Africa project13, which became effective only
in June 2013 and which the Evaluation Team has not attempted to cover in this assessment,
the SRF has to date comprised country-specific projects. The views of respondents were
sought on whether the SRF should be extended to regional initiatives and operations.
112. All told, some 38 per cent of respondents answered this question in the affirmative,
with another 37 per cent being undecided (see Table 11 below and Table II.29 in Annex 2).
Respondents in implementing countries were slightly more enthusiastic about the prospect of
regional operations than were those in pipeline countries. Among stakeholder groups, nearly
three-fifths of local development partners were undecided on the issue or did not answer the
question. Among all stakeholders, though, there was a minority of respondents – about 16
per cent overall –who felt that the SRF should not be extended beyond its current essentially
national scope.
113. Respondents who thought that there were, or might be, advantages to the SRF
launching regional projects provided a wide range of suggestions for topics which might
benefit most from a regional approach. It would be fair to say that if the SRF Council
decides to venture into further regional projects, or introduce a regional dimension to current
and future country projects, there will be no shortage of ideas to pursue. The general theme
of capacity building in other statistical offices was frequently mentioned, along with regional
training programs, south-south exchange of experiences among statistical offices (including
through study visits and temporary exchange of expert staff), and the sharing of best practices
and international expertise in various areas including modern data collection tools and data
dissemination. It was felt that a regional focus in these initiatives was critical as countries
learned from each other and were given the opportunity to share knowledge and demonstrate

13
   Listening to Africa (L2A) is a Region wide project that aims at piloting household surveys with mobile
interviews in three African countries (Cameroon, Malawi and Senegal). The pilot will last two years and will
serve to demonstrate the ability of the approach to collect high quality, timely welfare data that is comparable
over time and across countries.

                                                      55
results. The Evaluation Team noted that within the current country focus of the SRF, there
appeared to be substantial scope for productive activities of a regional nature, including as a
minimum the sharing of experience between pilot countries and reporting on SRF progress to
regional entities.
114. Running through several of the comments from African SRF countries was the strong
suggestion that any regional SRF statistical capacity building projects should be undertaken
in close collaboration with existing regional and sub-regional entities such as the African
Union, the UN Economic Commission for Africa, Afristat, UEMOA and ECOWAS, as well
as with the Africa regional region of the Bank itself through its initiative to build capacity
within the African Union Commission.
115. Apart from participating in strategic partnerships for the provision of expertise, these
organizations (and others such as ASEAN in the case of Lao PDR) were also seen as playing
a role in another major theme of respondents’ comments, namely the harmonization of
concepts and methods. There were numerous suggestions for surveys, seminars and other
projects that would help standardize methodologies, classifications and data compilation and
dissemination procedures, in order to promote cooperation and facilitate comparisons at
regional and international level. Specific ideas for regional work included the adoption and
implementation of new systems such as the 2008 System of National Accounts (SNA), the
harmonization of poverty monitoring survey methodologies, improvement of the quality of
trade statistics via cooperation between statistical agencies in the region, a common labor
force enquiry, and the harmonization of systems of data collection and production for
agriculture and livestock. Regional approaches to tackling MDG data requirements,
delivering systematic administrative data, and improving the quality of economic statistics
were also suggested.
116. Some respondents from African countries felt that SRF funding could be used to
support regional initiatives such as the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD),
the African Peer Review Mechanism, and the African Charter on Statistics. There was also
support for the formulation and financing of regional strategies for the development of
statistics, and for the Reference Regional Strategic Framework for Statistical Capacity
Building in sub-regions of Africa. Institutional strengthening of the existing regional centres
of excellence in statistical training was also advocated. A proposal from the user perspective
was the creation of a regional or sub-regional data warehouse containing archived
socioeconomic data from different countries, with well-managed web access for researchers,
academics and development experts.
117. Despite the enthusiasm of many respondents for regional projects and initiatives,
caution was expressed by others who were undecided on this issue. They felt that care would
be needed to avoid the creation of an additional layer of bureaucracy, and to select countries
where the level of statistical capacity and pace of statistical development were not too
dissimilar.




                                              56
                                              Table 11

                         Possible extension of the SRF to regional operations

7C. Do you consider that the SRF,
hitherto comprising almost exclusively
country-specific projects, should be
extended to regional initiatives and                                        No       Total
operations?                                Yes        Perhaps    No       answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                      24         20.5      9.5        3         57
Pipeline countries                          18          20        8         7         53

All SRF countries                           42         40.5      17.5       10       110

Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                      42          36       17          5
Pipeline countries                          34          38       15         13

All SRF countries                           38          37       16         9

Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                         42          42       17          0        12
NSO                                         44          33       13         10        41
OGA                                         47          26       11         16        19
ONU                                         40          20       20         20         5
IDS                                         ..           ..       ..         ..        4
LDP                                         24          52       17          7        29

Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.

Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                 57
118. The minority of respondents who considered that SRF funding should not be utilized
for regional projects were generally anxious that the SRF projects should first be
satisfactorily completed in the respective pilot countries, with a strengthening of the NSO as
an institution, and improvements in data quality, sectoral statistics and coordination. Lessons
from the national projects should be learned and documented before regional ventures were
contemplated. Concern was also expressed about a lack of control and monitoring in regional
projects, and in one instance it was considered that regional approaches were ineffective. In
at least two countries it was felt strongly that there were already too many actors and
conflicting interests in the field of statistics, with uncoordinated regional initiatives drawing
time and capacity away from more important national issues.

               e) Other issues related to the SRF Charter

119. Comments on other Charter-related issues were limited in number, as many
respondents were not familiar with it. In fact, one proposal was that the Charter should be
disseminated, so that countries and institutions became more knowledgeable about the
important SRF initiative. It was also suggested that the document be simplified and the
administrative portion separated out. Although the view was expressed that the Charter
needed no amendment, it was also pointed out that it currently addresses challenges to
national statistical systems; thus additions might be needed if regional programs are to feature
more prominently in the future.

       viii)   SRF governance arrangements and operational practices and
               procedures

120. In accordance with its Terms of Reference, the Evaluation Team examined various
aspects of the governance arrangements of the SRF-CF and sought information on how well
the operational practices and procedures of the Facility were serving the SRF’s objectives and
its various stakeholders. In the administration of the questionnaire, an effort was made to
restrict the questions to those stakeholder groups involved with the various issues raised.

               a) SRF grant approval and disbursement process
121. As many 25 per cent of all respondents did not provide an answer to this question,
which was addressed to the TTL, NSO and IDS groups (see Table 12 below and Table II.30
in Annex 2). Of those who did, only around a quarter in both implementing and pipeline
countries indicated that the review, approval and disbursement processes surrounding the
SRF grant were smooth and timely. Task Team Leaders were much more likely than NSO
respondents to give a positive response on this issue. Some 30 per cent of all respondents
answering the question stated that the processes had been beset by difficulties and delays; as
might be expected, this figure was higher in the pipeline countries overall, with Lao PDR an
exception.
122. Closer examination of the replies, especially the remarks of respondents in describing
particular facilitating or delaying factors in the process, reveals a more nuanced picture than
might be gained from the tabulated responses. The fact that the World Bank’s grant approval
and disbursement process had been considered smooth and timely by some respondents did
not, however, mean that problems had not been encountered even in these cases. In both
Afghanistan and Nigeria problems and delays in disbursements have occurred for internal
reasons, over which the SRF Administration and Bank country staff and project teams have
been able to exercise only limited control.


                                               58
                                                    Table 12
                              SRF grant approval and disbursement process

8A. How smooth and timely was, or has      Smooth                       Beset by
been to date, the SRF grant approval and     and         Somewhat      difficulties     No       Total
disbursement process?                      timely       problematic    and delays     answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                        6                12           4           5         27
Pipeline countries                            5                7            9           9         30

All SRF countries                             11               19          13          14         57


Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                        22               44          15          19
Pipeline countries                            17               23          30          30

All SRF countries                             19               33          23          25

Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                           42               25          17          17         12
NSO                                           15               34          24          27         41
IDS                                           ..               ..           ..          ..        4

Notes: This question was posed only to the above stakeholder groups.
Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.

Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                               59
123. Moreover, about half the responses falling into the ‘somewhat problematic’ and ‘beset
by difficulties and delays’ categories were accompanied by comments which indicated
clearly that the problems being referred to resulted mainly if not solely for internal reasons,
rather than as a result of the Bank’s processes and procedures. In Nigeria the channeling of
SRF funds through the Federal Projects Financial Management Division rather than directly
to the two implementing agencies has caused serious delays in requests for replenishment,
thereby affecting effective implementation of the work plan, including at state level. In
Ghana, as described elsewhere, the initial grant approval process was reported as smooth, but
the linking of the SRF to an IDA credit has caused a delay, due mainly to the decision by the
Ministry of Finance not to sign any more loans because of the worsening fiscal environment.
In Afghanistan the failure of the first round of negotiations on a twinning partner for the CSO
was a significant source of delay, although the Evaluation Team was unable to determine the
main source of the problem.
124. Elsewhere, a lack of skills and commitment among the relevant government officials
and an unfamiliarity with World Bank procedures were cited as contributing to difficulties in
the SRF approval process – although to other respondents, the cause of the delays was
unclear.
125. The above factors notwithstanding, many respondents reported that the Bank’s
administrative procedures had caused significant delays in SRF projects. That was
particularly the case with procurement procedures and the issuance of non-objection
clearance by the Bank, which were frequently described as slow and overly bureaucratic;
oversight functions could usefully be simplified. In Rwanda these ‘heavy’ procedures had
contributed to the delay in the release of the SRF funds into the Basket Fund account, along
with frequent changes in TTL and local Bank staff which caused a lack of continuity (see
Annex 3, for more details). In Senegal also, the process of (not) designating the TTL was
seen as a hurdle, with the time since project formulation already exceeding 18 months. The
nomination of experienced and committed TTLs and support staff was seen by respondents as
key to successful project implementation, and the Evaluation Team was not always
convinced that the Bank had sufficient capacity at country level to fully support the SRF
process, despite the best efforts of the in-country statisticians and others involved. In general,
respondents pointed out that more awareness of and training in SRF principles, norms and
procedures was needed on the part of both Bank staff and government officials in the SRF
project team, in order for the requirements as well as the benefits of an SRF project to be
fully understood.

               b) Experiences with implementing the SRF grant
126. Nearly half of respondents in the implementing countries stated that their experience
in implementing the SRF grant, judged on criteria such as the ease of reporting arrangements
and support from World Bank staff, was very positive, and another 30 per cent had a
somewhat positive impression (see Table II.31 in Annex 2). Although numbers were
relatively small (only the TTL, NSO and IDS groups were asked this question), respondents
in Nigeria and Afghanistan appeared to have slightly more favorable views than those in
Rwanda. Negative experiences were in a very small minority, but were nevertheless strongly
expressed; insufficient support from the SRF Administration Unit was mentioned, along with
frustration that Headquarters staff sometimes failed to understand the realities of the situation
in the field. At the same time, the Evaluation Team understood that the Administration Unit
did not always receive all the necessary documentation relating to field activities such as
supervision missions.


                                               60
127. For respondents in pipeline countries, grant administration is largely an academic
issue, and thus it was no surprise that 70 per cent either did not answer the question or
indicated that they had insufficient experience to judge.

                c) Problems faced in implementing the SRF projects
128. The Evaluation Team also attempted to learn about the main sorts of problems that
Task Team Leaders, in-country donor statisticians and national statistical offices had been
facing in implementing the respective SRF projects. Although the question concerned
implementation, it evoked nearly as many responses from the pipeline countries as from those
where implementation is well under way; only from Lao PDR were there no comments
offered.
129. The inadequacy of counterpart government budgetary support for the SRF project was
felt acutely in Nigeria; it was also mentioned by respondents in Afghanistan, but not in
Rwanda. Among the pipeline countries, respondents in DRC and Ethiopia foresaw this issue
as a major problem. Linked to this, a failure or at least delays by government in translating
commitment into practical action in support of the SRF project was also noted by some
respondents in Nigeria, as well as in DRC and Ghana – the two of the original five SRF pilot
countries where implementation has yet to commence. As noted earlier in this report, the
view was expressed from Nigeria that the Government lacks sufficient political will to
provide the project with adequate counterpart resources.
130. Another major set of issues concerned a lack of coordination. Among government
agencies this lack of coordination was identified as a problem in Afghanistan, Nigeria, DRC
and (presumably potentially) Ethiopia; in Nigeria, with its Federal – state system, there were
coordination problems both horizontally and vertically. A lack of coordination among
development partners was cited as a problem in Nigeria, DRC and Ethiopia. In Rwanda,
coordination issues seemed much less acute.
131. Respondents in all three implementing countries, but particularly in Afghanistan,
reported a lack of capacity as a major problem being faced in implementing the SRF project.
In Afghanistan this low level of capacity was evident at all levels of government including
the national statistical office, and related not only to substantive technical matters but also
financial management and procurement. In Nigeria it was mentioned that some government
agencies had inadequate capacity to generate relevant data relating to their functions.
132. Also reported under this question were numerous comments echoing those made
earlier on problematic administrative procedures, both on the part of government
administrations and the World Bank. In one country, the long delay between its identification
as a pilot and the (to date, non-) arrival of SRF funds was even seen as raising questions
about the full commitment of the Bank to the program. It is clear that these bureaucratic
processes are seen as one of the major challenges facing the effective and efficient
implementation of SRF projects in the field.

               d)   Recipient-country execution of SRF projects
133. An important SRF principle, embedded in the Charter, is that countries applying for
SRF grants must exercise leadership over their statistical development; in line with this, the
Charter specifies that grants shall normally be recipient-executed. Bearing in mind the choice
of SRF pilot countries, some with limited institutional capacity and memory, the Evaluation
Team sought the views of selected stakeholder groups (Task Team Leaders, national
statistical offices, in-country statisticians and local development partners) on the extent to
which recipient execution was proving, or was likely to prove, a challenge.

                                              61
134. Overall, about 60 per cent of respondents indicated that recipient-country project
execution posed at least somewhat of a challenge, and this was broadly the case in both
implementing and pipeline countries (see Table 13 below and Table II.32 in Annex 2).
However, as might be fully expected, responses varied greatly among countries; a large
majority of respondents in DRC and Afghanistan, but also in Senegal and Lao PDR, stated
that recipient execution involved at least some degree of challenge. Only in Rwanda were a
majority of respondents confident that this was not the case. Among stakeholder groups,
TTLs were much more ready than NSO respondents to consider recipient-country execution a
challenge.

                  e) Attention to SRF projects by World Bank line management
135. As a result of some of its early discussions with various stakeholders, and in line with
its remit to examine SRF governance arrangements, the Evaluation Team asked selected
respondents whether they thought line management in the World Bank paid adequate
attention to SRF projects.14 In the implementing countries overall, nearly half did – but this
average concealed scores ranging from some 70 per cent in Nigeria to only 30 per cent in
Rwanda (see Table 14 below and Table II.33 in Annex 2).
136. The pipeline countries showed lesser variation but, understandably, some 31 per cent
of respondents were unsure on this issue or didn’t answer the question. National statistical
office respondents, who comprised nearly half the total, took a more positive view than other
stakeholder groups, with none indicating that attention by Bank line management was
inadequate; a minority of other respondents felt otherwise, but the overall level of
dissatisfaction was still under 10 per cent.




14
  In retrospect, it might have been prudent for the Evaluation Team to have defined ‘line management’ more
closely, as some respondents may have interpreted it to mean any World Bank manager.

                                                   62
                                                    Table 13
                              Recipient-country execution of SRF projects


8D. How large a challenge do you
consider       that    recipient-country           Somewhat     Not a        I'm
execution of the SRF project has been A great        of a    significant    not      No       Total
or will be in [name of country]?         challenge challenge challenge      sure   answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                    14             11      13          5       1         44
Pipeline countries                        10             16       8          4       4         42


All SRF countries                         24             27      21          9       5         86


Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                    32             25      30         11       2
Pipeline countries                        24             38      19         10      10

All SRF countries                         28             31      24         10       6


Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                       42             42       8          0       8         12
NSO                                       17             32      29         17       5         41
IDS                                       ..             ..       ..         ..      ..        4
LDP                                       38             24      24          7       7         29


Notes: This question was not posed to the OGA and ONU groups.
Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed


Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                               63
                                                     Table 14
                         Attention to SRF projects by World Bank line management

8E. Do you consider that SRF projects
receive adequate attention by line                   To some         I'm not     No       Total
management in the World Bank?             Yes         extent    No     sure    answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                     21          13       4      5         1         44
Pipeline countries                         16          10       3      10        3         42


All SRF countries                          37          23       7      15        4         86


Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                     48          30       9      11        2
Pipeline countries                         38          24       7      24        7

All SRF countries                          43          27       8      17        5


Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                        33          50       17     0         0         12
NSO                                        56          22       0      15        7         41
IDS                                        ..           ..      ..     ..        ..        4
LDP                                        24          28       14     31        3         29

Notes: This question was not posed to the OGA and ONU groups.
Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed

Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                64
                  f) SRF grants as stand-alone projects
137. The same set of stakeholder groups was also asked whether they saw any advantage in
the SRF grant being part of a larger World Bank operation (for example an IDA credit),
rather than a stand-alone project as is currently the case. There was no great enthusiasm for
this idea, with the overall yes vote, at 20 per cent, being slightly outweighed by those
opposing it, i.e., opting for the status quo (see Table II.34 in Annex 2). A small majority of
respondents overall, though, were either undecided on the question or failed to answer it;
quite possibly they felt that they didn’t know enough about the pros and cons of the issue. Of
comments received, one positive response came with the proviso that the larger Bank
operation should also be in the field of statistical capacity building, while another respondent
supported the existing situation on the grounds that statistics was a specific sector for public
policy.

                   g) The SRF Generic Results Framework

138. Annex 4 to this report is devoted to a detailed description and critique of the SRF
Results Framework. The Evaluation Team also sought information on the degree of
familiarity of survey respondents with the Results Framework, and on their experience in
utilizing it. Again, stakeholder groups which were assumed to be unlikely to be using the
Framework were not asked the relevant questions.
139. Overall, about a quarter of respondents stated that they were very familiar with the
Results Framework, and another 40 per cent claimed some familiarity with it (see Table II.35
in Annex 2). Those very familiar with the Framework were more numerous in the
implementing countries (especially Rwanda) than in the pipeline countries, but overall the
proportion of respondents, who said they were not at all familiar with the Framework, or did
not answer the question, was the same across the two groups of countries. As would be
expected, Task Team Leaders and in-country donor statisticians were much more familiar
with the Results Framework than respondents from the national statistical offices or local
development partners.15
140. When TTLs, NSOs and in-country statisticians were asked about using the SRF
Results Framework, a mere 5 per cent (3 respondents) reported their experience to be very
positive; double that number found the experience to be generally negative (see Table II.36 in
Annex 2). More than half of all respondents, however, indicated that they didn’t have enough
experience with the Framework to make a judgment, or they left the question unanswered.
141. A large majority of those making suggestions for improving the generic Results
Framework were very familiar with it, and the remainder somewhat familiar. The view was
expressed was that the approach of having a generic SRF Results Framework and a set of
country-specific results frameworks was confusing and needed clarification and
simplification. A common complaint was that the generic framework was often not in line
with, or was even at odds with, the country-level results frameworks in some respects (as is
clearly shown in Annex 4). Criticisms made of the generic framework were that it contained
too many indicators, was too heavy to maintain, required input from user surveys, and
included indicators and targets that were too ambitious given the countries’ capacities to
report.
15
  The Evaluation Team was surprised to discover that local development partners indicated a slightly higher
degree of familiarity with the generic Results Framework than did national statistical office respondents. If this
was indeed the case, it might in retrospect have been advisable to have asked the subsequent survey question of
the LDP stakeholder group also. However, there is also the distinct possibility of some confusion on the part of
respondents between the generic and country-specific results frameworks.

                                                       65
142. Respondents recognized that the SRF pilot countries were heterogeneous and that it
would be difficult to find indicators that were relevant and measurable in all of them. It was
regretted, nevertheless, that the initial generic results framework had not been designed in
close enough consultation with Task Team Leaders and others who would have to utilize it,
to ensure that it was more realizable at country level; that needed to be borne in mind in the
future. Suggestions for improvement included tailoring the generic framework to country
circumstances as much as possible, and refining the generic framework indicators so that they
could be easily measured at country level; at the same time it was considered important to
ensure that key SRF generic results framework indicators were included in country project
results frameworks, in order to reduce additional reporting requirements.

               h) Further issues relating to SRF governance and operations
143. Given that the SRF was a pilot exercise, it was felt that there was much more scope
for proactive lesson learning and experience sharing among the pilot countries and in-country
donor statisticians than had been the case to date. In addition, there was an expectation that
the SRF team and the associated TTLs would have sufficient knowledge of Bank operational
procedures to enable them to provide strong and clear direction to the statisticians and the
implementing agencies.

       ix)   General questions on the impacts of the SRF-CF on national statistical
             systems

144. The Evaluation Team also sought the views of survey respondents on a number of
general, higher-level issues which relate to the principles, underlying approach and
development objective of the Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund, as described in
its Charter and associated documents.

               a) The SRF concept and statistical capacity building
145. The background to the creation of the SRF-CF is briefly summarized in the
introductory section of this report. Established on the principles of the Managing for
Development Results process and the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the SRF has
attempted to bring a broader approach to the building of statistical capacity than previous
initiatives. The Evaluation Team was interested to learn of the extent to which the SRF
concept was meeting (or had the potential to meet) the needs for statistical capacity
building in the pilot countries.
146. Over half of all respondents, in both implementing and pipeline countries, felt that
the concept of the SRF met statistical capacity building needs to a great extent (see Table
15 below and Table II.37 in Annex 2). These figures did however differ very markedly
from one country to the next, from about four-fifths of respondents in Ghana and Rwanda
to only around one third in Afghanistan and DRC. When those respondents who felt that
the SRF concept met the needs for statistical capacity building to some extent were added
in, the overall figure among all respondents who answered the question rose to 90 per cent.
A majority of every stakeholder group responded at least somewhat positively to this
question, although over a third of other government agency respondents were unsure about
the issue or failed to answer.




                                              66
                                                Table 15
                            The SRF concept and statistical capacity building

9A. To what extent do you consider that the
concept of the SRF meets the needs of          To a     To          To an        I'm
statistical capacity building in [name of     great    some     insignificant   not      No       Total
country]?                                     extent   extent      extent       sure   answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                         30          21        1           3       2         57
Pipeline countries                             30          14        1           6       2         53


All SRF countries                              60          35        2           9       4        110


Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                         53          37        2           5       4
Pipeline countries                             57          26        2          11       4


All SRF countries                              55          32        2           8       4


Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                            58          42        0           0       0         12
NSO                                            61          34        2           0       2         41
OGA                                            32          32        0          26      11         19
ONU                                            60          20        0          20       0         5
IDS                                             ..         ..        ..          ..      ..        4
LDP                                            55          28        3          10       3         29


Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.


Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                               67
147. Setting aside any concerns about the limitations of the World Bank’s Statistical
Capacity Indicator (see the Appendix to Annex 4), it appears from the Evaluation Team’s
survey that the SRF concept may better meet the statistical capacity building needs of those
countries which already have higher statistical capacity as measured by the SCI. As shown in
Annex 4, Rwanda had the highest overall SCI in 2013 by some distance, while DRC and
Afghanistan had easily the lowest. Notwithstanding any differences between countries, the
Evaluation Team received the clear impression that, overall, the SRF was playing a special
role in statistical capacity building in the pilot countries. This was partly as a result of the size
of the SRF grants in relation to most other sources of funding for statistical development, as
mentioned earlier in this report. But it was also acknowledged in the Team’s conversations
with numerous stakeholders, as well as in the comments of survey respondents, that the
concept behind the SRF and the principles embodied in the SRF projects appeared to
represent a new and effective approach to building sustainable capacities in statistics.

                b) Major statistical capacity building needs of SRF countries
148. Although the Team assumed that statistical capacity building, broadly defined, was the
raison d’être of every country’s SRF grant application, and indeed of its approval by the
Bank, it was interested to find out more about the main motivations behind each government’s
acceptance of the Bank’s invitation to apply for an SRF grant, and about the major needs to be
addressed. This question was posed to stakeholders working in national statistical offices and
other government agencies only.
149. Motivations reported by respondents could roughly be divided into those relating to
higher-echelon objectives corresponding to the outcome level of the SRF Results Framework,
or possibly even beyond it, and those relating to institution and capacity building within the
national statistical system itself.
150. Within the first category, in which Nigerian and Rwandan responses were prominent,
motivations cited for acceptance of the SRF grant included the need to improve the evidence
basis of planning for economic development (including for countries in post-conflict
situations); to enhance governmental policy formulation, decision-making and planning
through reliable and timely data; and to provide the ability (for government and development
partners) to monitor and evaluate program implementation and country performance against
targets. More specific objectives related to improvement of education standards and the
eradication of poverty. The need to enlighten policy-makers about the importance of
statistical information in policy- and decision-making, and a more general scaling up of
statistical literacy, were also mentioned. A number of respondents referred to the aspiration
of improving public access to statistics, and to the role of statistics in helping promote
accountability and transparency in governance.
151. In the more internally oriented set of responses relating to the national statistical
system, there were many more or less general references to the need to build institutional,
infrastructural, technical and human capacities within the agencies of the system, particularly
(in some countries) the national statistical office. More specific means of strengthening the
national statistical system, cited by respondents from several countries including Ghana,
included enhancing coordination of statistical activities, building capacity at sectoral level,
improving the mechanism for detailed data sharing among agencies, harmonizing statistical
standards and procedures, and improving the institutional and regulatory framework. Some

                                                  68
responses focused on the role of SRF funding in the effective implementation of the
respective national statistical development strategies. Other motivations included, in Nigeria,
a desire for holistic reform of the entire statistical system, streamlining the operations of
statistical producers across three tiers of government; in Senegal, the alignment of statistical
production to demand for data rather than supply; and in Rwanda, the achievement of self-
sufficiency in terms of statistical expertise, through capacity building of local statisticians and
researchers.
152. Many respondents cited the need for improvement in the availability of data, including
sectoral data and information at state level in Nigeria, as a reason for applying for SRF grants.
Funding from the SRF was also destined for improvements in the quality, reliability and
timeliness of statistical information, as well as for several country-specific requirements in
various fields of statistics. Apart from the direct use of the SRF project funds, the catalytic
role of the SRF in further resource mobilization at national level was also mentioned.

               c) Leadership of the statistical development process
153. A basic principle underlying the SRF approach is that governments should exercise
ownership and leadership of their national statistical development, by preparing
comprehensive and realistic strategies and subsequently taking the lead in coordinating donor
and government support for the implementation of those plans. The Evaluation Team asked
survey respondents whether the SRF had facilitated that process, or appeared to have the
potential to do so. It needs to be pointed out that in most of the pilot countries (DRC is the
only exception), the NSDS had been designed before the SRF project preparation process got
underway; thus the questionnaire responses relate more to the implementation stage of the
respective statistical development strategies.
154. In the implementing countries, over half of respondents considered that the SRF had
facilitated effective government ownership and leadership of the statistical development
process to a great extent, and a further third thought that this was the case to some extent (see
Table 16 below and Table II.38 in Annex 2). In terms of potential, the response from the
pipeline countries was similar, although here some 20 per cent of respondents were unsure on
the issue or didn’t answer the question. Among both groups of countries, however, there were
wide variations among countries, with respondents in Rwanda and Ghana responding the most
positively and those in DR Congo and Afghanistan the least. Among the stakeholder groups,
some 70 per cent of respondents from national statistical offices felt that the SRF was
facilitating (or would facilitate) government leadership to a great extent – more than double
the percentage from other government agencies, a third of whose respondents were uncertain
about the matter.

               d) SRF project implementation and governmental reform measures

155. According to the SRF Charter, countries applying for grants from the Catalytic Fund
must in principle be ready to carry out any administrative reforms that might be required for
proper implementation of their national statistical development strategies. The questionnaire
sought information as to whether reform measures that would not otherwise have been
embarked on were in fact being undertaken, or would potentially be involved, in the course of
implementing the respective SRF country projects.


                                                 69
                                                              Table 16
                                     Leadership of the statistical development process

9C. To what extent do you consider that the SRF
has facilitated, or has the potential to facilitate,
effective ownership and leadership by the               To a        To          To an       I'm
government of the development of the national           great      some     insignificant   not      No       Total
statistical system of [name of country]?               extent      extent      extent       sure   answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                                  31          19           1           5       1         57
Pipeline countries                                      27          15           0           8       3         53


All SRF countries                                       58          34           1          13       4        110


Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                                  54          33           2           9       2
Pipeline countries                                      51          28           0          15       6

All SRF countries                                       53          31           1          12       4

Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                                     58          33           0           0       8         12
NSO                                                     71          22           2           5       0         41
OGA                                                     32          26           0          32      11         19
ONU                                                     60          20           0          20       0         5
IDS                                                      ..          ..          ..          ..      ..        4
LDP                                                     41          41           0          14       3         29


Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.

Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                              70
156. Across all the SRF countries, some 30 per cent of respondents thought that national
authorities were, or would be, taking such reform measures to a significant extent, and this
figure rose to 65 per cent when those who agreed ‘to some extent’ were added in (see Table
17 below and Table II.39 in Annex 2). Fewer than 10 per cent of respondents overall, in fact,
were reasonably confident that SRF implementation would not involve reform measures.
There were wide variations among countries: over half of Nigerian respondents, but only
around 10 per cent of those in Afghanistan and Rwanda, saw national authorities undertaking
reforms to a significant extent. Unusually, the proportion of respondents who were unsure
about the situation or didn’t answer the question was smaller in the pipeline countries than in
those where the SRF was already under implementation. Among stakeholder groups, Task
Team Leaders were much more likely than others to consider that significant reforms were
being or would be undertaken.

                e) SRF facilitation of the use of data to support evidence-based decision-
                   making

157. The extent to which statistical data are used in policy- and decision-making processes
in the grant-recipient countries is one of the two indicators which attempt to measure
Outcome as defined in the Generic Results Framework for the SRF Catalytic Fund –
increased capacity to formulate policies and make decisions for development using better
statistics. However, as shown in Annex 4 to this report, baseline information for this indicator
from user satisfaction surveys is only currently available for Nigeria. The Evaluation Team
therefore hoped to gain insight into this important question through the survey questionnaire.
158. Overall, just over half of all respondents considered that the concept of the SRF has
facilitated, or has the potential to facilitate, the greater use of statistical data and indicators to
support evidence-based decision-making to a great extent (see Table 18 below and Table II.40
in Annex 2). Barring some 10 per cent of respondents who were unsure on this issue or did
not reply, the remainder supported this position to some extent. As in other areas, there were
distinct differences among both implementing and pipeline countries: respondents considering
that the SRF facilitated (or might facilitate) more use of data in policy- and decision-making
to a great extent ranged from 80 per cent in Ghana and 72 per cent in Rwanda to 33 per cent
in DRC and only 11 per cent in Afghanistan. Although differences in the mix of respondents
from one country to another cannot be ignored, this range of figures again appears to reflect,
to a substantial degree, the level of statistical capacity development in the respective
countries.
159. As has been the case on several other issues, the responses to this question of Task
Team Leaders, in-country donor statisticians and NSO respondents were more positive than
those representing other groups of stakeholders including other government agencies and
local development partners. Nevertheless, a large majority of all the stakeholder groups
agreed that the SRF concept was, at least to some extent, a facilitating factor in the greater use
of statistics in the development process.




                                                   71
                                                     Table 17
                         SRF project implementation and governmental reform measures

9D. Does implementation of the SRF project,
currently or potentially, involve national       Yes, to a     To       No, or     I'm
authorities taking reform measures that would   significant   some     probably    not     No       Total
not otherwise have been undertaken?               extent      extent      not     sure   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                              15          20        5       16       1         57
Pipeline countries                                  18          18        3        9       5         53

All SRF countries                                   33          38        8       25       6        110


Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                              26          35        9       28       2
Pipeline countries                                  34          34        6       17       9

All SRF countries                                   30          35        7       23       5

Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                                 67          33        0        0       0         12
NSO                                                 32          29       12       20       7         41
OGA                                                 26          26        5       32      11         19
ONU                                                 20          40        0       40       0         5
IDS                                                 ..          ..        ..       ..      ..        4
LDP                                                 17          41        7       31       3         29

Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.

Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                         72
                                                 Table 18
             SRF facilitation of the use of data to support evidence-based decision-making


9E. To what extent do you consider that the
concept of the SRF has facilitated, or has
the potential to facilitate, the greater use of
statistical data and indicators to support To a         To          To an        I'm
evidence-based decision-making in [name great some              insignificant   not      No       Total
of country]?                                    extent extent      extent       sure   answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                          28        25         0           3       1         57
Pipeline countries                              30        16         0           5       2         53


All SRF countries                               58        41         0           8       3        110


Percentage distributions
Implementing countries                          49        44         0           5       2
Pipeline countries                              57        30         0           9       4


All SRF countries                               53        37         0           7       3


Stakeholder groups:
TTL                                             58        42         0           0       0         12
NSO                                             66        29         0           5       0         41
OGA                                             37        37         0          16      11         19
ONU                                             40        40         0          20       0         5
IDS                                             ..        ..         ..          ..      ..        4
LDP                                             41        48         0           7       3         29


Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.


Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     73
         x) Looking to the future

160. In replying to the questionnaire, respondents provided a number of further comments on
the SRF, many of which are forward-looking in nature. These comments are summarized here.
161. Respondents in all three implementing countries expressed the wish that SRF funding
should be continued. Although there was a minority view that the SRF could live up to
expectations only with committed and experienced management and project staff, most
respondents from Afghanistan took the opportunity to thank the SRF project staff and team
members for their assistance and underlined the importance of the project to statistical capacity
building, in particular to respond to data requirements for proper monitoring and evaluation of
the expected results and outcome of the national development plan.
162. Despite some concerns that a lack of political will may have affected project
implementation, and differing views about the effectiveness of monitoring of the project, it was
generally felt that the SRF activities in Nigeria were bringing tangible results and that the project
had made a positive impact within a relatively short period of time. It was viewed as a catalytic
intervention in Nigeria’s long-term efforts to develop a well-integrated statistical system that was
in line with global best practice and that would facilitate the production and use of data in
national decision making. The SRF was also seen as helping develop critical statistical
infrastructure and encouraging the incorporation of statistics into a national M&E framework.
Concern was however expressed about the present limited coverage of the SRF project in
relation to the size of the country and to the possible scope of activity. Respondents requested
that additional funds be provided in order to consolidate the gains being made in the pilot phase,
to extend coverage from the pilot states to the whole country, and to support the conduct of
socio-economic and other surveys at sub-national level to facilitate the availability of baseline
data16.
163. In Rwanda, while there was some concern expressed about a lack of feedback to certain
development partners, there was a strong feeling that the SRF project was helping the national
statistical office improve its systems and deliver data in timely fashion in line with the
implementation of the NSDS. SRF funding needed to be continued in order to finance surveys
and enhance the links between data producers and users.
164. It was also felt that the SRF-CF should be expanded to other countries, drawing on
lessons learned in the pilot phase. The view was further expressed that the SRF could be utilized
to disseminate and share knowledge through regional programs and partnerships, and could fund
R&D on modern statistical tools and technology to improve institutional information on national
statistical offices in Africa, where the current dearth of data hampered organizational planning
and institutional development.
165. In the pipeline countries where projects were under preparation, the SRF grants were
eagerly awaited as a means of, among other things, financing key statistical activities,
subscribing to the SDDS, strengthening statistical training facilities, undertaking user satisfaction
surveys, and filling data gaps to monitor development plans. In DR Congo, it was considered
important to avoid further delay in commencing the SRF project, which was seen as an

16
  The Evaluation Team was informed that the World Bank is currently preparing a follow-up technical assistance
project in support of statistics which is projected to be at least $100 million in size and be ready for implementation
in mid-2014 i.e. shortly after the completion of the SRF project.

                                                          74
opportunity for government to identify major shortcomings in the statistical system and take the
necessary remedial steps. Respondents from Ethiopia felt that the SRF held out great potential if
implemented with strong leadership and full stakeholder participation, with the project serving as
the core vehicle for coordinated donor support to statistical capacity building. In Lao PDR,
where the recently commenced SRF project was the key donor vehicle supporting the
modernization of the statistical system, it was foreseen that it would improve coordination of
sectoral information and access to data, and make a significant contribution towards
implementation of the national statistical development strategy.
166. A number of respondents in both categories of countries felt that the notional resource
allocation ceiling of $10 million was rather arbitrary, even though it was acknowledged that this
sum could leverage additional resources in line with one of the SRF-CF’s core objectives. It was
proposed that there should in future be some flexibility in the allocation amount for larger
countries, and as an incentive for those countries that were performing well. Where
implementation was proceeding rapidly, additional resources should be granted towards the
achievement of the project development objectives, while follow-on grants could be provided for
scaling up pilot survey programs or other statistical activities relevant to overall national
development goals.




                                               75
IV.    Conclusions and recommendations

           i) Main conclusion and context

167. Based mainly on the generally positive feedback from the questionnaires received, the
in-depth discussions with the Task Team Leaders and the in-country statisticians and the field
visits to Nigeria and Rwanda, the Evaluation Team’s main conclusion is that in general, the
SRF appears to be reasonably successful in meeting its objectives. It is, however, important
to note the limitations of this evaluation, which draws conclusions from the experience about
a program which is basically operational in only three countries. In view of this, care needs to
be taken when considering this report in general and the conclusions and recommendations
presented in this section. Most importantly, there is a clear general impression that for most of
the success criteria utilized in the survey, the stakeholder groups which could be said to have
a larger stake or vested interest in the SRF (TTL, NSO and IDS) were more positive than the
remaining groups which largely comprise users of statistics.
168. While noting the need for a cautious interpretation of the results from the small sample
size, the Evaluation Team believes that the positive results gathered from the survey and the
field visits justify the recommendation that the SRF approach should be extended and
expanded. For the sake of clarity, it is useful to recall that the above conclusion refers to the
specific objectives set for the SRF-Catalytic Fund which are: i) promoting a system-wide
approach in statistics at country level; ii) increasing resources for implementing country-
owned national statistical plans; iii) linking improvements in the statistical system to the
needs of national and sectoral monitoring frameworks and promoting an improved dialogue
and partnership between users and statistical producers; and iv) delivering more efficient and
effective aid and technical assistance for strengthening statistical systems and results
measurement.
169. The assessment of the SRF by the Evaluation Team also involved a thorough review
of the results frameworks, generic and country-specific. As shown in Annex 4, in spite of
some adjustments since the generic results framework was first designed, the lack of
information on the key objectives of the SRF approach, the short implementation period and
the limited number of countries (3) where SRF project implementation has been effective,
has made the results framework less than satisfactory for evaluation purposes. Efforts by the
SRF Administration Unit to populate the generic results framework, as presented in the SRF
Annual Reports, are expected to provide useful insights on the SRF system-wide approach
and on user-producer dialogue as more information is fed in from the second round of user
satisfaction surveys. It is worth mentioning that based on the Evaluation Team’s survey, the
experience with user satisfaction surveys is patchy and additional efforts will be required to
improve them -- including, as suggested by the SRF Administration Unit (see below), the
need to lighten the surveys and focus on key statistical producers and users. The results
frameworks are discussed further in section vi) below.
170. The report also evaluates M&E arrangements of country-specific SRF projects and the
Bank teams’ supervision reports. On the country M&E arrangements which are based on the
national statistical development plans, the evaluation reveals that key information on the
impact of the SRF projects on mobilizing additional resources for statistics, on the improved
dialogue between users and producers of statistics, as well as on the harmonization and

                                                76
coordination of development partners’ support, is generally lacking. A review of the World
Bank’s supervision mission reports shows a more limited focus on the country projects’
development objectives and intermediate indicators, with few insights into the wider
objectives of the SRF approach as detailed above. On resources, which are an important
aspect of the Catalytic Fund, the Bank's monitoring has been focused on how much project
money has been disbursed rather than on the broader aspects such as the amount of domestic
and external funding generated for statistical work.
171. Because of the difficulties with the generic results framework and the country M&E
tools and arrangements developed and utilized so far, the Evaluation Team concludes that
       a) the assessment, as envisaged in the SRF Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements,
       was particularly timely; and
       b) it was important that the evaluation utilized techniques such as interviews, field
       visits and the questionnaire survey among all stakeholder groups, which are different
       from the tools routinely available.

           ii) Previous reviews of the SRF

172. In drawing up its conclusions and recommendations, the Evaluation Team recognizes that
the SRF Administration Unit included in its annual reports in 2011 and 2012 a chapter on
‘Lessons Learned and Next Steps’. The first key lesson focuses on delays which arise from a
variety of causes. Under the heading ‘How can we accelerate progress?’ the SRF Annual
Reports identify four measures namely:
       a) making a better assessment at the initial stages of the project of what is in place and
          what additional support may be needed to ensure a smooth preparation;
       b) revisiting country selection for future SRF operations;
       c) lightening procedures for the application and preparation of SRF projects; and
       d) supporting the national project executing agencies in the areas of procurement,
          financial management, and overall project management including M&E.
173. The second lesson refers to the challenges for national statistical authorities to
harmonize and coordinate the support and actions by development partners due to weak
capacity and the need to juggle competing demands by development partners. The Annual
Reports recommend more transparency on development partners’ activities in statistics and
their sources of funding such as sharing of their programs of activities and a yearly review of
these programs to enhance the monitoring of delivery and evaluation of effectiveness. The
SRF Annual Reports also highlight the important role of the in-country donor statistician in
helping to facilitate dialogue among the government agencies and with development partners
and other users and thus to strengthen the role of the national partnership group.
174. The third lesson highlighted in the Annual Reports refers to the generic Results
Framework and the difficulties encountered in getting the required indicators. Besides the
implementation of practical steps such as reducing the number of indicators (see Annex 4 for
more details), the Annual Reports recommend a number of steps, namely: i) starting the
discussion on the M&E indicators at the beginning of the preparation process; ii) simplifying
the user satisfaction survey and making it more selective both in terms of key users of
statistics and main statistical areas; and iii) other measures such as fostering the network of

                                               77
heads of national statistical offices of SRF countries and communications among the World
Bank project teams.
175. Based on the questionnaire survey and the field visits to Nigeria and Rwanda, the
Evaluation Team fully endorses the lessons and proposals for corrective measures identified
by the SRF Administration Unit. Some of these issues will be revisited later in this chapter
with insights from the survey responses.

       iii) Limitations of the evaluation: A cautious interpretation is needed

176. It was clear from the outset of the evaluation that the limited operational experience with
the SRF would pose challenges to assessing its performance. Care therefore needs to be
exercised in interpreting the findings of the evaluation. In particular, the Evaluation Team draws
attention to the widely differing response rates among the various stakeholder groups, and to the
likelihood that different groups may have different ‘stakes’ in the outcome of the assessment.
Comparisons between countries also need to be undertaken with care, because of the different
mix of respondents from each country. These points need to be borne in mind when considering
this report in general and the conclusions and recommendations presented in this section.
177. Judging by the experience with the questionnaire, the SRF is not as well-known even in
the implementing countries as one might expect, especially in the OGA, ONU and LDP groups.
These groups are also less likely to agree that the NSDS was inclusive. While this general
conclusion is not necessarily unexpected, the Evaluation Team feels that in the future, more
conscious attention needs to be paid in the course of SRF implementation to involving these
groups, which are largely users, in various ways – through user satisfaction surveys,
reinvigorated national partnership groups, properly functioning statistical advisory councils etc.

       iv) Detailed conclusions and recommendations by SRF main objectives

178. There are real achievements that can be attributed to the SRF in all three implementing
countries. In general, the five SRF objectives are being met, but with somewhat differing rates
of success.

               a) Promotion of a system-wide approach to statistics

179. Over 70 per cent of respondents in implementing countries believe that the SRF is at least
somewhat successful in promoting a system-wide approach. Contributory factors to this success
can be identified in all three implementing countries. That figure rises to around 80 per cent
when respondents who feel optimistic in this regard are added in. The equivalent figure for
countries where implementation has yet to fully commence is 50 per cent, with 43 per cent of
respondents in the pipeline countries feeling that it is too early to judge. But while development
partners are seen to be, and say they are, on board in agreeing with the development of a system-
wide approach -- fully 80 per cent subscribed to this view at least to some extent – their actual
support for such an approach was less pronounced.
180. Despite some positive findings about the success of the SRF in promoting a system-wide
approach, the survey results did not suggest that implementation of such an approach would be a
straightforward task. Thirty five per cent of respondents indicated that a system-wide approach
would pose a significant challenge and another 45 per cent a moderate challenge. One group of

                                               78
issues concerned the general lack of a data culture in several of the pilot countries and limited
capacity of the national statistical system. A second set of difficulties, at least as large as the
first, related to development partners themselves. Local donor agencies sometimes lacked
technical expertise in the field of statistics, which was not a focal area for some donors. Not
infrequently, development partners lacked an overall vision, and pressure for short-term results
still often favored one-off survey activities rather than system-wide development.


Recommendations
      Given the complex issues behind the promotion of a system-wide approach to statistics, it
       is difficult to formulate specific recommendations in the SRF context to tackle them. One
       particular aspect that may need further consideration is the role of the in-country donor
       statistician on coordination.
      The World Bank should lead by example by ensuring that it has staff in the country office
       suitably qualified in statistics or M&E to serve on the National Partnership Group,
       especially in countries where an in-country statistician is absent or provided by another
       development partner, and should encourage other development partners to do likewise.

               b) Resource mobilization

181. The evaluation questionnaire addresses three issues: i) whether domestic resources to
statistics have been increased since the start of the SRF project; ii) whether development partners
have increased their funding for statistics; and iii) whether the SRF resources should be seen as
core financing for implementing NSDSs. In general, the resource mobilization objective of the
SRF may not have attracted as much success as some of the other objectives.
182. Regarding domestic resources for statistics, 39 per cent of all respondents indicated that
funding had already increased. Interestingly, this figure was slightly higher for pipeline
countries than for implementing countries, but it must be noted that there was a very wide
variation among countries. This positive impression, however, seems to unravel in the detail:
only 10 per cent of non-LDP respondents attributed increases in domestic resources directly to
the SRF, and only 7 per cent of local development partners attributed increases of donor
resources to the Facility. Also, a significant proportion of respondents (30 per cent overall) were
not sure of the domestic resource situation and nearly half did not answer follow-up questions on
domestic resources, presumably because of a lack of knowledge. A similar situation prevailed in
relation to the resources of development partners; in addition, government respondents were far
more optimistic about increases in LDP resources than were the donors themselves. Despite
these levels of uncertainty, it seems clear that the direct effect of the SRF on increases in
resources for statistics in the pilot countries, both from domestic and external sources, has so far
been quite modest.
183. In support of the majority view that SFR funding should constitute core finance for
NSDS implementation, many respondents stated that government resources for statistical work
were often very inadequate. In that environment the SRF was seen as central and sustained core
funding for broader, more fundamental issues such as institutional development (especially in
post-conflict countries), capacity building, ICT and statistical infrastructure, and the statistical
capacity of line ministries.

                                                79
Recommendations
      Because of big divergences of views revealed by the survey about the funding plans of
       development partners, it is recommended that the SRF should promote a more systematic
       exchange of information on funding intentions within national partnership groups.
      Given the role of funding in ensuring sustainability of the support for statistics generated
       by the SRF, it is desirable for all concerned parties to increase efforts to generate
       additional funding and to actively explore additional resource mobilization methods, for
       example through matched funding arrangements.
      The practice of countries producing regular NSDS implementation reports is considered
       to be very helpful in monitoring the commitment of resources and their delivery, and
       should be promoted during SRF implementation. While responsibility for producing
       NSDS implementation reports lies firmly with countries, the TORs of the in-country
       donor statisticians should specifically mention the provision of support to national
       authorities in this regard.
      Aided by a conducive environment, the basket fund in Rwanda was proving effective for NSDS
       implementation, and the SRF should be used to encourage the use of basket funds elsewhere,
       taking country circumstances into consideration.

               c) Linking statistical systems to national monitoring frameworks

184. Sixty one per cent of respondents in implementing countries considered that the SRF was
at least somewhat successful in fostering this linkage. In these countries, half of all respondents
considered that the SRF had played a very significant role to date in enhancing the production,
quality and timeliness of data, and that figure rose to nearly 80 per cent when those who felt that
it had played some role were added in. To some degree, this result is not surprising given that for
the seven countries for which detailed M&E arrangements are available, improvements in data
collection, analysis and quality control figure very prominently.
185. The impact of the SRF in enhancing the accessibility and usability of data in the
implementing countries was reported to be somewhat less than for the production, quality and
timeliness of data; nevertheless 42 per cent of respondents in the implementing countries
reported that the SRF had played a very significant role to date, and another 30 per cent indicated
that it had played some role.
Recommendations
      In spite of problems mentioned in the introductory part of this section, user satisfaction
       surveys are one of the rare tools available to measure user satisfaction with accessibility,
       usability and other attributes of data. The Evaluation Team recommends that more
       research be undertaken into improving the quality and efficacy of such surveys and in the
       interim fully supports the proposal by the SRF Administration Unit to lighten the user
       satisfaction surveys and to be more selective on key data users.




                                                80
        Opportunities should be taken to critically assess initiatives such as PARIS21’s attempt to
         design a scoring system to measure the use of statistics in the policy process17.
        The importance of the use of statistics should be highlighted in future SRF projects by,
         for instance, encouraging user satisfaction surveys to monitor this concern and making it
         more explicit in project development objectives.

                  d) Promoting dialogue between statistics users and producers

186. Some 57 per cent of respondents in implementing countries (producers and users alike)
consider the SRF to be at least somewhat successful in promoting this dialogue, with a further 23
per cent (and as many as 39 per cent in Rwanda) optimistic in this regard. This relatively high
figure perhaps indicates that the promotion of a dialogue between users and producers is a
longer-term activity than some others. In the pipeline countries, over half the respondents either
felt that it was too early to judge on this issue, or failed to answer the question. In so far as
producers and users of statistics could be distinguished from among the stakeholders responding,
it appeared that the two groups held quite similar views on the success of the SRF to date in
promoting a dialogue between them; however, the only respondents stating that the SRF was
barely or not successful at all in this regard seemed to be users. In the countries where user
satisfaction surveys had already been conducted, some three-quarters of OGA and ONU
respondents, and over half of LDPs, either professed ignorance about the status of such surveys
in their respective countries or gave an inaccurate answer. Moreover, users of statistics were the
least well informed about capacity building activities designed for their benefit.
Recommendations
        Implementing agencies need to make much greater efforts to mainstream user satisfaction
         surveys in their work programs, to inform other stakeholders of their plans for those
         surveys and to publicize the results of surveys which have already been conducted.
        More attention should be paid to user-oriented awareness raising activities through
         greater publicity and outreach as well as to covering these activities in country
         dissemination strategies.
        Sharing among countries of various practices such as workshops, training of journalists
         and mobile education for user outreach should be encouraged.

                  e) Delivering more effective aid

187. In the implementing countries, 28 per cent of respondents felt that the SRF was very
successful in delivering more efficient and effective aid and technical assistance for
strengthening statistical systems and results measurement, and a further 37 per cent thought it
was somewhat successful. In their comments on this question, respondents in the implementing
countries frequently made reference to the fact that the SRF project addressed the overall
statistical system and provided a good platform for development partners to share information

17
   PARIS21 (2012). ‘A Scoring System to Measure the Use of Statistics in the Policy -Making Process. Summary
Report’. The scoring system provides an analytical framework for the assessment of national policy documents, and
allows for a quantitative ranking based on each country’s use of statistics, which falls into three categories: upstream
policy use, downstream policy use, and statistical capacity development in 44 low- and middle-income countries.

                                                          81
and experiences, become aware of what others were doing, and plan and channel their support to
statistics.
188. Predictably, nearly half of all respondents in the pipeline countries felt that it was too
early to judge the success of the SRF in meeting this objective. Among the stakeholder groups
in both the implementing countries and overall, local development partners were only slightly
less positive than national statistical office respondents in ascribing a degree of success to the
SRF in the better delivery of aid and technical assistance. It was interesting to note that a
handful of development partners were the only respondents to record an opposing view to the
general view that the SRF has led to better aid coordination.
Recommendations
      In spite of the relatively positive reaction from the survey on aid effectiveness, the
       information gathered from the field visits and more in-depth discussions with in-country
       donor statisticians show that progress in this area depends to a great extent on personal
       relationships between members of the local development partners. The importance of
       sustaining these relationships needs to be borne in mind in a situation with possibly
       frequent staff rotation. Moreover, the SRF Administration Unit should be kept up-to-date
       on staff changes by the respective World Bank offices so as to brief new TTLs on the
       special features of the SRF approach.


       v) Other conclusions and recommendations based on the survey

               a) In-country donor statisticians

189. Respondents in countries where there is an in-country statistician were virtually
unanimous that the statisticians have had a very significant positive impact on the successful
implementation of the respective projects. Within the very broad SRF-CF guidelines for the
in-country statisticians, they have been playing an important, sometimes crucial, role in
facilitating the system-wide approach and helping coordinate donor activities in statistical
capacity building. The fact that the statistician represented a major donor was seen as having
a positive impact on their effectiveness, and there was little or no perception of friction
surrounding the role of the statistician vis-à-vis the national statistical system. The Evaluation
Team noted that office arrangements for the statisticians could influence priority settings, but
in general, respondents felt that the balance of the statisticians’ contributions to the various
SRF objectives was appropriate. The Evaluation Team concludes that the in-country donor
statisticians have been an almost unqualified success.

Recommendations

      SRF projects should continue to incorporate the role of in-country donor statistician. In
       larger projects, more than one post should be considered subject to funding availability.
      When drafting terms of reference for future in-country donor statisticians, or revising
       existing ToRs, consideration should be given to emphasizing the coordinating role, both
       between producers and users of statistics and among development partners. Given the


                                                 82
       general lack of statistical capacity in the pilot countries, it is recommended that the post
       of in-country donor statistician should be funded for a substantial period of time.
      Strong consideration should be given in future SRF projects to formulating an exit strategy for the
       eventual withdrawal of the IDS post.
      In addition, the SRF Administration Unit should explore and analyze the lessons from
       different implementation models for the IDS and help to rebalance the IDS’ time
       allocation priorities where needed.

               b) Issues related to the SRF Charter

190. Only a very small minority of respondents considered that the expectations of the SRF in
terms of its impact and timing were unrealistic, but among the rest expectations varied
considerably from one country to another and among stakeholder groups. The implementing
countries also exhibited large differences when the SRF’s most significant impacts were
identified. Overall, though, it was clear that improvements in terms of data production, quality
and usability, and the promotion of a system-wide approach, were seen by respondents as the
SRF’s most important contributions to date. The Evaluation Team concludes that the SRF
approach is certainly broad and flexible enough to have a significant impact in each of the
diverse situations represented by the three implementing countries.
191. The possible extension of the SRF to regional operations drew varied responses, but those
respondents in favor outnumbered those against. A rich vein of suggestions was put forward,
featuring south-south exchange of experiences and the sharing of best practices and expertise.
Many respondents proposed that any regional SRF capacity building projects should be
undertaken in close collaboration with existing regional or sub-regional organizations.
192. From respondents’ comments on other issues related to the SRF Charter, and indeed their
lack of comments, the Evaluation Team gathered that most respondents in the pilot countries –
not unexpectedly--were not at all familiar with it.

Recommendations

      While retaining the country focus of the SRF approach, the SRF Council should explore
       the possibility of extending the SRF to regional initiatives including the introduction of a
       regional dimension to country projects, drawing on the (anonymous) suggestions put
       forward by respondents and collaborating where possible with other appropriate
       organizations .
      The Council should promote the sharing of experiences across countries.
      It is recommended that steps be taken for the Charter to be publicized, so that countries
       and institutions become more knowledgeable about the SRF initiative and the approach
       and principles underlying it. This action could be taken in conjunction with raising the
       visibility of the SRF on the World Bank internal and external websites.

               c) SRF governance arrangements and operational practices and procedures




                                                   83
193. Many of the Evaluation Team’s conclusions in this area corroborate the findings already
documented by the SRF Administration Unit and mentioned above. Thus, initiatives under way
to simplify procedures for the approval and disbursement of SRF grants can be readily supported
by the Team – even though its survey revealed that many of the problems laid at the Bank’s door
were in fact mainly or solely related to internal country difficulties. Similarly the call by survey
respondents for more awareness of and training in SRF principles and procedures has essentially
already been identified in the SRF Annual Reports -- although the Team notes that such activities
need to be directed not only at national project executing agencies but also at World Bank
country staff.
194. As opposed to only 22 per cent of respondents in the implementing countries who
described the SRF grant approval and disbursement process as smooth and timely, 78 per cent
rated their experience in implementing the grant, in terms of reporting arrangements and support
from Bank staff, as either very or somewhat positive. In fact the nomination of experienced and
committed TTLs and support staff was identified by respondents as key to successful project
implementation.
195. Problems faced in implementing the SRF projects, identified by selected stakeholders not
only in implementing but also pipeline countries, varied from country to country but included
inadequacy of counterpart government budgetary support, a lack of coordination (both across
government and among development partners), low levels of capacity, and overly bureaucratic
processes on the part of both the Bank and national administrations. The Evaluation Team notes
that procedural changes for the SRF projects have been designed to acknowledge and address
most of these problems.
196. The generic and country-specific results frameworks for the SRF have been discussed
earlier in this section as well as in Annex 4, and are taken up again in section vi) below. The
Evaluation Team’s survey confirmed the difficulties that Task Team Leaders, national statistical
offices and in-country statisticians have been having in using the generic Results Framework,
with those finding the experience generally negative outnumbering those who thought it very
positive. The review of the World Bank’s supervision mission reports shows a relatively narrow
focus on the project development objectives and intermediate results indicators.

Recommendations

      The actions already identified by the SRF Administration Unit to improve SRF
       governance and operational issues should continue to be pursued. Support to
       implementing agencies in the areas of procurement, financial management and overall
       project management including M&E should where necessary be extended to the Bank
       staff concerned.
      World Bank management should endeavor to ensure greater continuity in post of TTLs
       and other staff assigned to SRF project implementation.
      Modify SRF guidelines to TTLs to stress the point that the coverage of broader SRF
       issues, as noted in the generic SRF Results Framework, need to be taken into account
       during project supervision, so as to be able to respond to SRF requirements.




                                                84
      Given that the SRF is a pilot exercise, proactive lesson learning and experience sharing
       among the pilot countries, both for Bank TTLs as well as for national government staff
       involved in the project and in-country donor statisticians, should be further pursued.
      The SRF Administration Unit should continue its practice of including in the Catalytic
       Fund Annual Reports a chapter on Lessons Learned and Next Steps, incorporating where
       appropriate the issues raised in this evaluation report.


               d) General questions on the impacts of the SRF-CF on national statistical
                  systems

197. Over half of all respondents, in both implementing and pipeline countries, felt that the
concept of the SRF met (or had the potential to meet) their statistical capacity building needs to a
great extent. However, these figures did differ markedly from one country to the next, and there
appeared to be some relationship between the scores and the existing level of statistical capacity
as measured by the SCI. Within the overall rubric of statistical capacity building, the major
motivations for applying for an SRF grant also varied from one country to the next, but could
roughly be divided into those relating to higher-echelon objectives corresponding to the Outcome
level of the SRF Results Framework, and those concerning institution and capacity building
within the national statistical system itself.
198. In the implementing countries overall, more than half the respondents considered that the
SRF was facilitating effective government ownership and leadership of the statistical
development process to a great extent; in terms of potential, the response from the pipeline
countries was similar. On this question there were substantial variations among countries and
among stakeholder groups. The same applied to the issue of whether implementation of the SRF
project involved national authorities taking reform measures that would not otherwise have
occurred; overall nearly two-thirds of respondents felt that this was, or would be, the case at least
to some extent.
199. The Evaluation Team had particular interest in the extent to which statistical data are
used in policy- and decision-making in the grant-recipient countries, as this is one of two
indicators attempting to measure Outcome as defined in the Generic Results Framework, and
evidence from user satisfaction surveys to date is weak at best. Around 90 per cent of
respondents indicated that the concept of the SRF facilitated, or had the potential to facilitate, the
greater use of statistical data and indicators to support evidence-based decision-making at least to
some extent, although again there were distinct differences among both implementing and
pipeline countries. The experiences of Rwanda and of Niger State in Nigeria which the
Evaluation Team visited show that the importance given to statistics by senior level officials
played a key role in the promotion of the use of data for planning and policy decision-making.

200. Overall, the Evaluation Team concludes that the principles, underlying approach and
development objective of the SRF-CF, as described in its Charter, is finding a strong degree of
resonance and relevance in meeting the statistical capacity building needs and aspirations of all
the pilot countries. By and large, responses to this group of questions appear to be more positive
from countries where the level of statistical capacity, by the measures that are available, is


                                                 85
higher. However, given survey-related limitations and the complexity of factors likely to be at
work, the Team considers it difficult to formulate any specific recommendations in this area.

               e) Looking to the future

201. Respondents in all three implementing countries expressed the wish that SRF funding
should continue, citing both achievements to date and unfinished (or in some cases unstarted)
tasks still to be addressed. In the pipeline countries, the SRF grants were eagerly awaited as a
vehicle for meeting their respective statistical capacity needs. As noted at the beginning of this
section, the Evaluation Team recommends that the SRF approach should be extended and
expanded.

202. The Evaluation Team notes that the current notional resource allocation ceiling of $10
million is rather arbitrary, and sees merit in the suggestions from a number of survey respondents
that it be revisited.
Recommendation:

      While acknowledging the leveraging objective of SRF grants, the Evaluation Team
       recommends that the SRF Council re-examine the current notional resource allocation
       ceiling and consider upward flexibility for, for example, larger countries, as an incentive
       for high-performing projects, and to scale up pilot programs. .

       vi) Insights and recommendations on three specific issues concerning the
       future of the SRF

203. The discussion on conclusions and recommendations presented up until this point in
sections iii) to v) is derived primarily from the responses gathered from the questionnaire survey
in the 8 SRF pilot countries, enriched by in-depth discussions the Evaluation Team had with
TTLs of the pilot projects, in-country donor statisticians and various stakeholders in Nigeria and
Rwanda. The focus of the conclusions and recommendations is structured along the terms of
reference of the evaluation namely, how successfully the SRF approach has achieved its
objectives covering various outputs and practices engendered by the SRF, the inputs and
contributions made possible by the SRF approach, and SRF governance arrangements including
operational practices by the World Bank. The evaluation exercise takes as given the choice of the
pilot countries, existing practices concerning the design and monitoring of the results
frameworks (both the SRF generic and the country-specific ones), as well as procedures defined
by the SRF Charter and World Bank project management practices.

204. Based on the positive feedback from the questionnaires received, the in-depth discussions
with key stakeholders and the field visits to Nigeria and Rwanda, the main conclusion of this
evaluation, as highlighted at the beginning of this chapter, is that the SRF approach should be
extended and expanded. In this perspective, the Evaluation Team, upon the request of the SRF
Administration Unit, has undertaken additional work to provide insights and proposals on three
important issues which have significant bearing on the future of the SRF approach. These issues
are a) country selection, b) the results framework, and c) ways to enable greater flexibility in
project implementation and to enhance greater ownership by countries and the World Bank
operations units.

                                               86
               a) Country selection

205. For the pilot phase, the SRF-CF Council has been responsible for determining the criteria
by which countries have been identified to receive grants from the SRF-CF. The criteria include
country levels of statistical capacity and the extent of commitment to the SRF principles. Pilot
countries represent a mixture of different levels of statistical development, different types of
statistical systems, and different problems and concerns relating to the development of statistics
including those of fragile states emerging from conflict. While the selection principles are clear,
the SRF Charter is not sufficiently specific to help in the actual selection of countries.

206. Discussions with DfID staff who were closely involved in the selection of pilot countries
revealed that the actual decisions on country selection were based on compromises between
analytical considerations (such as the level of statistical capacity building and the capacity for
MDG monitoring) and political considerations. There was a generally shared belief that the SRF
approach would work across countries including those facing challenging circumstances. The
selection of Afghanistan and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) was based on this belief
in spite of the fact that DRC does not have an NSDS; having an NSDS in place or under
development was specifically mentioned as a requirement for countries applying for SRF grants.
The importance of the World Bank’s capacity on the ground, the role of the World Bank country
director/country coordinator, and the possibility of leveraging resources such as IDA funding
were also mentioned as important considerations, although it is not clear how these
considerations played a role in the final selection of countries for the pilot phase.

207. An exhaustive review of the SRF annual reports revealed repeated references to the
themes of difficulty, variety and fragility for the selection of countries. The 2010 report states
that because of the flexibility of the SRF approach, support should also be given to fragile states
which do not have basic statistical capacity in place. The 2011 report states that all five initial
pilot countries represent ‘potentially difficult circumstances’. The reports also showed
continuing efforts to reflect on the issue of country selection. For instance, the 2011 report states
that despite progress, modifications to the country selection criteria (and to internal
administrative processes) would be needed to ‘unleash the Fund’s full [catalytic] effect’. The
2012 report suggested revisiting the country selection criteria to focus more directly on the pre-
conditions.

208. Another issue which may affect country selection in the future revolves around two
possible options for the SRF grant application process, namely i) an open competition among all
IDA countries where defined criteria and prerequisites play an important role, and ii) an
‘invitation-only approach’ where countries are identified on the basis of technical and political
considerations as has been the case under the pilot phase of the SRF-CF.
Proposals

209. The recommendations for specific objectives of the SRF approach presented earlier in
this chapter are based on a clearly defined approach to data collection designed for this
evaluation, using the responses from the questionnaire survey, findings from the field mission
and interviews with all project task team leaders and in-country statisticians. By contrast, the
proposals suggested here for the selection of countries are solely based on the review of existing
documents on the SRF-CF and discussions and insights shared among the members of the

                                                 87
Evaluation Team. Hence, by comparison to the ‘recommendations’ presented in the earlier
sections, the ‘proposals’ suggested by the Evaluation Team on the issue of country selection (and
for that matter on the two other issues presented in this section, the results framework and issues
related to project implementation and ownership), are based on more limited underpinnings. But
assuming that the SRF approach will be extended and expanded, it is hoped that the proposals
listed below could, at least in part, contribute to a more methodical approach to country selection.

210. Fragile states versus other IDA countries. The positive feedback of the SRF from all 8
pilot countries including post-conflict countries appears to confirm the original belief that the
SRF approach does work in all country circumstances although more care and support should be
provided to fragile states. Based on the current classification of fragile states by the World Bank
which includes 36 countries out of 82 IDA-eligible countries, it is suggested that future SRF
funding may roughly be allocated 1/3 to fragile states and 2/3 to other countries.

211. Open competition versus ‘by invitation’. The relatively large size of SRF projects as
compared to other funding for statistical capacity building, and the generally positive reactions to
the SRF approach, would normally be expected to enhance the attractiveness of the SRF-CF as
support for statistical capacity building. While there may still exist justification for specific
countries to be ‘invited’ to apply for SRF grants as was the case under the pilot phase of the SRF,
it is the opinion of the Evaluation Team that open competition should be the primary option for
SRF funds allocation going forward.
212. Country selection criteria. The Evaluation Team has done a systematic review of
relevant criteria or preconditions that could affect country selection, many of which are drawn
from the experience of SRF pilot countries. These are summarized in the Appendix to this
chapter. While the comprehensive review of all criteria is a useful exercise, the Evaluation Team
believes that a two-step procedure would allow for a more practical approach to country
selection for future SRF funding.
213. Assuming that open competition will be adopted as the general rule for SRF grant
allocations in the future and given the relative success of the SRF pilot phase, candidate
countries can expect their applications for SRF grants to be subjected to a higher degree of
scrutiny. In fact, their willingness to apply for SRF funding is the first and foremost signal of
country commitment. The two-step approach mentioned above would apply to both regular IDA-
eligible countries and to fragile states, with some minor adjustments for the latter as shown in
Table 19.For regular IDA countries, all six first-order criteria must at least receive adequate
attention. The second-order criteria would help to fine-tune the selection process, allowing for
flexibility in the choice of countries. The criteria were identified based on the general
impressions of the Evaluation Team gathered from interviews during the field visits, written
comments from the survey, along with a study of the criteria utilised to date. . Based on the
assessment by the Evaluation Team, the degree of World Bank support to statistical capacity
building plays an important role.




                                                88
           Table 19: A two-step approach to country selection for SRF funding


                                     Regular IDA countries
First-order criteria                              Second-order criteria

a. The degree of commitment to the SRF                1. Statistical capacity (such as the SCI but
   principles.                                           preferably using three- or five-year
b. The existence of an NSDS.                             averages instead of the latest number).
c. The degree of high-level political                 2. The quality of the NSDS with preference
   endorsement of statistical capacity                   given to implementation efforts.
   building. Preference for a results focus at        3. Strength of leadership of the national
   the highest levels of government.                     statistical system.
d. The degree of World Bank support to                4. The existence of a senior in-country
   statistical capacity building.                        statistician from a lead donor agency to
e. The potential of SRF funding in                       help       with     coordination    and
   leveraging other resources, both domestic             harmonisation efforts.
   and foreign, in support for statistics.            5. The degree of adherence to a medium
f. The degree of coordination, through                   to long-term approach to statistical
   mechanisms or structures such as the                  capacity building, with preference
   National Partnership Group, between                   given to countries with increasing
   producers and users of statistics and                 funding for statistics.
   among the local development partners               6. The degree of commitment by the
   involved in statistical capacity building.            World Bank team in country office.


   Fragile states
First-order criteria                                  Second-order criteria

a. The existence of an NSDS or a well-                1. The degree of commitment to the SRF
   prepared statistical        strategy being            principles.
   developed where an NSDS would prove                2. The quality of the NSDS with preference
   very challenging to establish.                        given to implementation efforts.
b. The degree of high-level political                 3. Strength of leadership of the national
   endorsement of statistical capacity                   statistical system.
   building.
c. The degree of World Bank support to
   statistical capacity building.
d. The degree of coordination among the
   local development partners involved in
   support to statistics.




                                                 89
                b) The SRF generic results framework and country applicability

214. The detailed review in Annex 4 of efforts to monitor progress in statistical capacity in the
context of pilot country projects using the SRF approach highlighted the following challenges:
         i) Translating the generic results framework into specific indicators which are
            measurable and which can be monitored over time has proven to be much more
            challenging than originally expected. In this context the Evaluation Team
            acknowledges that devising indicators for a results framework in this field is no easy
            task, as has been documented elsewhere.18 The response by the SRF Administration
            Unit to the challenge of data unavailability has been to simplify the generic results
            framework by deleting indicators for which information is not available. As a result
            of this response, since the start of the SRF-CF, six of the original 22 indicators have
            been deleted. In particular, almost all indicators on commitments/disbursements of
            resources by the government and development partners have been removed, the only
            exception being disbursements under the SRF projects;
         ii) Even with a reduced set of indicators, information required to populate the generic
             results framework remains sparse and incomplete, making it difficult to measure and
             monitor key SRF principles, most importantly: a) the leveraging impact on resources
             of the SRF Catalytic Fund; and b) development partner support to the implementation
             of NSDSs;
         iii) In the context of specific country projects, there has been limited success by the
              project teams in blending the indicators of the generic results framework with country
              priorities based on individual country NSDSs. Updates of the SRF generic results
              framework using country information are produced by the SRF Administration Unit
              for the purpose of reporting and as an input to the SRF Annual Reports; and
         iv) The review of the World Bank’s supervision mission reports shows a relatively
             narrow focus on specific project development objectives and intermediate results
             indicators and limited efforts by supervision teams to attempt to cover the broader
             indicators of the SRF generic results framework.
Proposals

215. Generic results framework versus country-specific frameworks. Efforts by the SRF
Administration Unit to streamline the generic results framework to achieve better coherence with
data limitations at country level have been somewhat useful in helping to bridge the gap between
the two results frameworks. This has been done with data limitations as the major consideration.
A useful way to help bridge the gap between the two results frameworks is to view the SRF
generic results framework as an effort to monitor a medium- to long-term, system-focused effort
to sustainably develop the statistical capacity of countries, while specific project M&E
mechanisms monitor time-bound, data-focused operations. Given that countries are at different
stages of statistical capacity development, it is normal to expect that some country projects will

18
   The OPM report on the evaluation of the Paris Declaration (OPM 2009) mentions a number of attempts to apply
statistical capacity indicators, and notes concerns that finding indicators to include broader features of the statistical
system is problematic. In the SRF generic results framework, indicators of statistical capacity other than the SCI
itself have been deleted.

                                                           90
have more limited development objectives -- such as the production and accessibility of data and
human resource development which are the common development objectives of all the country
projects during the pilot phase -- while in countries such as Rwanda, the M&E mechanisms of
SRF projects should basically cover all the elements of the generic results framework. While
much more thinking is required to translate the above into operational practices, it is hoped that
this more dynamic vision of the SRF generic results framework will make it easier for project
teams and their counterparts in countries to conceive project M&E mechanisms for future SRF
projects.

216. Greater efforts to obtain information on budgetary commitments and support. While the
approach taken by the SRF Administration Unit in deleting all indicators related to funding and
disbursement for statistics, except for disbursement under the SRF projects, may be justified on
the basis of data unavailability, the impression of the Evaluation Team, based on the field
mission to Nigeria and Rwanda, was that information on resources for statistics is available but
does require special efforts to monitor. Without information on resources -- as is presently the
case in the (modified) generic results framework -- there is the risk that the sustainability of
support provided by the SRF projects may not be assured. The Evaluation Team therefore
proposes the re-introduction of some measure of budgetary resource monitoring, while
acknowledging that various challenges must be overcome including access to information on
resources provided by development partners.

217. Going beyond the production of and accessibility to statistics and highlighting user-
oriented awareness raising activities. The results frameworks of the pilot projects have a strong
focus on the production of data and their accessibility. While the Evaluation Team appreciates
the challenges in assessing the actual use of statistics, it would be useful for the SRF projects to
have provisions for the active support of properly functioning institutional mechanisms which
fully involve other government agencies outside the NSO as well as users of all sorts and
LDPs. This would include, among other actions, revising the content of the new indicator of the
generic results framework -- the number of government staff trained under the SRF -- which
should be supplemented by ‘total number of persons trained’ to reflect training of users including
journalists, researchers etc. In the same vein, emphasis should be put on the latter part of the
indicator ‘by type of training’; it would at least be helpful to distinguish technical training in
statistics from other types of training, which could relate to promoting the use of data or to
management and institutional matters or even to change management.

             c) Project implementation and project ownership

218. A close examination of the replies to the survey shows that many respondents reported
that the Bank’s administrative procedures had caused significant delays in SRF projects. That
was particularly the case with procurement procedures and the issuance of non-objection
clearance by the Bank, which were frequently described as slow and overly bureaucratic;
oversight functions could usefully be simplified.

Proposals

219. On World Bank procedures. The nomination of experienced and committed TTLs and
local support staff was seen by respondents to the questionnaire survey as key to successful

                                                91
project implementation, and the Evaluation Team was not always convinced that the Bank had
sufficient capacity at country level to fully support the SRF process. More awareness of and
training in SRF principles, norms and procedures was needed on the part of both Bank staff and
government officials in the SRF project team.

220. Greater ownership by countries and the World Bank. While country ownership is vitally
important and is at the core of the SRF approach, discussions19 on this issue in the broader context
of statistical capacity building have highlighted the need for the project or program to be ‘owned’
by a broad range of stakeholders and not exclusively by the government statistics office. The
different statistical priorities of the many relevant stakeholders mean that country ownership is
difficult to establish. In the short run, meeting the most pressing needs in terms of the statistics have
shared the focus on the government statistics office. A longer perspective must take into account the
needs and priorities of other government offices and many users.

221. The questionnaire survey for this evaluation shows clearly that ‘ownership’ is most
pronounced among NSOs and is much less evident among the other government agencies and the
users or potential users of statistics. More positive results on data quality and accessibility and
more importantly on dialogue between producers and users of statistics would go a long way in
promoting ownership for local stakeholders. The Evaluation Team’s impressions indicate a wide
range of interest and involvement by World Bank country teams in the SRF projects. Having as a
prerequisite for country selection the degree of World Bank support to statistical capacity
building in the country, as discussed earlier, could help in improving the situation.

222. Linkages with matching IDA credits. The review of country experiences by the
Evaluation Team shows that there may well be a case for such a linkage where the IDA funds are
meant to address high-level, non-technical concerns such as the results focus of government and
a reform-oriented institutional environment, which are described as among the higher pillars of
statistical capacity in the OPM evaluation report mentioned earlier, and which are presented
there as necessary for the full success of other more technical capacity building initiatives which
form lower pillars of statistical capacity in the OPM hierarchical framework. These latter more
technical pillars will tend to be those which are focused on in an SRF project. Properly
combined, the two could in principle be very effective. The experience of Ghana which has tried
combining the SRF with IDA funds, however, showed the risk of this approach, which has
caused a serious delay in the effectiveness of the SRF project. In the case of Nigeria, the
preparation of a larger IDA-funded operation for statistical support following the SRF project
appears to show the promise of potentially beneficial linkages.




19
  See for instance OPM (2009). Evaluation of the Implementation of the Paris Declaration: Thematic Study -
Support to Statistical Capacity Building. Synthesis Report.

                                                   92
Appendix to Chapter V


Overarching criteria

      Current level of statistical capacity and development
      Extent of commitment to SRF principles

Other criteria

      NSDS-related
        Quality NSDS in place [or being prepared].
        NSDS has clear implementation priorities.
        NSDS has high-level political endorsement.
        NSDS takes account of needs of main data producers and main data users.
        NSDS has widespread country support.
        NSDS has linkage to existing statistical initiatives.
        Formal request to WB for NSDS implementation using a sector-wide approach.

      Background conditions
        Identification of national resource requirements.
        Strong leadership of the national statistical system.
        Agreement on medium to long-term approach to statistical capacity building.
        Institutional reform, human development issues, problems of coordination and
          technical concerns all taken into account.

      Partnership issues
        National partnership for statistics in place or agreement on its establishment.
        Recognition of need to support and strengthen user-producer dialogue.
        Start of dialogue with LDPs.
        Agreement on need for donor coordination and some mechanisms in place to support
           it.
        Identification of lead donor.

      Project support related
        Potential to put IDS rapidly in place.
        Timetable for project preparation takes account of ongoing statistical programs.
        Existence of strong and committed Bank team in country office.
        Firm commitment from World Bank to appoint a TTL.



                                               93
                ANNEX 1: Survey questionnaire for SRF-CF stakeholders

Introduction

1.      The World Bank is conducting an independent evaluation of the Pilot Phase of the
Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF). The main purpose of the evaluation is to
assess the experience of the programs in the pilot countries, to identify achievements to date, and
to recommend any changes in policies and practices that may be necessary in order to improve
results. An evaluation of the pilot countries and recommendations for modifications to the
approach of the SRF would provide the basis for extending the role of the Catalytic Fund in
providing support for statistical capacity building to other countries. MM. Brian Ngo and
Andrew Flatt have been tasked to undertake this evaluation. As part of this exercise, they will be
visiting Nigeria and Rwanda for more detailed assessments of the SRF-CF.

2.      The pilot phase of the SRF-CF, which began in 2009, was set up to provide financial and
technical support to a limited number of pilot countries that either were endowed with a weak
level of statistical capacity or had recently emerged from conflict. Originally, five countries that
were invited by the World Bank to submit applications for assistance during the pilot phase,
namely Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Ghana, Nigeria, and Rwanda --
all IDA-eligible countries. Two of the countries – Afghanistan and DRC – were included on the
basis of their status of fragile, post- conflict states which posed particular problems relating to
the development of statistical capacity building. It was subsequently decided to expand the pilot
phase to three more countries -- Lao PDR, Senegal and Ethiopia -- and to extend funding for
testing the use of innovative approaches to data collection through 'Listening to Africa'
project, a project aimed at piloting the use of cell phones to gather high frequency
household level data in three African countries, Cameroon, Malawi, and Senegal.
3.      Generally speaking, countries that apply for SRF support must have either met or made
plans to develop a number of criteria most of which having been identified as important features
of aid effectiveness as covered by the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. These criteria call
for:
     a. The preparation or implementation of a statistical strategy for statistical development
        such as an NSDS;
     b. Statistical development uses a system-wide approach which supports a locally-owned
        and locally-led program in a coordinated way and moving towards the use of country
        systems and procedures for implementation;
     c. Budgetary resource allocations for statistics, preferably on a multi-year basis;
     d. A broad agreement to the SRF principles by all or at least a core set of local donors and
        the identification of a lead donor.
4.      As of May 2013, three projects in Afghanistan, Nigeria and Rwanda are under
implementation. The Ghanaian project has been awaiting approval by the government. The Lao
PDR project became effective in July or two months after this evaluation began and is ready for
implementation, DRC is about to be negotiated, while the remaining three projects are at
different stages of preparation. Funding for most projects is in the range of about US$10 million.
5.     The terms of reference (TORs) for the evaluation of the SRF-CF pilot phase were
discussed and agreed with donors in the spring of 2013. According to the agreed TORs, the

                                                94
evaluation will assess the experience of the pilot projects to identify their achievements and
impact and to recommend changes in policies and practices to improve results. More
specifically, the objectives of the evaluation are as follows:
       a) How successful the SRF-CF has achieved its objectives particularly in:
                  i. Promoting a system-wide approach in statistics at country level;
                  ii. Increasing resources for implementing country owned National Statistical
                      Plans;
                 iii. Linking improvements in the statistical system to the needs of national and
                      sectoral monitoring frameworks and promoting an improved national
                      dialogue and partnership between statistics users and statistical producers;
                      and
                 iv. Delivering more efficient and effective aid and technical assistance for
                     strengthening statistical systems and results measurement, through better
                     coordination and alignment to agreed National Statistical Plans and
                     through better alignment to the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness;
       b) The impact of the in-country donor statisticians in helping countries reach the SRF
          objectives;
       c) How the governance arrangements and operational practices and procedures are
          working; and
       d) To recommend what changes may be needed to enable the SRF-CF to reach its
          objectives.
6.     The evaluation questions will be answered through a combination of methodologies
including field visits to two countries -- Nigeria and Rwanda --, desk reviews of various World
Bank reports and working documents from pilot countries, and extensive use of questionnaires
covering the questions and issues detailed above to a broad range of relevant stakeholders
including:
          World Bank task team leaders (TTLs)
          Primary recipient agencies (National statistical offices)
          Other recipient agencies within governments
          Other recipients outside of government
          Local donor agencies
          In-country donor statisticians
          National poverty reduction or National MDG coordination (and M&E) units
          Other users (media, chambers of commerce).




                                               95
Master Questionnaire

                           Evaluation of the Pilot Phase of the
                Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF)
The World Bank has commissioned an independent evaluation of the Pilot Phase of the Statistics for
Results Facility Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF). The main purpose of the evaluation is to assess the experience
of the programs in the pilot countries, to identify achievements to date, and to recommend any changes in
policies and practices that may be necessary in order to improve results.

The Evaluation Team (Brian Ngo and Andrew Flatt) would like to seek your opinion on the following
aspects of the SRF-CF. The questionnaire is arranged according to major objectives of the SRF-CF and
key issues surrounding the SRF approach. Although many of the questions are multiple choice, the
Evaluation Team would very much welcome additional comments and insights on any of the issues
covered in the questionnaire.

Your response to the questionnaire will remain strictly confidential, and the results of the survey will only
be used in an aggregated form. Please return the completed questionnaire to Andrew Flatt
(andrewjflatt@gmail.com) by [date to be decided]. If you are unable to transmit the completed
questionnaire by email, please send the hard copy to [address in the World Bank office, to be decided].


I.        Promoting a system-wide approach to statistics at the country level
(A system-wide approach is defined broadly as the country having a clear nationally owned strategy for
statistics with arrangements for resources, broad consultation mechanisms that involve all stakeholders,
mechanisms for dialogue, coordination, and monitoring and evaluation)

1A. how inclusive has the approach been to formulating the national strategy for the development of
statistics (NSDS) in [name of country]?
[ ] Very inclusive      [ ] Somewhat inclusive [ ] Barely inclusive or not inclusive at all
[ ] I’m not sure

1B. to what extent do you think that development partners with an interest in supporting statistics
have agreed with the development of a system-wide approach in [name of country]?
[ ] Very much agreed     [ ] Somewhat agreed               [ ] Have not agreed at all
[ ] I’m not sure

1C. To what extent is your agency or yourself in your professional capacity, involved and able to support
the development of a system-wide approach in [name of country]?
[ ] To a very great extent      [ ] To some extent      [ ] To a minimal extent or not at all
Please identify any difficulties that your agency might face in being involved in or supporting the
development of a system-wide approach:

1D. How large a challenge do you consider the system-wide approach promoted by the SRF project to be
for a country like [name of country]?
[ ] A great challenge            [ ] Somewhat of a challenge         [ ] Not a significant challenge
at all [ ] I’m not sure
Please identify some of the challenges:



                                                     96
1E. Overall, how successful do you consider the SRF project to be in promoting a system-wide approach
to statistics in [name of country]?
[ ] Very successful        [ ] Somewhat successful       [ ] Barely successful or not successful at all
          [ ] Promises to be successful          [ ] Too early to judge
Please share with us any further comments on this topic:


II.     Increasing resources for implementing country-owned national statistical plans or strategies

2A. Have domestic resources for statistics been increased since [name of country] decided to become an
SRF pilot country? Or are there definite plans for an increase?
[ ] Domestic resources have already been increased
[ ] No increase yet, but there are definite plans for an increase
[ ] There has been no increase yet and there are no plans for an increase
[ ] I’m not sure about the domestic resource situation

2B. If there is an actual or planned increase, please give the approximate magnitude of such an increase:
[ ] significant           [ ] moderate          [ ] indicate percentage increase if available
To what extent, in your view, can this increase be attributed to the existence of the SRF?
[ ] Directly attributable [ ] Indirectly attributable        [ ] The increase would have occurred even
without the SRF           [ ] I’m not sure

2C. Have development partners increased resources for statistics since [name of country] decided to
become an SRF pilot country? Or are there definite plans for an increase?
[ ] Development partners have already increased resources
[ ] No increase yet, but development partners have definite plans to increase resources
[ ] There has been no increase yet and there are no plans for an increase
[ ] I’m not sure about the resource situation of development partners

2D. If there is an actual or planned increase, please give the approximate magnitude of such an increase:
[ ] significant           [ ] moderate          [ ] indicate percentage increase if available
To what extent, in your view, can this increase be attributed to the existence of the SRF?
[ ] Directly attributable [ ] Indirectly attributable        [ ] The increase would have occurred even
without the SRF           [ ] I’m not sure

2E. Has your agency increased resources for statistics since [name of country] decided to become an SRF
pilot country? Or are there definite plans for an increase?
[ ] Resources have already been increased
[ ] No increase yet, but there are definite plans for an increase
[ ] There has been no increase yet and there are no plans for an increase

2F. If there is an actual or planned increase, please give the approximate magnitude of such an increase:
[ ] significant            [ ] moderate         [ ] indicate percentage increase if available
To what extent, in your view, can this increase be attributed to the existence of the SRF?
[ ] Directly attributable [ ] Indirectly attributable        [ ] The increase would have occurred even
without the SRF

2G. Do you think that funds from the SRF should be seen as core finance for implementing the national
statistical plan or statistical development strategy (NSDS)?
[ ] Yes           [ ] Maybe         [ ] No
 Please elaborate:

                                                   97
2H. What do you consider to be the optimal relationship between the SRF-CF and IDA funding?

2I. Overall, how successful do you consider the SRF-CF to be in increasing resources for implementing
the national statistical plan or statistical development strategy in [name of country]?
[ ] Very successful        [ ] Somewhat successful           [ ] Barely successful or not successful at all
         [ ] Promises to be successful               [ ] Too early to judge
Please share with us any further comments on this topic:


III.   Linking improvements in the statistical system to the needs of national and sectoral
monitoring frameworks

3A. To what extent do you consider that monitoring the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals and/or poverty reduction targets has been incorporated into the national monitoring framework of
[name of country]?
[ ] Entirely or almost entirely incorporated           [ ] Somewhat incorporated
[ ] Hardly incorporated or not incorporated at all     [ ] I’m not sure

3B. What role (if any) has the SRF played to date in enhancing the production, quality and timeliness of
data in [name of country]?
[ ] A very significant role     [ ] Some role           [ ] Hardly any or no role to date       [ ] I’m
not sure
Please give specific examples of any enhancements where possible:

3C. What role (if any) has the SRF played to date in enhancing the accessibility and usability of data in
[name of country]?
[ ] A very significant role     [ ] Some role          [ ] Hardly any or no role to date         [ ] I’m
not sure
Please give specific examples of any enhancements where possible:

3D. Overall, how successful do you consider the SRF to be in linking improvements in the statistical
system to the needs of national and sectoral monitoring frameworks in [name of country]?
[ ] Very successful     [ ] Somewhat successful           [ ] Barely successful or not successful at all
        [ ] Promises to be successful            [ ] Too early to judge
Please share with us any further comments on this topic:


IV.      Promoting an improved national dialogue and partnership between users and producers of
statistics

4A. Do you consider that existing institutional mechanisms in the field of statistics in [name of country],
such as [specify mechanism(s) if possible], function well?
[ ] Yes          [ ] To some extent              [ ] No         [ ] I’m not sure

4B. Has a user satisfaction survey been undertaken, or is one planned, in [name of country]?
[ ] Yes, a survey has already been undertaken
[ ] A survey is being planned
[ ] There is no such survey planned
[ ] Not sure what the situation is with regard to a user satisfaction survey
Please describe any experience you have had with a user satisfaction survey, and any action that has been
undertaken as a direct result of it:

                                                    98
4C. Have there been any efforts under the SRF to enhance the capacity of data users (such as the training
of local journalists in the use of statistics) in [name of country], or are any such efforts planned?
[ ] Yes, there have been efforts to enhance the capacity of data users
[ ] No efforts yet, but some are planned
[ ] There are no such efforts in place or planned
[ ] Not sure what the situation is
Please describe any efforts to enhance the capacity of data users in [name of country]:

4D. Overall, how successful do you consider the SRF to be in promoting an improved national dialogue
and partnership between users and producers of statistics in [name of country]?
[ ] Very successful     [ ] Somewhat successful           [ ] Barely successful or not successful at all
        [ ] Promises to be successful           [ ] Too early to judge
Please share with us any further comments on this topic:


V.       Delivering more efficient and effective aid and technical assistance for strengthening
statistical systems and results measurement, through better coordination and alignment to agreed
national statistical plans and through better alignment to the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness

5A. Has the SRF had an impact, or do you think it has the potential to make an impact, on aligning
support for statistical capacity building to the national statistical plan or NSDS in [name of country]?
[ ] Has already had a positive impact on aligning support
[ ] Has the potential to make an impact
[ ] Has not had any positive impact and/or does not appear to have the potential to do so
[ ] I’m not sure

5B. Has the SRF approach led, or do you think it has the potential to lead, to better donor coordination of
statistical capacity building in [name of country]?
[ ] Has already led to better donor coordination of statistical capacity building
[ ] Has the potential to lead to better donor coordination
[ ] Has not led to better donor coordination and/or does not appear to have the potential to do so
[ ] I’m not sure

5C. Overall, how successful do you consider the SRF to be in delivering more efficient and effective aid
and technical assistance for strengthening statistical systems and results measurement in [name of
country]?
[ ] Very successful     [ ] Somewhat successful          [ ] Barely successful or not successful at all
        [ ] Promises to be successful           [ ] Too early to judge
Please share with us any further comments on this topic:


VI.      Impact of the in-country donor statistician in helping to achieve SRF objectives
(one of the particularities of the SRF approach relative to other capacity building efforts is the nomination
of an in-country statistician financed with external resources to facilitate the system-wide approach,
coordination etc.).

[These questions will not be asked where no in-country donor statistician is present]

6A. What are your views on the usefulness of the in-country donor statistician ([name of statistician])?
Does the fact that the statistician represents a major donor have an impact on the statistician’s
effectiveness?

                                                     99
6B. What have been the contributions of the in-country donor statistician in helping to achieve the
objectives of the SRF as set out in previous questions, such as the development of a statistical
development strategy, donor coordination and engaging various stakeholders to promote the demand for
statistics? Has the balance of the statistician’s contributions to these various objectives been appropriate,
in your view?

6C. Are there any actual or potential areas of friction or contention surrounding the role of the in-country
donor statistician in relation to the national statistical system and its staff?


6D. Assuming that the post of in-country donor statistician is not a permanent one, do you see the need
for an exit or disengagement strategy to cover the eventual withdrawal of the post?


6E. Please share with us any further comments on this topic:


VII.    Broad issues related to the SRF Charter

7A. How reasonable or realistic do you think the expectations for the SRF are in terms of its impact and
its timing?
[ ] Very reasonable             [ ] Somewhat reasonable                 [ ] Unrealistic
         [ ] I’m not sure
What have been in your view the most significant impacts of the SRF in [name of country]?

7B. To what extent do you think the choice of countries invited to apply for the SRF, particularly post-
conflict countries with weak statistical capacity, has affected the impact of the SRF approach?
[ ] To a great extent            [ ] To some extent                  [ ] To an insignificant extent
         [ ] I’m not sure

7C. Do you consider that the SRF, hitherto comprising almost exclusively country-specific projects,
should be extended to regional initiatives and operations?
[ ] Yes          [ ] Perhaps              [ ] No
If yes or perhaps, which sort of projects might benefit most from a regional approach?

7D. Please share with us any further comments on issues related to the SRF Charter:


VIII.   SRF-CF governance arrangements and operational practices and procedures

8A. How smooth and timely was, or has been to date, the SRF grant approval and disbursement process?
[ ] Smooth and timely [ ] Somewhat problematic                       [ ] Beset by difficulties and delays
Please describe any particular facilitating or delaying factors in the process:

8B. What has been your experience in implementing the SRF grant, in terms of reporting arrangements,
support from World Bank staff and so on?
[ ] Very positive      [ ] Somewhat positive [ ] Generally negative                  [ ] I don’t have
enough experience to judge

8C. What are the main sorts of problems that you have been facing in implementing the SRF project? (For
example, inadequacy of government budgetary support; lack of coordination among government agencies

                                                    100
and/or among development partners; failure to translate government commitment into practical action at
the operational level; etc…)

8D. How large a challenge do you consider that recipient-country execution of the SRF project has been
or will be in [name of country]?
[ ] A great challenge            [ ] Somewhat of a challenge          [ ] Not a significant challenge
         [ ] I’m not sure

8E. Do you consider that SRF projects receive adequate attention by line management in the World
Bank?
[ ] Yes      [ ] To some extent              [ ] No         [ ] I’m not sure

8F. Would there be an advantage to the SRF grant being part of a larger Bank operation rather than being
a stand-alone project as is currently the case?
[ ] Yes         [ ] Perhaps                [ ] No

8G. Are you familiar with the SRF standardized [generic] Results Framework?
[ ] Very familiar          [ ] Somewhat familiar        [ ] Not familiar at all

8H. What has been your experience with the SRF standardized [generic] Results Framework?
[ ] Very positive       [ ] Somewhat positive [ ] Generally negative                 [ ] I don’t have
enough experience to judge
Please describe any suggestions you have for improving the Framework:

8I. Please share with us any further comments on the SRF governance arrangements and operational
practices and procedures:


IX.     General questions

9A. To what extent do you consider that the concept of the SRF meets the needs for statistical capacity
building in [name of country]?
[ ] To a great extent          [ ] To some extent            [ ] To an insignificant extent
        [ ] I’m not sure

9B. Please describe the main motivation for your Government’s accepting the World Bank’s invitation to
apply for a grant from the Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund. What were, or are, the major
needs that you wish to address?

9C. To what extent do you consider that the SRF has facilitated, or has the potential to facilitate, effective
ownership and leadership by the government of the development of the national statistical system of
[name of country]?
[ ] To a great extent          [ ] To some extent                [ ] To an insignificant extent
        [ ] I’m not sure

9D. Does implementation of the SRF project, currently or potentially, involve national authorities taking
reform measures that would not otherwise have been undertaken?
[ ] Yes, to a significant extent [ ] To some extent           [ ] No, or probably not [ ] I’m not sure




                                                     101
9E. To what extent do you consider that the SRF has facilitated, or has the potential to facilitate, the
greater use of statistical data and indicators to support evidence-based decision making in [name of
country]?
[ ] To a great extent            [ ] To some extent             [ ] To an insignificant extent
        [ ] I’m not sure


10A. Please share with us any further comments on any aspect of the SRF:




**
Thank you very much indeed for your cooperation and assistance in responding to this questionnaire.
Please return it to Andrew Flatt (andrewjflatt@gmail.com) by [date to be decided]. If you are unable to
transmit the completed questionnaire by email, please send the hard copy to [address in the World Bank
office, to be decided].




                                                  102
             ANNEX 2: Tabulations from the survey of SRF-CF stakeholders

This annex contains tabulations of the responses from the survey of SRF stakeholders undertaken
from July to early September 2013. Descriptions of the questionnaire and its administration,
along with response rates to the survey, are given in Section II of the report. Shorter versions of
selected tables appear throughout Section III. The master questionnaire utilized is shown in
Annex 1.

The stakeholder group abbreviations used in the tabulations are as follows:

 TTL           Task Team Leaders
 NSO           Primary recipient agencies (usually the national statistical office)
 OGA           Other government agencies
 ONU           Other national users
 IDS           In-country donor statisticians
 LDP           Local development partners




                                               103
                                                                 Table II.1
                                            Inclusiveness of the NSDS formulation approach


1A. How inclusive has the approach
been to formulating the national strategy                                              Barely
for the development of statistics (NSDS)                             Somewhat     inclusive or not                     No
in [name of country]?                           Very inclusive        inclusive    inclusive at all   I'm not sure   answer


Number of responses
Implementing countries                               26.5                21              4                5.5          0
Pipeline countries                                    32                 14              1                 6           0


All SRF countries                                    58.5                35              5               11.5          0


Percentage distributions                              %                  %               %                %            %
Afghanistan                                           37                 42              16                5           0
Nigeria                                               55                 35              5                 5           0
Rwanda                                                47                 33              0                19           0
Implementing countries                                46                 37              7                10           0
DR Congo                                              50                 50              0                 0           0
Ethiopia                                              23                 46              0                31           0
Ghana                                                 80                 0               0                20           0
Lao PDR                                               57                 36              7                 0           0
Senegal                                              100                 0               0                 0           0
Pipeline countries                                    60                 26              2                11           0


All SRF countries                                     53                 32              5                10           0


Stakeholder groups:                                   %                  %               %                %            %
TTL                                                   75                 25              0                 0           0
NSO                                                   74                 22              2                 1           0
OGA                                                   42                 42              11                5           0
ONU                                                   20                 80              0                 0           0
IDS                                                   ..                 ..              ..                ..          ..
LDP                                                   34                 31              7                28           0


Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                           104
                                                        Table II.2
                      Perceived agreement of development partners with a system-wide approach
1B. To what extent do you think
that development partners with an
interest in supporting statistics
have agreed with the development      Very
of a system-wide approach in          much    Somewhat                                      I'm not         No
[name of country]?                   agreed    agreed            Have not agreed at all       sure        answer


Number of responses
Implementing countries                26          10                       0                   1            3
Pipeline countries                    25          12                       0                   4            0


All SRF countries                     51          22                       0                   5            3


Percentage distributions               %          %                       %                   %             %
Afghanistan                           38          62                       0                   0            0
Nigeria                               88          12                       0                   0            0
Rwanda                                60          0                        0                  10           30
Implementing countries                65          25                       0                   3            8
DR Congo                              50          33                       0                  17            0
Ethiopia                              29          57                       0                  14            0
Ghana                                 67          33                       0                   0            0
Lao PDR                               75          17                       0                   8            0
Senegal                               71          14                       0                  14            0
Pipeline countries                    61          29                       0                  10            0


All SRF countries                     63          27                       0                   6            4


Stakeholder groups:                    %          %                       %                   %             %
TTL                                   50          42                       0                   8            0
NSO                                   68          22                       0                   5            5
OGA                                   58          26                       0                  11            5
ONU                                   80          20                       0                   0            0
IDS                                    ..         ..                       ..                  ..           ..
Notes: This question was not posed to the LDP group. Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.


Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                       105
                                                    Table II.3
                     Involvement and support of development partners in a system-wide approach


1C. To what extent is your agency
or yourself in your professional
capacity, involved and able to          To a
support the development of a            very
system-wide approach in [name of        great                                 To a minimal extent or
country]?                              extent         To some extent                not at all              No answer


Number of responses
Implementing countries                   8                  5                            2                     2
Pipeline countries                       3                  7                            1                     1


All SRF countries                        11                 12                           3                     3


Percentage distributions                 %                  %                           %                      %
Afghanistan                              33                 17                          17                     33
Nigeria                                  ..                 ..                           ..                    ..
Rwanda                                   38                 50                          13                     0
Implementing countries                   47                 29                          12                     12
DR Congo
Ethiopia                                 17                 67                          17                     0
Ghana                                    ..                 ..                           ..                    ..
Lao PDR                                  ..                 ..                           ..                    ..
Senegal                                  67                 33                           0                     0
Pipeline countries                       25                 58                           8                     8


All SRF countries                        38                 41                          10                     10


Stakeholder groups:                      %                  %                           %                      %
LDP                                      38                 41                          10                     10


Notes: This question was posed to the LDP group only. Responses from some countries have been suppressed.


Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     106
                                                         Table II.4
                                       Challenge of the system-wide approach

1D. How large a challenge do you consider
the system-wide approach promoted by the                                                                  I'm
SRF to be for a country like [name of                                 Somewhat of    Not a significant    not     No
country]?                                   A great challenge          a challenge   challenge at all    sure   answer


Number of responses
Implementing countries                             16                     26                11            3       1
Pipeline countries                                 21                     23                5             2       2


All SRF countries                                  37                     49                16            5       3


Percentage distributions                           %                       %                %             %       %
Afghanistan                                        32                     42                26            0       0
Nigeria                                            45                     45                0             5       5
Rwanda                                              6                     50                33           11       0
Implementing countries                             28                     46                19            5       2
DR Congo                                          100                      0                0             0       0
Ethiopia                                           23                     46                15            8       8
Ghana                                              20                     50                30            0       0
Lao PDR                                            43                     50                0             7       0
Senegal                                            40                     50                0             0      10
Pipeline countries                                 40                     43                9             4       4


All SRF countries                                  34                     45                15            5       3


Stakeholder groups:                                %                       %                %             %       %
TTL                                                58                     33                8             0       0
NSO                                                32                     39                20            2       7
OGA                                                47                     42                0            11       0
ONU                                                 0                     60                40            0       0
IDS                                                 ..                     ..               ..            ..      ..
LDP                                                21                     55                17            7       0
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                   107
                                                      Table II.5
                           Success of the SRF-CF in promoting a system-wide approach

                                                                  Barely
1E. Overall, how successful do you                              successful                 Too
consider the SRF-CF to be in                                      or not      Promises    early
promoting a system-wide approach to     Very       Somewhat     successful      to be       to      No       Total
statistics in [name of country]?      successful   successful      at all    successful   judge   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                   19           22            4            5         7        0         57
Pipeline countries                        7            8            1           12         23       2         53

All SRF countries                        26           30            5           17         30       2        110

Percentage distributions                  %            %            %            %         %        %
Afghanistan                              26           42           11            5         16       0         19
Nigeria                                  25           45            5           10         15       0         20
Rwanda                                   50           28            6           11         6        0         18
Implementing countries                   33           39            7            9         12       0
DR Congo                                  0           17            0           17         67       0         6
Ethiopia                                  8           23            0           31         31       8         13
Ghana                                     0           10            0           40         50       0         10
Lao PDR                                  36           14            7           14         29       0         14
Senegal                                  10           10            0           10         60      10         10
Pipeline countries                       13           15            2           23         43       4

All SRF countries                        24           27            5           15         27       2

Stakeholder groups:                       %            %            %            %         %        %
TTL                                      25           17            0            0         58       0         12
NSO                                      32           22            2           22         22       0         41
OGA                                      26           32           11           16         16       0         19
ONU                                      20           60            0           20         0        0         5
IDS                                       ..           ..           ..           ..        ..       ..        4
LDP                                      10           31            7           14         31       7         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     108
                                                         Table II.6
                                              Increase in domestic resources

                                           Domestic     No increase                        I'm not
2A. Have domestic resources for            resources       yet, but    There has been    sure about
statistics been increased since [name of     have        there are     no increase yet       the
country] decided to become an SRF           already       definite      and there are     domestic
pilot country? Or are there definite         been       plans for an   no plans for an    resource      No       Total
plans for an increase?                     increased      increase        increase        situation   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                        19             10              6              17          1         53
Pipeline countries                            22             13              2              14          1         52

All SRF countries                             41             23              8              31          2        105

Percentage distributions                      %              %               %              %           %
Afghanistan                                   11             21              21             47          0         19
Nigeria                                       44             22              11             17          6         18
Rwanda                                        56             13              0              31          0         16
Implementing countries                        36             19              11             32          2
DR Congo                                      50             33              0              17          0         6
Ethiopia                                      17             8               0              67          8         12
Ghana                                         30             30              20             20          0         10
Lao PDR                                       43             43              0              14          0         14
Senegal                                       80             10              0              10          0         10
Pipeline countries                            42             25              4              27          2

All SRF countries                             39             22              8              30          2

Stakeholder groups:                           %              %               %              %           %
TTL                                           75             8               0              17          0         12
NSO                                           34             34              2              27          2         41
OGA                                           37             32              0              32          0         19
IDS                                           ..             ..              ..              ..         ..        4
LDP                                           31             7               17             41          3         29
Notes: This question was not posed to the ONU group. Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                       109
                                                     Table II.7
                                     Magnitude of increase in domestic resources


2B1. If there is an actual or planned increase (in
domestic resources), please give the approximate                                           No               Total
magnitude of such an increase                            Significant   Moderate          answer           responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                                       13          15                25                53
Pipeline countries                                           18          12                22                52


All SRF countries                                            31          27                47               105


Percentage distributions                                     %            %                 %
Afghanistan                                                  11          47                42                19
Nigeria                                                      33          22                44                18
Rwanda                                                       31          13                56                16
Implementing countries                                       25          28                47
DR Congo                                                     50          33                17                6
Ethiopia                                                     17           8                75                12
Ghana                                                        30          20                50                10
Lao PDR                                                      29          36                36                14
Senegal                                                      60          20                20                10
Pipeline countries                                           35          23                42


All SRF countries                                            30          26                45


Stakeholder groups:                                          %            %                 %
TTL                                                          67          17                17                12
NSO                                                          41          27                32                41
OGA                                                          11          42                47                19
IDS                                                          ..           ..                ..               4
LDP                                                          7           21                72                29


Notes: This question was not posed to the ONU group. Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.


Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                   110
                                                      Table II.8
                              Attribution of increase in domestic resources to the SRF


                                                                      The increase
2B2. To what extent, in your view,                                    would have
can this increase (in domestic                                       occurred even    I'm
resources) be attributed to the         Directly       Indirectly     without the     not       No          Total
existence of the SRF?                 attributable    attributable       SRF          sure    answer      responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                     5               12              4             12     20           53
Pipeline countries                        5.5              6.5             7             14     19           52


All SRF countries                         10.5             18.5           11             26     39          105


Percentage distributions                   %                %             %              %      %
Afghanistan                                5               37              0             5      53           19
Nigeria                                    17              11              0             22     50           18
Rwanda                                     6               19             25             44      6           16
Implementing countries                     9               23              8             23     38
DR Congo                                   25              25              0             33     17           6
Ethiopia                                   0                0              8             42     50           12
Ghana                                      20              10              0             20     50           10
Lao PDR                                    7               29             14             21     29           14
Senegal                                    10               0             40             20     30           10
Pipeline countries                         11              13             13             27     37


All SRF countries                          10              18             10             25     37


Stakeholder groups:                        %                %             %              %      %
TTL                                        13              38             17             0      33           12
NSO                                        12              20              7             20     41           41
OGA                                        11              26              0             32     32           19
IDS                                        ..               ..             ..            ..      ..          4
LDP                                        3                0             21             41     34           29


Notes: This question was not posed to the ONU group. Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     111
                                                         Table II.9
                            Increase in development partner resources (external perspective)
                                                      No increase      There has
2C. Have development partners                           yet, but         been no     I'm not sure
increased resources for statistics   Development     development      increase yet     about the
since [name of country] decided      partners have   partners have      and there       resource
to become an SRF pilot                  already      definite plans   are no plans    situation of
country? Or are there definite         increased      to increase         for an     development       No       Total
plans for an increase?                 resources       resources        increase        partners     answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                    15              10               0              10           5         40
Pipeline countries                        12              13               5              11           0         41

All SRF countries                         27              23               5              21           5         81

Percentage distributions                  %               %               %               %            %
Afghanistan                               38              31               0              23           8         13
Nigeria                                   35              35               0              24           6         17
Rwanda                                    40               0               0              30          30         10
Implementing countries                    38              25               0              25          13
DR Congo                                  17              33              33              17           0         6
Ethiopia                                  29              29              14              29           0         7
Ghana                                     56              22              11              11           0         9
Lao PDR                                   8               50               0              42           0         12
Senegal                                   43              14              14              29           0         7
Pipeline countries                        29              32              12              27           0

All SRF countries                         33              28               6              26           6

Stakeholder groups:                       %               %               %               %            %
TTL                                       50              25              25              0            0         12
NSO                                       41              32               0              17          10         41
OGA                                       11              32               5              47           5         19
ONU                                       0               20               0              80           0         5
IDS                                       ..               ..              ..             ..           ..        4
Notes: This question was not posed to the LDP group. Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                       112
                                                       Table II.10
                      Magnitude of increase in development partner resources (external perspective)


2D1. If there is an actual or planned increase (in
development partner resources), please give the                                            No               Total
approximate magnitude of such an increase                Significant   Moderate          answer           responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                                        9           16               15                40
Pipeline countries                                           12           11               18                41


All SRF countries                                            21           27               33                81


Percentage distributions                                     %            %                %
Afghanistan                                                  15           62               23                13
Nigeria                                                      24           41               35                17
Rwanda                                                       30           10               60                10
Implementing countries                                       23           40               38
DR Congo                                                     17           33               50                6
Ethiopia                                                     29           29               43                7
Ghana                                                        44           22               33                9
Lao PDR                                                      25           25               50                12
Senegal                                                      29           29               43                7
Pipeline countries                                           29           27               44


All SRF countries                                            26           33               41


Stakeholder groups:                                          %            %                %
TTL                                                          17           50               33                12
NSO                                                          37           29               34                41
OGA                                                          11           32               58                19
ONU                                                           0           60               40                5
IDS                                                           ..          ..                ..               4


Notes: This question was not posed to the LDP group. Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      113
                                                          Table II.11
               Attribution of increase in development partner resources to the SRF (external perspective)


2D2. To what extent, in your view,                                         The increase
can this increase (in development                                          would have       I'm
partner resources) be attributed to the     Directly       Indirectly     occurred even     not     No        Total
existence of the SRF?                     attributable    attributable   without the SRF   sure   answer    responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                        11               12              0            6      11          40
Pipeline countries                            5.5              5.5             2           11      17          41


All SRF countries                            16.5              17.5            2           17      28          81


Percentage distributions                      %                 %              %            %       %
Afghanistan                                   23               54              0            8      15          13
Nigeria                                       35               18              0           18      29          17
Rwanda                                        20               20              0           20      40          10
Implementing countries                        28               30              0           15      28
DR Congo                                      17                0              0           33      50          6
Ethiopia                                      14               14              0           29      43          7
Ghana                                         22               11              0           33      33          9
Lao PDR                                        8               25              0           17      50          12
Senegal                                        7                7              29          29      29          7
Pipeline countries                            13               13              5           27      41


All SRF countries                             20               22              2           21      35


Stakeholder groups:                           %                 %              %            %       %
TTL                                           13               46              8            8      25          12
NSO                                           20               22              2           17      39          41
OGA                                           21               11              0           32      37          19
ONU                                           40                0              0           60       0          5
IDS                                            ..               ..             ..           ..      ..         4


Notes: This question was not posed to the LDP group. Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                         114
                                                         Table II.12
                           Increase in development partner resources (internal perspective)



2E. Has your agency increased resources
for statistics since [name of country]     Resources       No increase yet,     There has been no
decided to become an SRF pilot country?   have already       but there are       increase yet and
Or are there definite plans for an           been          definite plans for   there are no plans     No       Total
increase?                                  increased          an increase         for an increase    answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                         6                   2                    2              7         17
Pipeline countries                             3                   1                    4              4         12


All SRF countries                              9                   3                    6             11         29


Percentage distributions                       %                  %                     %              %
Afghanistan                                    17                  0                   17             67         6
Nigeria                                        67                 33                    0              0         3
Rwanda                                         38                 13                   13             38         8
Implementing countries                         35                 12                   12             41
DR Congo                                                                                                         0
Ethiopia                                       0                  17                   33             50         6
Ghana                                          ..                  ..                   ..             ..        1
Lao PDR                                        ..                  ..                   ..             ..        2
Senegal                                        67                  0                    0             33         3
Pipeline countries                             25                  8                   33             33


All SRF countries                              31                 10                   21             38


Stakeholder groups:                            %                  %                     %              %
LDP                                            31                 10                   21             38


Notes: This question was posed to the LDP group only. Responses from some countries have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                    115
                                                        Table II.13
                     Magnitude of increase in development partner resources (internal perspective)


2F1. If there is an actual or planned increase (in your
agency's resources), please give the approximate                                          No           Total
magnitude of such an increase                             Significant   Moderate        answer       responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                                         1            4             12            17
Pipeline countries                                             2            1              9            12


All SRF countries                                              3            5             21            29


Percentage distributions                                       %            %              %
Implementing countries                                         6           24             71
Pipeline countries                                            17            8             75


All SRF countries                                             10           17             72


Stakeholder groups: LDP                                       10           17             72


Notes: This question was posed to the LDP group only.
The number of responses at country level is considered too small to be presented.


Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                       116
                                                        Table II.14
             Attribution of increase in development partner resources to the SRF (internal perspective)


                                                                               The increase
2F2. To what extent, in your view, can                                         would have
this increase (in your agency's resources)     Directly       Indirectly      occurred even      No         Total
be attributed to the existence of the SRF?   attributable    attributable    without the SRF   answer     responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                            1               0                 5           11           17
Pipeline countries                                1               0                 3            8           12


All SRF countries                                 2               0                 8           19           29


Percentage distributions                         %               %                  %            %
Implementing countries                            6               0                 29          65
Pipeline countries                                8               0                 25          67


All SRF countries                                 7               0                 28          66


Stakeholder groups: LDP                           7               0                 28          66


Notes: This question was posed to the LDP group only.
The number of responses at country level is considered too small to be presented.


Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                       117
                                                Table II.15
                         The SRF as possible core finance for implementing the NSDS


2G. Do you think that funds from the SRF should be
seen as core finance for implementing the national                               No       Total
statistical development strategy?                         Yes   Maybe    No    answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                                    34     11      10      2         57
Pipeline countries                                        26     12      15      0         53


All SRF countries                                         60     23      25      2        110


Percentage distributions                                  %      %       %       %
Afghanistan                                               79     21      0       0         19
Nigeria                                                   35     20      40      5         20
Rwanda                                                    67     17      11      6         18
Implementing countries                                    60     19      18      4
DR Congo                                                  67     17      17      0         6
Ethiopia                                                  46     31      23      0         13
Ghana                                                     20     10      70      0         10
Lao PDR                                                   71     21      7       0         14
Senegal                                                   40     30      30      0         10
Pipeline countries                                        49     23      28      0


All SRF countries                                         55     21      23      2


Stakeholder groups:                                       %      %       %       %
TTL                                                       50     25      25      0         12
NSO                                                       59     12      29      0         41
OGA                                                       58     21      16      5         19
ONU                                                       20     20      60      0         5
IDS                                                        ..     ..     ..      ..        4
LDP                                                       55     31      10      3         29


Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                    118
                                                       Table II.16
      Success of the SRF-CF in increasing resources for implementing national statistical development strategies
2I Overall, how successful do you
consider the SRF-CF to be in                                       Barely
increasing        resources      for                             successful                 Too
implementing        the     national                               or not      Promises    early
statistical development strategy in      Very       Somewhat     successful      to be       to      No       Total
[name of country]?                     successful   successful      at all    successful   judge   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                    22           19            2            8         6        0         57
Pipeline countries                         9            5            0           12         25       2         53

All SRF countries                         31           24            2           20         31       2        110

Percentage distributions                   %            %            %            %         %        %
Afghanistan                               32           58            0           11         0        0         19
Nigeria                                   35           30            5           25         5        0         20
Rwanda                                    50           11            6            6         28       0         18
Implementing countries                    39           33            4           14         11       0
DR Congo                                   0           17            0           17         67       0         6
Ethiopia                                  23            8            0           23         46       0         13
Ghana                                     10            0            0           40         50       0         10
Lao PDR                                   29           21            0           21         29       0         14
Senegal                                   10            0            0           10         60      20         10
Pipeline countries                        17            9            0           23         47       4

All SRF countries                         28           22            2           18         28       2

Stakeholder groups:                        %            %            %            %         %        %
TTL                                       33           17            0            8         42       0         12
NSO                                       29           27            0           22         22       0         41
OGA                                       42           11            5           26         11       5         19
ONU                                       20           20            0           40         20       0         5
IDS                                        ..           ..           ..           ..        ..       ..        4
LDP                                       17           24            3           10         41       3         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      119
                                                      Table II.17
        Incorporation of MDG and poverty reduction target monitoring into national monitoring frameworks
3A To what extent do you consider that
monitoring the achievement of the                                             Hardly
Millennium Development Goals and/or          Entirely or                   incorporated
poverty reduction targets has been             almost                         or not      I'm
incorporated into the national monitoring      entirely      Somewhat      incorporated   not      No       Total
framework of [name of country]?             incorporated    incorporated       at all     sure   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                          26                  21          5          4       1         57
Pipeline countries                              30              14.5            3         5.5      0         53

All SRF countries                               56              35.5            8         9.5      1        110

Percentage distributions                         %                  %           %          %       %
Afghanistan                                     16                  63         16          5       0         19
Nigeria                                         30                  40         10         15       5         20
Rwanda                                          94                  6           0          0       0         18
Implementing countries                          46                  37          9          7       2
DR Congo                                        50                  25         17          8       0         6
Ethiopia                                        54                  38          0          8       0         13
Ghana                                           80                  10          0         10       0         10
Lao PDR                                         43                  36          7         14       0         14
Senegal                                         60                  20         10         10       0         10
Pipeline countries                              57                  27          6         10       0

All SRF countries                               51                  32          7          9       1

Stakeholder groups:                              %                  %           %          %       %
TTL                                             50                  29         17          4       0         12
NSO                                             59                  32          0          7       2         41
OGA                                             32                  32         16         21       0         19
ONU                                             40                  60          0          0       0         5
IDS                                              ..                 ..          ..         ..      ..        4
LDP                                             59                  24         10          7       0         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      120
                                                  Table II.18
                     SRF role in enhancing the production, quality and timeliness of data

3B What role (if any) has the SRF
played to date in enhancing the               A very              Hardly any   I'm
production, quality and timeliness of       significant   Some    or no role   not      No       Total
data in [name of country]?                     role        role    to date     sure   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                          29          16       5.5       6.5      0         57
Pipeline countries                              10          6        11        19       7         53

All SRF countries                               39          22       16.5      25.5     7        110

Percentage distributions                        %           %         %         %       %
Afghanistan                                     21          32       29        18       0         19
Nigeria                                         70          25        0         5       0         20
Rwanda                                          61          28        0        11       0         18
Implementing countries                          51          28       10        11       0
DR Congo                                        0           0        50        33      17         6
Ethiopia                                        31          8        15        31      15         13
Ghana                                           20          10       40        20      10         10
Lao PDR                                         14          29        7        43       7         14
Senegal                                         20          0        10        50      20         10
Pipeline countries                              19          11       21        36      13

All SRF countries                               35          20       15        23       6

Stakeholder groups:                             %           %         %         %       %
TTL                                             33          0        33        17      17         12
NSO                                             51          17       11        13       7         41
OGA                                             26          26        5        42       0         19
ONU                                             20          60        0        20       0         5
IDS                                             ..          ..        ..        ..      ..        4
LDP                                             24          21       21        31       3         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      121
                                                    Table A.19
                           SRF role in enhancing the accessibility and usability of data

                                                                          Hardly
3C What role (if any) has the SRF played to date     A very              any or no   I'm
in enhancing the accessibility and usability of    significant   Some     role to    not      No       Total
data in [name of country]?                            role        role     date      sure   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                                 24         17        4         8       4         57
Pipeline countries                                     10         7         10        18      8         53

All SRF countries                                      34         24        14        26     12        110

Percentage distributions                               %          %         %         %       %
Afghanistan                                            21         42        16        11     11         19
Nigeria                                                60         20        0         15      5         20
Rwanda                                                 44         28        6         17      6         18
Implementing countries                                 42         30        7         14      7
DR Congo                                               0          0         50        33     17         6
Ethiopia                                               31         15        15        31      8         13
Ghana                                                  20         0         40        30     10         10
Lao PDR                                                14         36        0         36     14         14
Senegal                                                20         0         10        40     30         10
Pipeline countries                                     19         13        19        34     15

All SRF countries                                      31         22        13        24     11

Stakeholder groups:                                    %          %         %         %       %
TTL                                                    33         8         25        8      25         12
NSO                                                    46         12        10        22     10         41
OGA                                                    21         37        0         37      5         19
ONU                                                    40         40        0         20      0         5
IDS                                                    ..         ..        ..        ..      ..        4
LDP                                                    14         28        21        28     10         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      122
                                                       Table II.20
      Success of the SRF in linking improvements in the statistical system to the needs of monitoring frameworks
3D Overall, how successful do you
consider the SRF to be in linking                                 Barely
improvements in the statistical                                 successful                 Too
system to the needs of national and                               or not      Promises    early
sectoral monitoring frameworks in       Very       Somewhat     successful      to be       to      No        Total
[name of country]?                    successful   successful      at all    successful   judge   answer    responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                   19           16             3           8         10       1          57
Pipeline countries                        6            5             1          11         24       6          53

All SRF countries                        25           21             4          19         34       7          110

Percentage distributions                  %            %             %           %         %        %
Afghanistan                              21           26             5          11         37       0          19
Nigeria                                  35           40             5          15         5        0          20
Rwanda                                   44           17             6          17         11       6          18
Implementing countries                   33           28             5          14         18       2
DR Congo                                  0            0             0          17         83       0              6
Ethiopia                                 23            8             0          23         23      23          13
Ghana                                     0           10             0          20         70       0          10
Lao PDR                                  14           21             7          29         21       7          14
Senegal                                  10            0             0          10         60      20          10
Pipeline countries                       11            9             2          21         45      11

All SRF countries                        23           19             4          17         31       6

Stakeholder groups:                       %            %             %           %         %        %
TTL                                      25            8             0          17         42       8          12
NSO                                      24           20             2          20         34       0          41
OGA                                      26           26             11         26         5        5          19
ONU                                      40           60             0           0         0        0              5
IDS                                       ..           ..            ..          ..        ..       ..             4
LDP                                      14           10             3          14         41      17          29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     123
                                                    Table II.21
                               Functioning of existing institutional mechanisms


4A Do you consider that existing institutional
mechanisms in the field of statistics in [name of           To some           I'm not     No       Total
country].......function well?                        Yes     extent    No       sure    answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                                23          21   6          6       1         57
Pipeline countries                                     7          24   18         2       2         53


All SRF countries                                     30          45   24         8       3        110


Percentage distributions                              %           %    %          %       %
Afghanistan                                           21          58   11         11      0         19
Nigeria                                               35          40   20         5       0         20
Rwanda                                                67          11   0          17      6         18
Implementing countries                                40          37   11         11      2
DR Congo                                               0          33   67         0       0         6
Ethiopia                                               8          23   46         8      15         13
Ghana                                                 10          40   40         10      0         10
Lao PDR                                               21          57   21         0       0         14
Senegal                                               20          70   10         0       0         10
Pipeline countries                                    13          45   34         4       4


All SRF countries                                     27          41   22         7       3


Stakeholder groups:                                   %           %    %          %       %
TTL                                                   50          33   17         0       0         12
NSO                                                   32          44   17         7       0         41
OGA                                                   26          42   32         0       0         19
ONU                                                    0          40   40         20      0         5
IDS                                                    ..         ..   ..         ..      ..        4
LDP                                                   21          38   17         14     10         29


Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     124
                                                     Table II.22
                                          Status of user satisfaction surveys


                                        Yes, a                There is    Not sure what the
4B Has a user satisfaction survey    survey has    A survey   no such     situation is with
been undertaken, or is one          already been   is being    survey      regard to a user      No       Total
planned, in [name of country]?       undertaken    planned    planned    satisfaction survey   answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                  28            5            3             20              1         57
Pipeline countries                      12           14            7             19              1         53


All SRF countries                       40           19            10            39              2        110


Percentage distributions                 %            %            %             %               %
Afghanistan                             42           26            0             32              0         19
Nigeria                                 35            0            15            50              0         20
Rwanda                                  72            0            0             22              6         18
Implementing countries                  49            9            5             35              2
DR Congo                                17            0            67            17              0         6
Ethiopia                                 8            8            15            62              8         13
Ghana                                   100           0            0             0               0         10
Lao PDR                                  0           43            7             50              0         14
Senegal                                  0           70            0             30              0         10
Pipeline countries                      23           26            13            36              2


All SRF countries                       36           17            9             35              2


Stakeholder groups:                      %            %            %             %               %
TTL                                     33           50            8             8               0         12
NSO                                     54           22            12            12              0         41
OGA                                     11            0            11            79              0         19
ONU                                     20            0            0             80              0         5
IDS                                      ..           ..           ..            ..              ..        4
LDP                                     28           14            3             48              7         29


Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     125
                                                        Table II.23
                                     Efforts to enhance the capacity of data users
4C Have there been any efforts under                                        There
the SRF to enhance the capacity of data    Yes, there have        No        are no
users (such as the training of local        been efforts to     efforts      such      Not sure
journalists in the use of statistics) in     enhance the       yet, but   efforts in   what the
[name of country], or are any such         capacity of data   some are    place or     situation     No       Total
efforts planned?                                users          planned     planned         is      answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                           25              7            4           20         1         57
Pipeline countries                                9              14           6           20         4         53

All SRF countries                                34              21          10           40         5        110

Percentage distributions                         %               %           %            %          %
Afghanistan                                      47              26           5           21         0         19
Nigeria                                          45              0           10           45         0         20
Rwanda                                           39              11           6           39         6         18
Implementing countries                           44              12           7           35         2
DR Congo                                         17              17          50           17         0         6
Ethiopia                                          8              8            8           69         8         13
Ghana                                            40              40           0           0         20         10
Lao PDR                                          21              36           7           36         0         14
Senegal                                           0              30          10           50        10         10
Pipeline countries                               17              26          11           38         8

All SRF countries                                31              19           9           36         5

Stakeholder groups:                              %               %           %            %          %
TTL                                              50              17          25           8          0         12
NSO                                              41              32           7           15         5         41
OGA                                               0              11           5           84         0         19
ONU                                              60              0            0           40         0         5
IDS                                               ..             ..           ..          ..         ..        4
LDP                                              17              10          10           52        10         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                       126
                                                       Table II.24
           Success of the SRF in promoting an improved dialogue between users and producers of statistics
4D Overall, how successful do you
consider the SRF to be in                                          Barely
promoting an improved national                                   successful                 Too
dialogue and partnership between                                   or not      Promises    early
users and producers of statistics in     Very       Somewhat     successful      to be       to      No       Total
[name of country]?                     successful   successful      at all    successful   judge   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                    14           18            5           13         5        2         57
Pipeline countries                         5            6            1           13         21       7         53

All SRF countries                         19           24            6           26         26       9        110

Percentage distributions                   %            %            %            %         %        %
Afghanistan                               11           53            16           5         16       0         19
Nigeria                                   35           25            5           25         5        5         20
Rwanda                                    28           17            6           39         6        6         18
Implementing countries                    25           32            9           23         9        4
DR Congo                                   0            0            0           33         50      17         6
Ethiopia                                   8            0            0           31         38      23         13
Ghana                                     10           20            0           10         50      10         10
Lao PDR                                   14           21            7           36         21       0         14
Senegal                                   10           10            0           10         50      20         10
Pipeline countries                         9           11            2           25         40      13

All SRF countries                         17           22            5           24         24       8

Stakeholder groups:                        %            %            %            %         %        %
TTL                                       33           17            0           17         25       8         12
NSO                                       17           20            0           34         24       5         41
OGA                                       16           21            16          26         16       5         19
ONU                                       20           40            0           20         0       20         5
IDS                                        ..           ..           ..           ..        ..       ..        4
LDP                                       10           24            10          14         28      14         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      127
                                                       Table II.25
                     SRF impact on aligning support for statistical capacity building to the NSDS
5A Has the SRF had an impact, or do      Has already                 Has not had any
you think it has the potential to make      had a       Has the      positive impact
an impact, on aligning support for         positive     potential    and/or does not
statistical capacity building to the      impact on     to make      appear to have      I'm
national statistical plan or NSDS in       aligning        an        the potential to    not     No       Total
[name of country]?                         support       impact           do so         sure   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                       20              30             2            4       1         57
Pipeline countries                            5              43             0            4       1         53

All SRF countries                            25              73             2            8       2        110

Percentage distributions                     %               %             %             %       %
Afghanistan                                  42              47             5            5       0         19
Nigeria                                      40              50             0            5       5         20
Rwanda                                       22              61             6           11       0         18
Implementing countries                       35              53             4            7       2
DR Congo                                      0              100            0            0       0         6
Ethiopia                                      8              92             0            0       0         13
Ghana                                        10              90             0            0       0         10
Lao PDR                                      14              57             0           29       0         14
Senegal                                      10              80             0            0      10         10
Pipeline countries                            9              81             0            8       2

All SRF countries                            23              66             2            7       2

Stakeholder groups:                          %               %             %             %       %
TTL                                          33              67             0            0       0         12
NSO                                          27              68             0            5       0         41
OGA                                          11              74             0           16       0         19
ONU                                          20              60             0           20       0         5
IDS                                           ..             ..             ..           ..      ..        4
LDP                                          17              62             7            7       7         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                       128
                                                            Table II.26
                            SRF impact on donor coordination of statistical capacity building
                                          Has already                         Has not led to
                                          led to better                        better donor
5B Has the SRF aproach led, or do            donor              Has the       coordination
you think it has the potential to lead,   coordination        potential to   and/or does not
to better donor coordination of           of statistical        lead to      appear to have     I'm
statistical capacity building in            capacity         better donor    the potential to   not      No       Total
[name of country]?                          building         coordination          do so        sure   answer   responses
Number of responses
Implementing countries                         21                 30                2            3       1         57
Pipeline countries                             3.5               42.5               1            5       1         53

All SRF countries                             24.5               72.5               3            8       2        110

Percentage distributions                       %                  %                %             %       %
Afghanistan                                    53                 32                5           11       0         19
Nigeria                                        35                 60                0            0       5         20
Rwanda                                         22                 67                6            6       0         18
Implementing countries                         37                 53                4            5       2
DR Congo                                        0                100                0            0       0         6
Ethiopia                                       15                 77                8            0       0         13
Ghana                                          10                 80                0           10       0         10
Lao PDR                                         0                 71                0           29       0         14
Senegal                                         5                 85                0            0      10         10
Pipeline countries                              7                 80                2            9       2

All SRF countries                              22                 66                3            7       2

Stakeholder groups:                            %                  %                %             %       %
TTL                                            38                 63                0            0       0         12
NSO                                            22                 73                0            5       0         41
OGA                                             0                 79                0           16       5         19
ONU                                             0                 80                0           20       0         5
IDS                                             ..                ..                ..           ..      ..        4
LDP                                            28                 52               10            7       3         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                           129
                                                         Table II.27
                 Success of the SRF in delivering more effective aid for strengthening statistical systems



5C Overall, how successful do you
consider the SRF to be in delivering                                  Barely
more efficient and effective aid and                                successful                 Too
technical assistance for strengthening                                or not      Promises    early
statistical  systems     and    results     Very       Somewhat     successful      to be       to      No       Total
measurement in [name of country]?         successful   successful      at all    successful   judge   answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                       16           21            2           10         6        2         57
Pipeline countries                            6            6            0           12         25       4         53


All SRF countries                            22           27            2           22         31       6        110


Percentage distributions                      %            %           %             %         %        %
Afghanistan                                  21           47           11            5         11       5         19
Nigeria                                      40           30            0           15         10       5         20
Rwanda                                       22           33            0           33         11       0         18
Implementing countries                       28           37            4           18         11       4
DR Congo                                      0            0            0           33         67       0         6
Ethiopia                                     15            8            0           15         46      15         13
Ghana                                        10           10            0           20         60       0         10
Lao PDR                                      21           21            0           36         21       0         14
Senegal                                       0           10            0           10         60      20         10
Pipeline countries                           11           11            0           23         47       8


All SRF countries                            20           25            2           20         28       5


Stakeholder groups:                           %            %           %             %         %        %
TTL                                          33            8            0            8         42       8         12
NSO                                          20           24            0           27         27       2         41
OGA                                          32           16            5           32         11       5         19
ONU                                           0           60            0            0         20      20         5
IDS                                           ..           ..           ..           ..        ..       ..        4
LDP                                          10           31            3           14         34       7         29


Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013



                                                        130
                                                         Table II.28
                                               Expectations for the SRF


7A. How reasonable or realistic do you
think the expectations for the SRF are in      Very         Somewhat                   I'm not     No       Total
terms of its impact and timing?             reasonable      reasonable   Unrealistic     sure    answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                         21               26           2           3         1         53
Pipeline countries                             18               13           1           19        1         52


All SRF countries                              39               39           3           22        2        105


Percentage distributions                        %               %            %           %         %
Afghanistan                                    21               63           5           11        0         19
Nigeria                                        67               22           6           6         0         18
Rwanda                                         31               63           0           0         6         16
Implementing countries                         40               49           4           6         2
DR Congo                                        0               50           0           50        0         6
Ethiopia                                       33               17           0           42        8         12
Ghana                                          60               20           10          10        0         10
Lao PDR                                        21               29           0           50        0         14
Senegal                                        50               20           0           30        0         10
Pipeline countries                             35               25           2           37        2


All SRF countries                              37               37           3           21        2


Stakeholder groups:                             %               %            %           %         %
TTL                                            50               42           0           8         0         12
NSO                                            46               34           2           17        0         41
OGA                                            26               26           0           42        5         19
IDS                                             ..               ..          ..          ..        ..        4
LDP                                            31               41           3           21        3         29


Notes: This question was not posed to the ONU group. Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     131
                                                   Table II.29
                            Possible extension of the SRF to regional operations


7C. Do you consider that the SRF, hitherto
comprising almost exclusively country-
specific projects, should be extended to                                             No       Total
regional initiatives and operations?         Yes         Perhaps    No             answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                        24            20.5    9.5              3         57
Pipeline countries                            18            20       8               7         53


All SRF countries                             42            40.5    17.5            10        110


Percentage distributions                      %              %       %               %
Afghanistan                                   32            50       13              5         19
Nigeria                                       50            25       15             10         20
Rwanda                                        44            33       22              0         18
Implementing countries                        42            36       17              5
DR Congo                                      17            33       33             17         6
Ethiopia                                      46            38       8               8         13
Ghana                                         40            10       20             30         10
Lao PDR                                       21            64       14              0         14
Senegal                                       40            30       10             20         10
Pipeline countries                            34            38       15             13


All SRF countries                             38            37       16              9


Stakeholder groups:                           %              %       %               %
TTL                                           42            42       17              0         12
NSO                                           44            33       13             10         41
OGA                                           47            26       11             16         19
ONU                                           40            20       20             20         5
IDS                                           ..             ..      ..              ..        4
LDP                                           24            52       17              7         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      132
                                                        Table II.30
                                   SRF grant approval and disbursement process


8A. How smooth and timely was, or has                                        Beset by
been to date, the SRF grant approval and        Smooth         Somewhat     difficulties     No       Total
disbursement process?                          and timely     problematic   and delays     answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                             6                  12         4           5         27
Pipeline countries                                 5                  7          9           9         30


All SRF countries                                  11                 19        13          14         57


Percentage distributions                           %                  %         %            %
Afghanistan                                        27                 55         9           9         11
Nigeria                                            30                 40        10          20         10
Rwanda                                             0                  33        33          33         6
Implementing countries                             22                 44        15          19
DR Congo                                           0                  0         50          50         6
Ethiopia                                           20                 40        20          20         5
Ghana                                              11                 22        33          33         9
Lao PDR                                            40                 60         0           0         5
Senegal                                            20                 0         40          40         5
Pipeline countries                                 17                 23        30          30


All SRF countries                                  19                 33        23          25


Stakeholder groups:                                %                  %         %            %
TTL                                                42                 25        17          17         12
NSO                                                15                 34        24          27         41
IDS                                                ..                 ..         ..          ..        4


Notes: This question was posed only to the above stakeholder groups.
Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                        133
                                                      Table II.31
                                    Experiences in implementing the SRF grant


8B. What has been your experience in                                             I don't have
implementing the SRF grant, in terms of                                             enough
reporting arrangements, support from        Very      Somewhat      Generally   experience to     No       Total
World Bank staff and so on?                positive    positive     negative         judge      answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                        13            8          1             3            2         27
Pipeline countries                            2             6          1             17           4         30


All SRF countries                             15            14         2             20           6         57


Percentage distributions                      %             %          %             %            %
Afghanistan                                   55            36         0             9            0         11
Nigeria                                       60            20         0             20           0         10
Rwanda                                        17            33         17            0           33         6
Implementing countries                        48            30         4             11           7
DR Congo                                      0             17         0             50          33         6
Ethiopia                                      0             40         0             60           0         5
Ghana                                         11            11         11            56          11         9
Lao PDR                                       20            20         0             60           0         5
Senegal                                       0             20         0             60          20         5
Pipeline countries                            7             20         3             57          13


All SRF countries                             26            25         4             35          11


Stakeholder groups:                           %             %          %             %            %
TTL                                           25            33         0             25          17         12
NSO                                           24            24         2             39          10         41
IDS                                           ..            ..         ..            ..           ..        4


Notes: This question was posed only to the above stakeholder groups.
Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      134
                                                      Table II.32
                                   Recipient-country execution of SRF projects


8D. How large a challenge do you consider
that recipient-country execution of the SRF                Somewhat       Not a       I'm
project has been or will be in [name of        A great       of a      significant    not     No       Total
country]?                                     challenge    challenge   challenge     sure   answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                           14           11           13         5       1         44
Pipeline countries                               10           16           8          4       4         42


All SRF countries                                24           27           21         9       5         86


Percentage distributions                         %             %           %          %       %
Afghanistan                                      47           35           0         18       0         17
Nigeria                                          31           23           23        15       8         13
Rwanda                                           14           14           71         0       0         14
Implementing countries                           32           25           30        11       2
DR Congo                                         67           33           0          0       0         6
Ethiopia                                         18           27           27         9      18         11
Ghana                                            10           30           40        10      10         10
Lao PDR                                          14           57           0         29       0         7
Senegal                                          25           50           13         0      13         8
Pipeline countries                               24           38           19        10      10


All SRF countries                                28           31           24        10       6


Stakeholder groups:                              %             %           %          %       %
TTL                                              42           42           8          0       8         12
NSO                                              17           32           29        17       5         41
IDS                                              ..            ..          ..         ..      ..        4
LDP                                              38           24           24         7       7         29


Notes: This question was not posed to the OGA and ONU groups.
Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                       135
                                                      Table II.33
                           Attention to SRF projects by World Bank line management


8E. Do you consider that SRF projects receive
adequate attention by line management in the             To some         I'm not     No       Total
World Bank?                                     Yes       extent    No     sure    answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                          21          13      4      5         1         44
Pipeline countries                              16          10      3      10        3         42


All SRF countries                               37          23      7      15        4         86


Percentage distributions                        %           %       %      %         %
Afghanistan                                     47          35      0      12        6         17
Nigeria                                         69          8       8      15        0         13
Rwanda                                          29          43      21     7         0         14
Implementing countries                          48          30      9      11        2
DR Congo                                        50          33      0      17        0         6
Ethiopia                                        36          9       9      36        9         11
Ghana                                           40          10      20     20        10        10
Lao PDR                                         57          14      0      29        0         7
Senegal                                         13          63      0      13        13        8
Pipeline countries                              38          24      7      24        7


All SRF countries                               43          27      8      17        5


Stakeholder groups:                             %           %       %      %         %
TTL                                             33          50      17     0         0         12
NSO                                             56          22      0      15        7         41
IDS                                              ..         ..      ..     ..        ..        4
LDP                                             24          28      14     31        3         29


Notes: This question was not posed to the OGA and ONU groups.
Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      136
                                                      Table II.34
                                          SRF grants as stand-alone projects


8F. Would there be an advantage to the SRF grant being
part of a larger Bank operation rather than being a stand-                            No       Total
alone project as is currently the case?                      Yes    Perhaps    No   answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                                        8       23       9      4         44
Pipeline countries                                            9       18       12     3         42


All SRF countries                                            17       41       21     7         86


Percentage distributions                                     %        %        %      %
Afghanistan                                                  12       65       18     6         17
Nigeria                                                      15       38       23    23         13
Rwanda                                                       29       50       21     0         14
Implementing countries                                       18       52       20     9
DR Congo                                                     17       33       33    17         6
Ethiopia                                                     36       36       18     9         11
Ghana                                                        10       40       50     0         10
Lao PDR                                                       0      100       0      0         7
Senegal                                                      38       13       38    13         8
Pipeline countries                                           21       43       29     7


All SRF countries                                            20       48       24     8


Stakeholder groups:                                          %        %        %      %
TTL                                                          33       25       33     8         12
NSO                                                          20       59       17     5         41
IDS                                                           ..      ..       ..     ..        4
LDP                                                          17       45       24    14         29


Notes: This question was not posed to the OGA and ONU groups.
Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     137
                                                        Table II.35
                           Familiarity with the SRF (standardized) generic Results Framework


                                                                          Not
8G. Are you familiar with the SRF              Very        Somewhat    familiar at        No       Total
standardized [generic] Results Framework?    familiar       familiar      all           answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                          14            15           13              2        44
Pipeline countries                              7             20           13              2        42


All SRF countries                               21            35           26              4        86


Percentage distributions                        %             %            %              %
Afghanistan                                     24            41           29              6        17
Nigeria                                         31            23           38              8        13
Rwanda                                          43            36           21              0        14
Implementing countries                          32            34           30              5
DR Congo                                        17            33           33             17        6
Ethiopia                                        27            36           36              0        11
Ghana                                           20            30           50              0        10
Lao PDR                                         0             86           14              0        7
Senegal                                         13            63           13             13        8
Pipeline countries                              17            48           31              5


All SRF countries                               24            41           30              5


Stakeholder groups:                             %             %            %              %
TTL                                             58            42           0               0        12
NSO                                             15            39           41              5        41
IDS                                             ..            ..           ..              ..       4
LDP                                             17            45           31              7        29


Notes: This question was not posed to the OGA and ONU groups.
Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     138
                                                     Table II.36
                         Experience with the SRF (standardized) generic Results Framework


8H. What has been your experience                                             I don't have
with the SRF standardized [generic]     Very      Somewhat     Generally   enough experience     No       Total
Results Framework?                     positive    positive    negative         to judge       answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                    2          11            2              9              3         27
Pipeline countries                        1           7            4              16             2         30


All SRF countries                         3          18            6              25             5         57


Percentage distributions                  %           %            %              %              %
Afghanistan                               0          36            9              55             0         11
Nigeria                                   10         50            10             20            10         10
Rwanda                                    17         33            0              17            33         6
Implementing countries                    7          41            7              33            11
DR Congo                                  0           0            33             50            17         6
Ethiopia                                  20         20            0              60             0         5
Ghana                                     0          11            22             56            11         9
Lao PDR                                   0          40            0              60             0         5
Senegal                                   0          60            0              40             0         5
Pipeline countries                        3          23            13             53             7


All SRF countries                         5          32            11             44             9


Stakeholder groups:                       %           %            %              %              %
TTL                                       0          58            33             8              0         12
NSO                                       7          24            0              56            12         41
IDS                                       ..          ..           ..             ..             ..        4


Notes: This question was posed only to the above stakeholder groups.


Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                     139
                                                       Table II.37
                                   The SRF concept and statistical capacity building


9A. To what extent do you consider that the concept     To a      To          To an
of the SRF meets the needs of statistical capacity      great    some     insignificant   I'm not     No       Total
building in [name of country]?                         extent    extent      extent         sure    answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                                  30        21           1            3         2         57
Pipeline countries                                      30        14           1            6         2         53


All SRF countries                                       60        35           2            9         4        110


Percentage distributions                                %         %            %            %         %
Afghanistan                                             32        53           5            5         5         19
Nigeria                                                 50        40           0            5         5         20
Rwanda                                                  78        17           0            6         0         18
Implementing countries                                  53        37           2            5         4
DR Congo                                                33        67           0            0         0         6
Ethiopia                                                54        15           8            15        8         13
Ghana                                                   80        20           0            0         0         10
Lao PDR                                                 50        29           0            21        0         14
Senegal                                                 60        20           0            10       10         10
Pipeline countries                                      57        26           2            11        4


All SRF countries                                       55        32           2            8         4


Stakeholder groups:                                     %         %            %            %         %
TTL                                                     58        42           0            0         0         12
NSO                                                     61        34           2            0         2         41
OGA                                                     32        32           0            26       11         19
ONU                                                     60        20           0            20        0         5
IDS                                                         ..       ..        ..           ..        ..        4
LDP                                                     55        28           3            10        3         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                      140
                                                        Table II.38
                                     Leadership of the statistical development process



9C. To what extent do you consider that the SRF has
facilitated, or has the potential to facilitate, effective
ownership and leadership by the government of the              To a     To          To an        I'm
development of the national statistical system of [name        great   some     insignificant    not     No       Total
of country]?                                                  extent   extent      extent       sure   answer   responses

Number of responses
Implementing countries                                         31       19           1           5       1         57
Pipeline countries                                             27       15           0           8       3         53


All SRF countries                                              58       34           1          13       4        110


Percentage distributions                                       %        %            %          %       %
Afghanistan                                                    37       53           0          5       5          19
Nigeria                                                        55       25           5          15      0          20
Rwanda                                                         72       22           0          6       0          18
Implementing countries                                         54       33           2          9       2
DR Congo                                                       17       50           0          17      17          6
Ethiopia                                                       46       23           0          23      8          13
Ghana                                                          70       30           0          0       0          10
Lao PDR                                                        50       29           0          21      0          14
Senegal                                                        60       20           0          10      10         10
Pipeline countries                                             51       28           0          15      6


All SRF countries                                              53       31           1          12       4


Stakeholder groups:                                            %        %            %          %       %
TTL                                                            58       33           0          0       8          12
NSO                                                            71       22           2          5       0          41
OGA                                                            32       26           0          32      11         19
ONU                                                            60       20           0          20      0           5
IDS                                                             ..      ..           ..         ..      ..          4
LDP                                                            41       41           0          14      3          29


Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013




                                                        141
                                                       Table II.39
                           SRF project implementation and governmental reform measures


9D. Does implementation of the SRF
project, currently or potentially, involve
national authorities taking reform measures    Yes, to a                No, or
that would not otherwise have been            significant    To some   probably   I'm not     No       Total
undertaken?                                     extent        extent      not       sure    answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                            15            20        5         16        1         57
Pipeline countries                                18            18        3         9         5         53


All SRF countries                                 33            38        8         25        6        110


Percentage distributions                          %             %         %         %         %
Afghanistan                                       11            58       11         16        5         19
Nigeria                                           55            20        0         25        0         20
Rwanda                                            11            28       17         44        0         18
Implementing countries                            26            35        9         28        2
DR Congo                                          17            67       17         0         0         6
Ethiopia                                          31            38        0         15       15         13
Ghana                                             40            30       10         10       10         10
Lao PDR                                           36            29        7         29        0         14
Senegal                                           40            20        0         20       20         10
Pipeline countries                                34            34        6         17        9


All SRF countries                                 30            35        7         23        5


Stakeholder groups:                               %             %         %         %         %
TTL                                               67            33        0         0         0         12
NSO                                               32            29       12         20        7         41
OGA                                               26            26        5         32       11         19
ONU                                               20            40        0         40        0         5
IDS                                               ..            ..        ..        ..        ..        4
LDP                                               17            41        7         31        3         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013



                                                       142
                                                          Table II.40
                      SRF facilitation of the use of data to support evidence-based decision-making


9E. To what extent do you consider that the
concept of the SRF has facilitated, or has the
potential to facilitate, the greater use of
statistical data and indicators to support         To a         To          To an       I'm
evidence-based decision-making in [name of         great       some     insignificant   not       No       Total
country]?                                         extent       extent      extent       sure    answer   responses


Number of responses
Implementing countries                              28           25          0           3        1         57
Pipeline countries                                  30           16          0           5        2         53


All SRF countries                                   58           41          0           8        3        110


Percentage distributions                            %            %           %           %        %
Afghanistan                                         11           84          0           0        5         19
Nigeria                                             65           30          0           5        0         20
Rwanda                                              72           17          0          11        0         18
Implementing countries                              49           44          0           5        2
DR Congo                                            33           50          0          17        0         6
Ethiopia                                            62           23          0           8        8         13
Ghana                                               80           20          0           0        0         10
Lao PDR                                             50           36          0          14        0         14
Senegal                                             50           30          0          10        10        10
Pipeline countries                                  57           30          0           9        4


All SRF countries                                   53           37          0           7        3


Stakeholder groups:                                 %            %           %           %        %
TTL                                                 58           42          0           0        0         12
NSO                                                 66           29          0           5        0         41
OGA                                                 37           37          0          16        11        19
ONU                                                 40           40          0          20        0         5
IDS                                                  ..           ..         ..          ..       ..        4
LDP                                                 41           48          0           7        3         29
Note: Responses from the IDS group have been suppressed.
Source: SRF Evaluation Survey 2013


                                                      143
     ANNEX 3: Detailed reviews of Nigeria and Rwanda experiences with the SRF-CF

Introduction

1.      As described in the Methodology section, owing to the short period covered by this
evaluation and the fact that only three country projects were under implementation when it
started, the assessment of the SRF’s objectives has relied on a number of different approaches
including in-depth discussion with the teams in charge of the preparation and implementation of
pilot projects as well as field visits to two of the three countries with relatively longer
implementation experience. The visits provided useful information on how the key principles of
the SRF approach work in a concrete country context, which was very helpful to the Evaluation
Team in getting better insights into the responses and comments drawn from a larger population
of respondents from the eight pilot countries. The field visits also provided the opportunity for
the Evaluation Team to refine the questionnaire and the identification of responding groups for
the survey.

NIGERIA

                  a) Background

2.      The Nigeria Statistical System. Nigeria is a three-tiered federal state composed of 36
States and the Federal Capital Territory. Each state is made up of administrative units called
Local Governments. By the provisions of the Nigeria Constitution, government at each level has
the authority to produce its own statistics. In practice, most of the statistics are produced by the
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) which operates as the apex organization and coordinator of
the National Statistics System (NSS), the State Statistical Agencies (SSAs) and line Ministries,
Departments and Agencies (MDAs) both at the federal and state levels. The NBS and Federal
MDAs produce national statistics, while the SSAs and state-level MDAs are in charge of
statewide statistics. Other important producers of official statistics include the Central Bank of
Nigeria (CBN), responsible for financial statistics, and the National Population Commission
(NPopC) which has formal responsibility for population and demographic statistics, including
carrying out population and housing censuses, and operates at all three administrative tiers of the
government. Given the federal structure of governments in Nigeria, accurate population figures
are important and politically sensitive since they are used to determine budget allocations for and
transfers to the States.

3.      The NBS was established by the Statistics Act of 2007 from the merger of the Federal
Office of Statistics and the National Data Bank. The National Strategy for the Development of
Statistics (NSDS) -which will be discussed in greater detail below- also promoted the conversion
of SSAs into State Bureau of Statistics (SBSs) to play the role of counterparts of the NBS at the
state level. In order to change the status of the agency, the State must have passed their Statistics
Edicts20. Overall coordination of the NSS is provided by the National Consultative Committee on

20
  The creation of the SBS is a key step in the reform of the state statistical systems. The former Director of the State
Statistical Agency will become the Statistician General of the state and serves as a counterpart of the Federal
Statistician General. To switch from an SSA to an SBS, all the states have to pass Statistical Edicts. As of the time
of the Evaluation Team’s visit to Nigeria (end-June 2013), 21 of the 36 states have passed the Edicts and are on their
way to creating SBSs.

                                                         144
Statistics (NCCS), a forum where overall coordination, development of statistical programs, and
uniform standards and methodologies among the various agencies are discussed and adopted by all
producers of official statistics in Nigeria, with a view to improving the quality, comparability and
timeliness of statistical production. All policy issues regarding statistics are managed by the
National Statistics Board which was established as the oversight body of the NSS and as the
Steering Committee for statistical development in Nigeria with the NBS as its secretariat.
4.      The National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS). In the course of
rebuilding the NSS, the Government prepared a five-year statistical strategic plan for 2010/11-
2014/15 which was developed in part with a grant from the World Bank’s Trust Fund for Statistical
Capacity Building and which aims at achieving the following strategic objectives:
     (i) creating the demand for the use of statistics at the state level through a focus on statistical
         communications;
     (ii) strengthening the national framework for data management and development through an
          emphasis on reforming the legal framework (especially at the state level); institutional
          restructuring of the MDAs; and streamlining the coordination arrangements;
     (iii) developing the necessary statistical framework and information technology (both
           hardware and software) with a focus on enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness in
           data collection, processing and analysis, and their dissemination; and
     (iv) promoting the development and use of sound and well-accepted statistical techniques for
          data production and management across the entire NSS.
5.       The NSDS incorporates a generic State Statistical Master Plan (SSMP) for strengthening
the Nigeria NSS at sub-national levels. The strategy also envisages a Sectoral Statistics Plan
(SSP) targeting implementation of the NSDS at sectoral level. The latter is to be done in phases;
the first phase includes 16 Federal MDAs chosen on the basis of the volume of their respective
statistical activities and the relative significance of the content of the mandate of each of the
MDAs in national survival and development. The NSDS is expected to be evaluated in the
middle of next year.
6.     The SRF Project. The US$ 10 million three-year project became effective in June 2011
and implementation is expected to be completed by February 2014. The project’s main
components provide support to help to achieve the four strategic objectives of the NSDS as
described above with a focus on NBS and NPopC at the federal level and six pilot states
(Anambra, Bauchi, Edo, Kaduna, Niger and Ondo states), one per geopolitical zone of the
Federation.
7.     Development partners. Eighteen development agencies 21 are actively and directly
involved in statistical development activities in Nigeria with the World Bank playing the role of
lead donor. Their main support activities are summarized in Table III.1.




21
  They are AfDB, CIDA, DfID, ECOWAS, ESSPIN-DfID (DfID funded Education Sector Support Programme in
Nigeria), European Union, FAO, ILO, IMF, SPARC-DfID (DfID funded State Partnership for Accountability,
Responsiveness and Capability aimed at supporting state-level governments in the use of public resources),
UNAIDS, UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNIDO, USAID, WHO and the World Bank.

                                                   145
                    Table III.1: Main Activities in Statistics by Development Partners
         Agency                                                   Main Activities
World Bank/DfID                     Implementation of the NSDS both at the Federal level and in 6 pilot states. State
                                     Master Plans finalized and included in the NSDS.
                                    National, MDAs and State Statistical Yearbooks. Templates have been
                                     distributed and are being populated by the various agencies.
                                    Support to survey data collection and analysis (Core Welfare Indicators Survey;
                                     Nigeria Living Standards Survey (NLSS); Labor Force and Manpower Survey;
                                     National Agricultural Sample Census; National Agricultural Survey.
                                    National M&E Framework.
                                    Roll out of Automation of Death and birth registries through NPoPC. This will
                                     assure more accurate population projections and yield better demographic
                                     statistics for planning.
                                    Digitalization of the Cartographic System with NPoPC, to get digital maps and
                                     improve Geographic Information Systems at NBS and NPoPC reporting.
                                    Sectoral data collection and analysis in Health (Malaria Control Survey) and
                                     Education (Service Delivery Survey).
                                    GDDS (General Data Dissemination System)
                                    Improving access to administrative data
                                    With OECD/PARIS21: Accelerated Data Program.
                                    Data harmonization by sector just completed Water & Sanitation.
UNDP                                Nigeria Data Nervous System, through NBS, currently piloted in 17 States and
                                     will be rolled out to the remaining states through the NSDS.
                                    Financing pilot program to set up of automatic death and birth registration
                                     centers, through NPoPC. A request is being finalized (which will be sent to the
                                     World Bank shortly), for Assistance in rolling out the Birth and Death Registry.
UNICEF                              Regular conduct of the Multiple Indicators Cluster Survey. Data for last survey
                                     2008 being processed.
UNFPA                               Support to Census activities. Currently assisting the NPoPC in processing the
                                     2006 Census data
US Aid                              Assist NPoPC in data collection and analysis of the Census and the Nigeria
                                     Demographic and Health Survey. Last survey conducted in 2008 with the data
                                     processing still on-going.
AfDB                                PPP (purchasing power parity) project.
                                    Survey on Remittances: Financing a survey to study the amount and effect of
                                     remittances in the Nigeria economy. The study will be conducted with
                                     coordination from the World Bank.

Source: IDA, Country Partnership Strategy Paper for the Federal Republic of Nigeria 2010-13. The information on activities
shown in this table refers to the situation in 2009.

                  b) Nigeria’s Experiences with the SRF Approach/Project

8.      Promotion of a system-wide approach to statistics at the country level. The
experiences of the two countries visited by the SRF evaluation mission reflect two startlingly
different systems which have a significant impact on coordination. Leaving aside differences due
to largely different geographical sizes and populations of the two countries, the top-down
structure of government in Rwanda has proven to facilitate coordination and the design and
implementation of a system-wide approach. In contrast, the three-tiered government structure in
Nigeria has made it much more challenging to achieve similar results.



                                                          146
9.      In spite of the above challenges, the design of the Nigeria SRF project which allocates
funding equally between NBS and NPopC22 has been instrumental in incentivizing these two
major Statistics agencies to work together. In addition to this significant achievement given that
these two major statistics agencies were not effectively collaborating in the past, the SRF
evaluation mission observed signs of greater ownership of the statistics development program at
both the Federal and the Niger State levels. The difficulty of coordination is partly due to the
Federal structure of governments in Nigeria. For instance it was reported that although the NBS
is legally supposed to act as the overall coordinator on statistics matters for Nigeria as a whole,
control of the NBS on state-level administrations and ministries remains confused in practice.

10.    The evaluation mission also met with the SRF Technical Committee which is chaired by
the Director of International Relations of the Federal Ministry of Finance and includes
representatives of the Central Bank of Nigeria, the National Planning Commission, the Auditor
General Office, the Accountant General Office, the Nigeria Statistical Association and the two
executing agencies of the SRF project, NBS and NPopC. The interactions between the various
members of the Technical Committee reveal a number of useful insights such as the complexities
of coordination among various agencies in Nigeria where the authority of the lead agency, in this
case the Federal Ministry of Finance, cannot be taken for granted. Based on the discussions
during the meeting, the sharing of documents and other information on the SRF project among
the members of the Committee may need to be improved although it is not clear whether this
should be the role of the Ministry of Finance or of the World Bank.

11.     The situation in Niger State reflects a strong ownership of statistics at the state level by
all concerned including the Chairperson of the Board of the Niger State SBS (who was a former
Director-General of NBS), the Planning Commissioner, senior staff at the state-level ministries
of health and education as well as major statistics users including university researchers and local
media representatives. More specifically, all the state-level MDAs have joined the State
Consultative Committee on Statistics – SCCS, the state-level NCCS.

12.     Increasing resources for implementing NSDS. As can be seen in Table III.2,
allocations for investments have gone up sharply both for the NBS (from N290 million in 2011
to N 1 billion in 2013) and for the NPopC (from N290 million in 2011 to N 1.5 billion in 2013).
               Table III.2: Budget allocations for Statistics 2011-13, in billions of Naira
                             2011 (budgeted)              2012 (budgeted)              2013 (budgeted)
                         Capital       Recurrent       Capital      Recurrent      Capital       Recurrent
                       expenditures   expenditures   expenditures expenditures   expenditures   expenditures
        National
        Planning          1.31            5.30          1.05          5.85          2.80            6.37
        Commission
        NBS               0.29            2.42          0.36          3.37          1.00            3.96
        NPopC             0.29            5.18          1.96          6.93          1.50            5.36



22
  In June 2012, changes were made at the top management level of NPopC which have caused delays in the
implementation of the SRF project on the components managed by this agency. The new management of NPopC
has also developed very ambitious plans for the Commission which has rendered more difficult recent discussions
between NPopC and other partners involved in statistics, including with the World Bank staff involved in the
implementation of the SRF project. The recent resignation of the NPopC chairperson will likely lead to continued
uncertainty in the near future.

                                                      147
13.     The NBS is taking steps towards the creation of the Trust Fund for Statistics using a
similar trust fund arrangement in education as a model23. Development partners are also in the
early process of considering the creation of a basket fund for statistics. The World Bank is
currently preparing a new technical assistance project – with a notional amount of at least $100
million for a 2-3 year project focusing on aligning existing methodologies to international
standards and on helping to build Nigeria’s capacity to produce and disseminate statistics using
the updated methodologies. This project is tentatively scheduled to become effective in June
2014, shortly after the end of the current SRF project.
14.     In Niger State, the major developments in terms of resources have been the establishment
of a separate budget for the SBS; funding for statistics used to be allocated through the Planning
Commission. The dramatically increased budget for statistics has jumped from N1 million to
N52 million in the most recent year.
15.     Linking improvements in the statistical system to the needs of national and sectoral
monitoring frameworks. In spite of important progress, the impression of the SRF evaluation
mission is that more work needs to be done on advocacy and on helping to raise awareness of the
benefits of good data on the quality of economic policies. The challenges of how to promote
usage of data for economic planning and how to allay the general skepticism of the public at
large on economic and social data in Nigeria were a common theme. Improving the regularity of
the publication of key data together with the organization of press conferences on the release of
new information on the CPI and GDP have led to an improved coverage of economic data in the
local media. The evaluation mission was also informed that earlier in the year, the MDG Office
has commissioned a special study by the NBS to cover more MDG specific data.

16.      In the Niger State Vision 3:2020 -- which aims to make of Niger State one of the top
three states in Nigeria by the year 2020 --, statistics play a very critical role. Using the model of
the Africa Peer Review Mechanism, senior political leaders of the State are considering setting
up a state peer review mechanism to learn from best practices amongst Nigerian states in public
finance, procurement practices, and statistics generation and dissemination. Senior officials met
by the SRF evaluation mission also shared their plans for funding social and economic research
in the State. The participation of the evaluation mission in a discussion between senior officials
at the state-level ministries of health and education and the State Statistician General revealed the
strong desire for the SBS to help with improving the quality of statistics in health and education
required for policy making. The regular publication of key documents including the Niger State
Statistical Yearbook, statistics on public finance, education, manpower and agriculture to name a
few have led to the sharply rising demand for data.

17.      Promoting an improved national dialogue and partnership between users and
producers of statistics. The SRF has raised awareness and interest in statistics through a number
of important measures including: (i) the publication of a release calendar for the NBS website;
(ii) the dissemination of several publications; and (iii) the revamping of the NBS website which
includes a powerful data portal with data mapping features. As a result of these measures,
official statistics are now being mentioned in the media at an increasing rate; notably a number
of editorials in the largest national newspapers covered poverty data, GDP, unemployment and

23
  The latest information is that the idea of a Statistics Trust Fund will require more time for reflection and has been
temporarily put on hold.

                                                         148
inflation. A user satisfaction survey was conducted at the federal level and in the 6 pilot states
during the period of July to October 2011. The results of the survey, collected during workshops,
have been analyzed and are available. NBS has organized journalist training with a focus on the
interpretation of data, and a statistics user-producer seminar. Users of statistics have worked
together to compile their needs which have been revised in December 2012 to be used as
information to convey to the Federal level agencies for information and increased support.

18.     The SRF project has also facilitated the conduct of 2 NCCS meetings. The NCCS is the
largest forum on statistics in Nigeria. It meets twice a year; every producer of official statistics is
invited to this meeting, and the way forward for the NSS is usually discussed at this forum.
During the last meeting in December 2012, two main achievements were noted: (i) the adoption
of the updated template for the State Statistical Yearbooks and (ii) a dialogue with all
stakeholders on the way forward with re-basing the GDP (current base year is 1990) and GDP
calculations for state and federal governments. The NSS is currently organizing itself to be in a
position to compute state-level GDP, following the conclusion of the dialogue at the NCCS.
19.     In Minna, the mission was able to get a first-hand exposure to the workings of statistical
development at the State level, including a very useful joint meeting with the State Consultative
Committee on Statistics (SCCS) chaired by the chairman of the board, various board members,
university researchers and the local media to go over the internal dynamics on the development
of statistics in Niger State, where rising demand for data has led not only to the regular
publication of key economic and social indicators but also to a constant effort to improve the
quality and coverage of data published by the SBS and state-level MDAs. Meetings with the
permanent secretaries of the Planning Commission, the new officials of the ministries of health
and education and the State Statistician General provided the evaluation mission with first-hand
exposure to the close and constructive relationships on their respective roles in promoting both
the reliance on and concerns for timely and relevant data for economic planning and its
implementation.
20.      Delivering more effective and efficient aid and technical assistance for strengthening
statistical systems. The development partners have established the Nigeria Development
Partners’ Statistics, Monitoring and Evaluation Group to maximize the impact of their support in
improving production and use of M&E and statistics in Nigeria. The newly created forum
provides for a unified dialogue with the Government and other Nigerian partners, for sharing
information, implementation progress reports and lessons on support for statistics in Nigeria.
The World Bank is the Chair and provides secretarial support with DfID as the backup agency.
The Group’s priority work plan for the 2012-14 period focuses on the enhancement of the quality
of data and their availability at the state level in four areas considered as key to national
development namely the national accounts, health, education and agriculture. To this end, the
Group will promote and support a better coordination among the main producers of official
statistics at federal level and state levels, the survey program identified by NBS and NPopC, as
well as the M&E component of the Transformation Agenda.
21.    The development partners have devised in early 2013 a joint support strategy to the NBS
Corporate Strategy Implementation Plan (CSIP) for 2013-201424, which covers three main areas:

24
  This is the first time that the NBS has developed such a strategy and shared it with its development partners for
information and eventual support. Given the limited resources coming from both the Government and development
partners, further prioritization of the strategy document’s Action Plan is needed.

                                                       149
(i) how to better use administrative data and survey programs to generate better quality statistics,
(ii) how to better align training programs with data production needs, and (iii) how to improve
the ICT strategy for better data production and dissemination. In spite of these various efforts for
more coordinated assistance in statistics, there remain concerns that support by development
partners on statistics, and particularly to the MDAs, is not always in collaboration with the NBS,
thereby rendering coordination of the NSS less than effective.
22.     Impact of the in-country donor statistician (IDS) in helping to achieve the SRF
objectives. The multiplicity of national stakeholders involved in the implementation of the SRF
project both at the federal and state levels together with difficulties in travelling inside the
country -- in particular security concerns in addition to long distances between Abuja and the six
pilot states included in the SRF project -- have made the tasks of the IDS most challenging.
Discussions with other development partners in Nigeria brought up the critical issue as to what
should be the main role(s) of the IDS. The SRF-Catalytic Fund guidelines on terms of reference
for the IDS are very broad and cover: (a) coordination of national agencies in charge of statistics;
(b) coordination of development partners; (c) support for a national partnership to promote and
strategize statistics development in the country including institutional reforms; and (d) provision
of capacity development and technical assistance for the implementation of the NSDS.
23.      In addition to the difficulties in allocating the ID S’s time to the various objectives listed
above, the need for hands-on support for a recipient country-executed project and in the
particular case of Nigeria where the IDS also plays the very important role of a ‘clearing house’
for all data used in World Bank projects -- the World Bank portfolio in Nigeria of approximately
$5 billion is by far the largest in sub-Saharan Africa -- further complicated the role of the IDS.
Given the very broad tasks performed by the current IDS in Nigeria, discussions by the
evaluation mission with national stakeholders at both the Federal and State levels revealed a high
appreciation of the IDS’s roles.
24.     Discussions with all the current IDSs (Afghanistan, DRC, Ghana and Nigeria) reveal a
broad range of priority settings in their current day-to-day activities covering the three main tasks
which are project implementation, coordination and strategizing.                In terms of office
arrangements, most IDSs are located in the local office of the lead agency which also finances
the IDSs – the World Bank for DRC and Nigeria and DfID for Afghanistan. In Ghana, the IDS is
financed by DfID but based at the local World Bank office. This arrangement has helped to
lighten the demand on the IDS’s time for regular office tasks such as project-related activities
and to allow the Ghana IDS to focus her work much more on coordination and strategizing.
Based on the assessment by the evaluation mission, the SRF guidelines may need to be reviewed.
For large countries, and more particularly federal systems such as Nigeria and Ethiopia where
states play an equally important role in the generation of data, it may be worth considering
having more than one IDS.
25.      Broad issues related to the SRF Charter. SRF-CF governance arrangements and
operational practices and procedures. The mission also met with the World Bank's Country
Director who shows a very strong support for statistics and has empowered the in-country donor
statistician to play an active role in decision meetings on various WB projects in Nigeria with a
focus on data. The Country Director for Nigeria highlighted the importance of statistics as a key
sector in the country assistance strategy than that the SRF has helped raise the profile of
statistics. She also mentioned that the development partners group in Statistics is performing
best among the various sectors in Nigeria.

                                                 150
RWANDA

               a) Background

26.    Compared to most other developing countries, the Government of Rwanda’s (GoR)
management of the development process has a strong results focus. The government has a strong
commitment to managing for results; all Government entities have results-based performance
contracts, and increasingly evidence-based planning is becoming more widespread.
27.      The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR). At the center of Rwanda’s
National Statistical System is the NISR which was established in 2006 as a semi-autonomous
executive agency and coordinating agency of the NSS with the mandate to provide official
statistics on social and economic living conditions and to conduct large-scale household-based and
establishment-based surveys and censuses. Other important statistics producers are line ministries
for administrative data, the Rwanda Revenue Authority for revenue statistics, the National Bank of
Rwanda for balance of payments, banking and monetary statistics and the National Identification
Agency for personal identification, driver’s licences and civil registration. NISR is also
mandated to track and monitor progress of the Economic Development and Poverty Reduction
Strategy (EDPRS, 2008-12) using key performance indicators and targets identified in the
country’s Common Performance Assessment Framework (CPAF).
28.     The National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS1, 2009-14). As was
the case for most national statistical offices in developing countries, there remained several
weaknesses in terms of coordination, collaboration and information sharing between NISR and
other data producers and users of statistics. The development and implementation of the
National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS1, 2009-14), by providing the overall
direction and the framework for coordinating statistical activities, has led to significant
improvement in the recent past. Developed through a consultative process involving the
Government, NGOs, civil society, the private sector and development partners, NSDS1 covers
five main components: (i) data development and management; (ii) information dissemination and
services to users; (iii) coordination of NSS; (iv) capacity development (human and
infrastructure); and (v) financing. The NISR is the main agency responsible for the overall
NSDS1 program implementation and project executing agency.
29.     Steering Committee/National Partnership Group. A joint Government/development
partners (DPs) Steering Committee/National Partnership Group (SC/NPG) was established and
provides the national oversight for the implementation of the NSDS, including the implementation
of individual projects such as the SFR project. Chaired by the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry
of Finance and Economic Planning, the SC/NPG is mandated to oversee, promote, coordinate,
support, monitor and evaluate the implementation of the NSDS plan. The Steering Committee’s
detailed schedule of meetings is presented in Table III.3.




                                               151
                         Table III.3: Schedule of SC/NPG meetings and their coverage
           October              Review of overall performance against NSDS1 Annual Action Plan and Budget in
                                 the previous financial year25;
                                Discussion of independent annual review report;
                                Discussion of overall NSDS1 strategies and policies for next financial year;
                                Review of progress so far in the current financial year; and
                                Review of work plans and budgets for the third quarter of this financial year.
           January              Discussion of draft Annual Action Plan and Budget (including Procurement Plan) for
                                 next financial year (approval by March in time for GoR budget);
                                DPs to advise on indicative funding for next year's budget;
                                Review of progress so far in this financial year;
                                Review of work plans and budgets for the fourth quarter of the new financial year.
           April                Discussion of approved Annual Action Plan and Budget;
                                Discussion of status of DP funding and GoR funding for the next financial year;
                                Review of progress in current financial year; and
                                Review of work plans and budgets for the first quarter of the next financial year.
           June/July            Review of progress in final quarter of the last financial year; and
                                Review of work plans and budgets for the second quarter of the new financial year.

30.     The role of development partners. Since the launch of NSDS1 in 2010, Rwanda’s
development partners have aligned their support to the NSDS implementation. DfID and the
European Commission, subsequently joined by the World Bank through the SRF project in 2012,
have been actively involved in financing NSDS priorities through the NISR-managed NSDS1
‘Basket Fund’ approach with pooled resources while other important partners --UNDP,
UNICEF, UNFPA, Belgian Technical Cooperation, and AfDB -- provide their support through
separate processes but under the overall priorities set out in the NSDS. Currently, the other DPs
are involved in:
           International Comparison Program Statistics (AfDB)
           Civil Registration, DevInfo, DHS4 (UNICEF);
           Population census, Civil Registration, IMIS Rwanda (UNFPA);
           MDG monitoring and reporting (UNDP);and
           Local Capacity Development in Administrative Data Management in Health, Education,
            Agriculture, and Population (Belgian Technical Cooperation).

31.    The functioning of the Basket Fund. Among the eight SRF pilot countries, Rwanda is
the only one which has set up pooled funding by a group of development partners under a Basket
Fund.
32.     Working Agreements. Once the development partners have informed the government of
the level and timing of their participation in the "NSDS1 Basket Fund", their contributions will
be specified in the bilateral arrangements between them and the GoR in which they will have
agreed to:
           establish an approved disbursement schedule in order to assist the GoR in planning for
            implementation of the NSDS1


25
     The financial year in Rwanda runs from July to June.

                                                            152
        make funding available according to approved disbursement schedules, on the basis of
         approved Annual Action Plans and Budgets;
        support the GoR in the management, coordination and implementation of the NSDS1;
        inform the GoR and other development partners of any change that may interfere with the
         implementation of the NSDS1, so that the partners can jointly take necessary actions;
        lessen the administrative burden on NISR by deciding on harmonized reporting and
         auditing systems to the extent practicable; and
        The DPs will not bear any responsibility and/or liability to any third party with regard to
         the implementation of the NSDS1.
33.     Each participating DP's contribution is channeled to the National Bank account
designated for the sole use of the "NSDS1 Basket Fund". NISR is responsible for maintaining a
financial management system, including records and accounts, and preparing financial
statements covering all DPs’ funds utilized. The oversight of the "NSDS1 Basket Fund" will be
conducted by the NSDS1 Steering Committee/National Partnership Group which will be
responsible for monitoring and directing the Fund's activities. It is the highest authority
governing implementation of the NSDS1 Basket Fund.
34.     Planning and Budgeting. GoR will produce an Annual Action (Work) Plan and Budget
for the NSDS1, to be funded by the "NSDS1 Basket Fund". Once approved, the plan of work
and budget will provide a basis on which the GoR and DPs pledge their levels of financial
support to implement the NSDS1. DPs will endeavor to provide information on future
disbursements in advance of the budget year. The GoR commits to ensuring that development
partners' pledges are reflected in the Ministry of Finance’s annual budget estimates. Once
appropriated, the NSDS1 budget will be allocated according to the activities set out in the
Annual Action Plan to achieve specified targets. This process will be repeated each year to
incorporate forward budgets and to make any necessary modifications to the plan of work and
budget to incorporate intermediate outcomes and outputs to be achieved in future years.
35.     Recent evaluations of the performance of NISR in managing the implementation of
NSDS1. An independent institutional assessment 26 of NISR in 2010-11, financed by the
European Commission and DfID and conducted in mid-2012, highlighted the very strong
achievement by the latter with a limited budget. Overall, there is a very positive perception of
NISR by all stakeholders. NISR is seen as making good progress. Sector ministries were
uniformly appreciative of the work that NISR is doing to deliver social and economic statistics
and in helping to improve the quality of administrative statistics and to drive the agenda for the
need for evidence and good quality statistics to support this. And despite a qualified audit report,
the financial management of the Basket Fund which supports the implementation of the NSDS is
generally seen as good.
36.    The evaluation, however, highlighted the high reliance of NISR on foreign consultancy
support to help NISR deliver during the first two years of NSDS1. While acknowledging that this
dependency is set to increase over the remaining two years of NSDS1 as it copes with the
challenge of an increased demand for support to the rest of the government, NISR will need to


26
  Roger Edmunds, ‘National Institute of Statistics, Rwanda Mid-term Review of the National Strategy for the
Development of Statistics’, August 2012, unpublished.


                                                   153
develop the capacity and skills of its staff. More recently, a five-year capacity building program
with a focus on staff skills training has recently been approved.

Rwanda’s Experiences with the SRF Approach/Project

37.     Promotion of a system-wide approach to statistics at the country level. As described
in the background section, it was generally recognized by the people met by the Evaluation Team
that ownership of the strategy for the development of statistics by the GoR is well anchored,
which made it easy to bring DPs on board. And although Rwanda was already implementing the
NSDS (2010-14) with significant progress as shown above before the SRF project became
effective, the latter was recognised to have played a significant role in helping to give statistics a
more powerful and relevant role in economic and social management in Rwanda both in terms of
technical support and finance. In contrast to previous support for statistics which was scattered,
by replicating the five main components27 of NSDS1, the SRF project has had a direct impact on
the production of data, which was considered to be critical in raising the profile of statistics in
Rwanda.
38.     Discussions with other producers of data such as the National Identification Agency, the
National Bank of Rwanda, and the Rwanda Development Board (in charge of the promotion of
investments) all confirmed the strong coordination within the government of Rwanda on matters
related to statistics and the critical role played by NISR, although the role of the SRF project was
not clear.
39.      Increasing resources for implementing NSDS1. What transpired from the discussions
with the NISR was the beneficial impact of the SRF project in bringing significant additional
resources and, through this process, in helping to attract other resources to statistics. In the words
of the Director-General of NISR, ‘dialogue without money brings no respect’. Some of the local
DPs who are not heavily involved in statistics have, however, raised the issue of sustainability in
funding. From the minutes of the NSDS Steering Group meetings, the contribution by the GoR
to statistics in the context of the implementation of NSDS1 remains practically stagnant between
fiscal year 2013 (July 2012 to June 2013) and the following fiscal year (ending June 2014) at
about RWF 3.2 billion. It was more difficult to evaluate contributions by DPs given that
contributions to the Basket Fund may be used in different fiscal years.
40.     Linking improvements in the statistical system to the needs of national and sectoral
monitoring frameworks. The mandate given to NISR on tracking progress of the Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy and its active collaboration with line ministries
reflect the importance of linking improved statistics to the need for monitoring progress in
Rwanda. While the SRF project provides some focus on this issue, the attention has been much
more on harmonising data collection tools among the various sector ministries, in particular local
government, agriculture, health, education, economy and finance. This again highlights the bias
of the SRF project design toward data development which as mentioned above, was much
appreciated by the top management of NISR.
41.   Promoting an improved national dialogue and partnership between users and
producers of statistics. Meetings with the Institute of Policy Analysis and Research of Rwanda
27
   Namely: (i) data development and management; (ii) information dissemination and services to users; (iii)
coordination of NSS; (iv) capacity development (human and infrastructure); and (v) financing as discussed earlier in
this annex.

                                                       154
(IPAR), the Kigali Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) and the Managing Director of
New Times, a major local newspaper, again confirmed the strong relationships between
producers and users of data in Rwanda -- although there remain challenges as to the timeliness of
data in some areas, and weak capacity in comprehending statistics by the local media. There was
unanimous recognition that the NISR website has significantly improved in the last year.
Currently, in addition to economic and sectoral data, the website also allows for the online
retrieval of micro data as well as a comprehensive literature on techniques and methods
(metadata). For some of the research institutes, the fact that the NISR has to coordinate all data
collection activities as well as to set high standards has helped to enhance the quality and
reliability of statistics in the country. The NISR has close working relations with the National
Council on Higher Education. In terms of needs, it was pointed out to the evaluation mission that
the NISR needs to go beyond general social, economic, and administrative data into new areas
such as employment, labour force, tourism, mining etc.
42.     Discussion with the local media reflects some weaknesses in understanding key
economic indicators, which point to the need for more training of data users. Also, domestic data
users appear confused when faced with differences in numbers provided by international
organizations such as the World Health Organization and by the Rwandan Ministry of Health.
Similar discrepancies exist for enrolment rates between UNESCO and NISR, which may in part
be accounted for by the use of different methodologies. Training of domestic users of data is rare
and inadequate and based on the evaluation mission’s own assessment, will need to be given
more emphasis. Another issue relates to the need for NISR and other statistics producers to
provide commentary on the data so as to make them more accessible to non-experts. There were
suggestions that the NISR should enhance its public relations role through, for instance,
publication of more articles on data release on its website as well as through the national radio
and television channels. According to some of the people interviewed by the Evaluation Team,
the focus of NISR in recent years has been on the production of data. How to make statistics
more understandable to the lay person must be given more attention. The SRF project, which has
as one of its intermediate result indicators the implementation of the Statistical Information
Dissemination Policy, may be helpful on this issue.
43.     Delivering more effective and efficient aid and technical assistance for strengthening
statistical systems. The close collaboration between GoR and the DPs under the leadership of
the NSDS Steering Group/National Partnership Group, together with the establishment of the
NSDS1 Basket Fund, are examples of best practices in terms of aid and technical assistance
delivery. While the World Bank, through the SRF project, joined the Basket Fund as a latecomer
and midway through the implementation of NSDS1, the important resources brought by the
project have had a very significant impact on the production of statistics in Rwanda. While
World Bank procurement procedures may have caused delays in resource availability at the
earlier stage of the SRF project, flexibility in the design of the Basket Fund arrangements have
made it possible to move funding by the various members of the Basket Fund around to cover
funding gaps and to help avoid delays in the implementation of NSDS1 activities.
44.      Impact of the in-country donor statistician in helping to achieve the SRF objectives.
Rwanda does not currently have an in-country donor statistician financed under the SRF project.
The evaluation mission was informed that the technical advisor to the DG of NISR has recently
left the country and his replacement is being advertised. However, it was not clear to the mission
that this person has played the role of the in-country statistician, particularly since the DG of

                                               155
NISR mentioned that he does not need an in-country donor statistician. What are needed instead
are specialized skills for highly technical challenges which are time-specific. It was also
mentioned that the country may need assistance from somebody with global experience in
helping to develop a long-term vision for statistics in Rwanda for NSDS2.
45.    On the use of consultants, the former approach by UNDP to bring in West African
consultants in statistics was not considered satisfactory by the NISR. Currently, faced with the
challenge of producing credible data on a timely basis, the NISR relies rather heavily on Oxford
Policy Management (OPM) consultants for a wide array of specialized tasks including helping to
build data sets. Concerns were expressed by some of the people met by the Evaluation Team
about the overreliance on OPM and the lack of hands-on training for local NISR staff, many of
whom were recruited in the past two years and thus have little experience. The need to embed
capacity building within the institution is critical; the experience of UNFPA with hands-on
support for local enumerators on the population census has shown good results.
46.     Broad issues related to the SRF Charter. On the option of regional SRF activities,
efforts towards regional integration and consequently the need to harmonize statistics across
countries may need a different approach to capacity building, but a consistent message was the
need to consolidate progress at country level to allow countries to develop first before they can
share experiences and vision.
47.     SRF-CF governance arrangements and operational practices and procedures .
Discussions the Evaluation Team had with NISR managers and staff and with local development
partners highlighted a general frustration with the World Bank’s heavy procedures, particularly
concerning procurement rules. It was generally believed that Rwanda’s procurement system is
sufficiently solid28. In the specific case of the SRF project, $5.5 million for the preparation of the
population census was not spent according to World Bank procedures, and expenditure
commitments may have been incurred before the SRF project became effective, leading to
significant delays in providing non-objection clearance for the retroactive replenishment of the
Basket Fund. The lack of continuity both in the TTL and the local World Bank staff rendered the
situation even more complicated. The flexibility granted by other partners in the Basket Fund has
made it possible to continue with the census operation while awaiting clearance by the World
Bank.

48.     It was highlighted to the evaluation mission that the lack of clarity in supervision
assignment and budget between DECDG and the Operations division was a factor in the lack of
adequate project support by the World Bank. It was reported that in the early days of the SRF
project, there was confusion as to how the supervision budget was managed, including a lack of
clarity on the charge code for supervision needed to access budgetary resources. It was
highlighted that the rapid turnover of the WB resident project officer was also a major stumbling
block, although this now appears to have been stabilised.

28
  Rwanda is currently a candidate for piloting the use of country systems in World Bank financed projects. The
assessment is at an advanced stage and a decision will be taken in the near future on the timeline needed for Rwanda
to become a pilot country. Until then, Government and DPs have agreed, in order to ensure a unified approach that
the Bank Procurement and Consultant Guidelines will apply. It must be noted that the Rwanda systems and bidding
documents are to a large extent aligned to the Bank procedures and bidding documents. The few gaps identified will
be reflected as exceptions to the law and modifications in the national bidding documents.


                                                       156
                ANNEX 4: The Results Framework and Monitoring of Progress

                 a) The Results Framework - Conceptual Approach and Guidelines

1.       The broad approach of the SRF Catalytic Fund is that financial and technical assistance
resources are provided to countries to assist in the implementation of national strategies for the
development of statistics (NSDS) or similar national priorities with a focus on a program-based
approach and mechanisms for user feedback. More efficient and effective delivery of support
designed using the principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness together with an
increase in resources for statistics, which is a desirable key feature of the Catalytic Fund, will
facilitate a sustained improvement in the production and use of official statistics and lead to an
enhanced capacity in recipient countries to formulate and manage development policies and
strategies. A more detailed presentation of the results chain, consisting of four inputs, four
activities, three outputs at program level, three outputs at country level, and one outcome can be
found in Table IV.1.
                        Table IV.1: Results Chain for the SRF Catalytic Fund

       Inputs               Activities                 Outputs                 Outputs                 Outcome
                                                   (program level)          (country level)

                                                                                                   1) Increased
 1) Finance from the    1) Implementation of      1) More efficient        1) Sustained
                                                                                                   capacity for policy
 SRF-CF, other          good quality              and effective delivery   improvement in
                                                                                                   formulation and
 development            national statistical      of support to the        capacity to produce
                                                                                                   decision-making
 partners, and          development plan.         national statistical     and use official
                                                                                                   for development.
 government.                                      system, and improved     statistics.
                        2) Promote use of
                                                  alignment with
 2) Technical           program-based                                      2) Improved
                                                  principles of Paris
 assistance from the    approach.                                          response of
                                                  Declaration on Aid
 SRF-CF                                                                    statistical system to
                        3) Strengthen             Effectiveness.
 Administration Unit                                                       national and
                        mechanisms for user
 and from other                                   2) Adoption of           sectoral needs.
                        feedback and
 development                                      program- based
                        prioritization of                                  3) Improved
 partners.                                        approach for
                        statistical activities.                            dialogue and
                                                  supporting statistical
 3) Staff time of the                                                      partnership
                        4) Design efficient       development in grant-
 lead donor, other                                                         between statistics
                        and effective project     recipient countries.
 development                                                               users and
                        implementation
 partners, and                                    3) Increase in           producers.
                        arrangements,
 government                                       resources for
                        consistent with Paris
 officials.                                       implementing
                        Declaration on Aid
                                                  national statistical
 4) In-country donor    Effectiveness.
                                                  development plans.
 statistician.



   Source: Reproduced from 'Catalytic Fund - Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements' by the SRF Catalytic
   Fund Administration Unit (March 2010).
2.     It was furthermore proposed that specific approaches be used to monitor progress both at
the levels of expected outputs -- particularly those referring to country-level outputs -- and
outcomes. For country-level outputs, three specific indicators are proposed to monitor progress:
i) the Statistical Capacity Indicator of the World Bank; ii) the publication of data quality

                                                         157
assessments in priority data areas (to be agreed in each country), using the Data Quality
Assessment Framework of the IMF or similar assessment frameworks; and iii) an improved data
dissemination policy that includes the publication of the calendar for the release of key statistics
and of detailed guidelines for users on the access to survey metadata. The monitoring of
outcomes will be based on feedback from users through user surveys. It is therefore
recommended that all recipient countries will need to undertake user surveys -- first, during
project inception to serve as a baseline, and subsequently at relevant junctures such as the
preparation of the Mid-Term Review and at project completion.
3.      Whereas the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements for the SRF Catalytic Fund
were clearly spelled out as described above, efforts were made to allow for country leadership in
the spirit of the Paris Declaration and for country-specificity in the implementation of the logical
framework at the country level. The M&E guidelines for project preparation clearly specify that
M&E arrangements for each country program supported by the Catalytic Fund should be based
primarily on arrangements already agreed in NSDSs or similar documents. To link country-
specific M&E frameworks with the Catalytic Fund 'generic' M&E arrangements, project teams
and their counterparts in grant-recipient countries were advised, to the extent possible, to use the
'generic' framework in developing country-specific arrangements and to include most of the
generic framework indicators in country-level M&E arrangements.
4.      At the country level, implementing agencies will be responsible for measuring and
monitoring the chosen indicators and for preparing semi-annual implementation progress reports
in collaboration with development partners through the National Partnership Group and the lead
donor. At the project level, where the supervising entity is the World Bank, progress reporting
will consist of six-monthly assessments of implementation status and results (also known as
ISRs) and Grant Monitoring Reports to track grant activities.

               b) The Generic Results Framework in Practice
5.      As shown below, as the appendix to this Annex deals only with the SCI, the original
results framework further expanded the results chain shown in Table IV.1 by identifying a list of
22 indicators which were designed to allow for objective measurements of inputs, activities,
outputs at program and country levels and outcomes. For each of the 22 indicators, specific
sources of information to be used for monitoring progress were specified with trend lines
showing a baseline figure, a target figure at project completion, and two milestones during the
project life. A full list of the indicators together with their sources of information is shown in
Table IV.2, which also traces some subsequent changes to the indicators.




                                                158
   Table IV.2: Generic Results Framework - Coverage, Sources and Availability of Information
     Outcome,
 outputs, activities                   Indicators                            Sources of                 Availability of
    and inputs                                                              information                  information

OUTCOME
Increased capacity for         1/1. Proportion of user               User satisfaction surveys a/.   Baseline information is
policy formulation and         survey respondents satisfied                                          available for four
decision-making for            that statistical outputs meet                                         countries where user
development                    their priority data needs.                                            satisfaction surveys
                                                                                                     have been completed
                                                                                                     (Afghanistan, Ghana,
                                                                                                     Nigeria and Rwanda).
                               2/2. Extent to which                  User satisfaction surveys.      Baseline information is
                               statistical data is used in                                           only available for
                               policy and decision-making                                            Nigeria and more
                               processes.                                                            detailed analysis of
                                                                                                     other USSs is awaited.
OUTPUTS (COUNTRY LEVEL)
Sustained improvement          3/3. Statistical capacity             World Bank statistical          SCI (statistical capacity
in capacity to produce         building indicator.                   capacity database.              indicator) scores are
and use official statistics.                                                                         available for 2013.
                               4. Additional indicators of           Progress or implementation
                               statistical capacity                  reports.
                               established Country-
                                                  b/.
                               specific projects
Improved response of           5/4. Percent increase in              User satisfaction surveys.      Available for four
statistical system to          user satisfaction of official                                         countries.
national and sectoral          statistics.
needs.
Improved dialogue and          6/5. Proportion of users in           Interviews with users by        Using as a proxy,
partnership between            priority sectors who agree            project supervision teams.      regular annual
statistics users and           that consultation                                                     producer- user meetings
producers.                     mechanisms with data                                                  (Lao PDR) or
                               producers work well.                                                  stakeholder dialogue
                                                                                                     (Rwanda).

OUTPUTS (PROGRAM LEVEL)
More efficient and             7. Commitments                        Surveys of donor activities
effective delivery of          expenditures for statistical          in statistics by the National
support to the national        activities by development             Partnership Group.
statistical system, and        partners not participating in
improved alignment with        the National Partnership
principles of Paris            Group.
Declaration on Aid             8/6. Proportion of support            Surveys of donor activities     Figures are available
Effectiveness.                 to statistics by development          in statistics organized by      for most countries
                               partners that is aligned with         the National Partnership        although they may be
                               national priorities.                  Group or NSO.                   hard to interpret.
Adoption of program-           9/7. Existence of National            Minutes of National             Available for all
based approach for             Partnership Group to                  Partnership Group               countries.
supporting statistical         monitor the implementation            meetings.

                                                               159
    development in grant-       and status of national
    recipient countries.        statistical development
                                plans.
    Increase in resources for   10. Levels of funding               Minutes of National
    implementing national       committed and spent by              Partnership Group
    statistical development     government and donors for           meetings.
    plans.                      the implementation of
                                NSDSs compared to
                                budgeted amounts.
                                11. Levels of funding               Government budget audit
                                committed and spent by              reports.
                                government for the
                                implementation of NSDSs
                                compared to budgeted
                                amounts.
    ACTIVITIES
1) Implementation of good       12/8. Percentage of                 Implementation progress   Only available for
   quality national             activities implemented              reports of NSDSs.         Rwanda.
   statistical development      compared to agreed
   plan.                        implementation plan.
                                13/9. Implementation                (WB) Implementation       Available for countries
                                progress rating (if World           Status and Results        under implementation.
                                Bank is supervising entity).        monitoring.
1) Processes to promote use     14/10. Percentage of                Minutes of National       Available for all
   of program-based             development partners                Partnership Group         countries.
   approach.                    participating in the                meetings.
                                National Partnership Group
                                relative to all donors
                                involved in statistical
                                development.
                                15/11. Publication of                Progress reports of      Only available for
                                annual NSDS                         national authorities.     Rwanda.
                                implementation progress
                                report.
    Design and use of           16/12. Pooled funding               Reports of National       Only available for
    efficient and effective     arrangements used by                Partnership Group.        Rwanda on a national
    project implementation      development partners.                                         basis. Pooled funding
    arrangements, consistent                                                                  arrangements may be
    with Paris Declaration                                                                    available for specific
    on Aid Effectiveness.                                                                     activities such as
                                                                                              censuses.
    INPUTS
1) Finance from the SRF-        17. Ratio of firm                   Reports of National
   CF, other development        commitments compared to             Partnership Group.
   partners, and                NSDS agreed by National
   government.                  Partnership Group.
                                18/13. Catalytic Fund               Progress reports of       Available for all
                                project disbursement rates.         supervising entity.       countries under
                                                                                              implementation.
    Technical assistance        19/14. Technical assistance         Reports of National       Measured by whether
    from the SRF-CF             provided.                           Partnership Group.        or not there are in-
    Administration Unit and                                                                   country twinning
    from other development                                                                    arrangements


                                                              160
 partners.
 Staff time of the lead     15. Number of government         Project supervision reports.   Currently only available
 donor, other               staff trained under the SRF                                     for Nigeria
 development partners,      grant by type of training.
 and government             20/16. Existence of lead         Reports of National            Lead donor
 officials.                 donor in National                Partnership Group.             arrangements exist for
                            Partnership Group.                                              most pilot countries.
                            21. Number of national           Project supervision reports.
                            staff devoted mainly to
                            SRF project activities.
 In-country donor           22/17. Existence of in-          Reports of National            In-country donor
 statistician.              country donor statistician.      Partnership Group.             statisticians are
                                                                                            currently operational in
                                                                                            Afghanistan, DRC,
                                                                                            Ghana and Nigeria.
             a/
    Notes:    User satisfaction surveys have been conducted in four countries (Afghanistan, Ghana, Nigeria and
             Rwanda); are being planned for Ethiopia, Lao PDR and Senegal: and are not currently planned for
             DRC.
             b/
               Deleted (original) indicators are shown with strikethrough. One new indicator to replace the deleted
             original one is shown in italics.
6.       Whereas the generic results framework as summarized above and shown with full details
in the M&E Arrangements Guidelines for the SRF Catalytic Fund provides a logical framework
to monitor the outcome of the SRF approach as well as the intermediate steps such as inputs,
activities, and outputs, translating those into specific indicators which are measurable and can be
monitored over time has proven to be much more challenging. For lack of information, six of the
original 22 indicators were subsequently deleted -- and one new indicator introduced. As a result
of these changes, the number of indicators was reduced from the original 22 to 17.
7.      In particular, efforts to measure and monitor the catalytic impact of the SRF approach in
leveraging more resources for the implementation of national statistical development plans,
through monitoring the levels of funding commitments and effective disbursements relative to
budgeted amounts both by the governments and development partners, were discarded. Also,
efforts to measure a sustained improvement in the capacity to produce and use official statistics
by identifying additional indicators of statistical capacity building in addition to the World Bank
Statistical Capacity Indicator (SCI) were subsequently dropped.
8.      Even with a reduced set of indicators, the availability of information required to populate
the generic results framework remains sparse and incomplete, making it difficult to measure and
monitor key SRF principles, most importantly: a) the leveraging impact on resources of the SRF
Catalytic Fund; and b) development partner support to the implementation of NSDSs. For
indicators which rely on user satisfaction surveys as the main sources of data such as the
improved dialogue and partnership between statistics users and producers and the use of statistics
for planning, monitoring and evaluation and more specifically, improved response of the statistical
system to national and sectoral needs, as shown in Table IV.2, information is available in four
countries (Afghanistan, Ghana, Nigeria including for the six pilot states and Rwanda) for which
user satisfaction surveys have already been carried out. Surveys are being planned for Ethiopia,
Lao PDR and Senegal but as of the latest information, no user satisfaction surveys are currently
being planned for DRC. With the exception of Rwanda, implementation progress reports of
national statistical development plans are not available which makes it difficult if not impossible


                                                       161
to monitor progress on a broad range of indicators. Regular updates of the SRF Generic Results
Framework using pilot country information are produced by DECDG and made available in the
SRF Annual Reports.

                     c) The Results Framework for the Pilot Countries
9.      While project teams and countries were advised to incorporate the elements of the
generic results framework in developing country-specific M&E arrangements, the latter should
be based primarily on arrangements agreed in NSDSs or similar national documents. A review of
the seven pilot SRF projects 29 shows limited success in blending the elements of the generic
results framework and country-specific M&E priorities based on individual country NSDSs. A
more careful examination of the country-specific results frameworks and monitoring reveals that
for the five key SRF principles, only the one dealing with the promotion of an improved national
dialogue and partnership between users and producers of the statistics has been identified as a
result indicator in most pilot countries. The other key principles -- promoting a system-wide
approach in statistics, increasing resources for implementing national statistical plans, linking
improvements in statistics to the needs of national and sectoral monitoring frameworks, and
delivering more efficient and effective technical assistance -- have received more limited
attention as shown in Table IV.3.
          Table IV.3: Coverage of Key SRF Principles in Country-Specific M&E Arrangements

                                                                           Specific results indicators monitored in
                     Key SRF Principles
                                                                            country project M&E arrangements

 Promoting a system-wide approach to statistics at the             None of the pilot projects have identified elements of
 country level (including mechanisms for dialogue,                 the system-wide approach as a specific result indicator;
 coordination, and monitoring and evaluation).                     however, since all the SRF projects are aligned with
                                                                   the respective NSDS implementation plans, the need to
                                                                   promote and monitor the system-wide approach may
                                                                   not be seen as necessary.
 Increasing resources for implementing country-owned               None with one exception: execution of annual work
 national statistical plans or strategies.                         plans including government externally financed budget
                                                                   (DRC).
 Linking improvements in the statistical system to the             None with one exception: number of MDG indicators
 needs of national and sectoral monitoring frameworks.             supported by the NSO and sourced as NSO data
                                                                   (Afghanistan).
 Promoting an improved national dialogue and                       User satisfaction, data dissemination policy, and
 partnership between users and producers of statistics.            increased data availability through web portals are
                                                                   monitored by several countries. Only the Lao PDR
                                                                   project proposed to monitor data user-producer
                                                                   dialogue through annual conferences.
 Delivering more efficient and effective aid and                   None of the pilot projects have identified monitoring
 technical assistance for strengthening statistical                better coordination and alignment of technical
 systems and results measurement, through better                   assistance as a result indicator. The Lao PDR project
 coordination and alignment to agreed national                     monitors an inter-agency coordination mechanism on
 statistical plans and through better alignment to the             macroeconomic and poverty related statistics.
 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.

Sources: Project appraisal documents for seven of the eight pilot countries.


29
     Information on the Senegal project was not available at the time this report was finalized.

                                                               162
10.    First and foremost, the individual SRF pilot projects were designed to support national
capacity development in statistics. Giving the relatively larger size of the SRF pilot projects
compared to more narrowly designed capacity building projects in statistics, the scope of the
SRF pilot projects is generally broader covering: i) specific capacity development components
such as staff training, human resource management, and IT infrastructure; ii) efforts to improve
data collection, analysis and quality control; and iii) efforts to enhance data access and
dissemination. A summary of the results project development objectives (PDOs) and
intermediate results indicators can be found in Table IV.4.




                                              163
                   Table IV.4: SRF Projects - M&E Indicators by Pilot Country

                                        Project
     Project
                     Country          Development                      Intermediate Results Indicators
   component
                                       Objectives
Overall             Ethiopia                                   Statistical information on microdata access
institutional                                                 policy and dissemination framework in place.
reforms
                    Lao PDR    A comprehensive                 Inter-agency coordination mechanism (rules and
(including
                               macroeconomic framework        regulations) on macroeconomic and poverty-related
coordination)
                               is developed and used for      statistics in place and operational.
                               policy making and planning.

                    Nigeria                                    Annual progress reports presented to NSOa/
                                                              boards and uploaded to website.
                                                               Code of conduct based on NSO core values
                                                              developed and disseminated.
                                                               Increase in the incidence of statistics quoted in
                                                              the local media.

Capacity            Afgha-     Improvement in statistical      Number of NSO and line ministry statistical staff
development         nistan     capacity.                      who have completed specialized training program.
(including human                                               IT infrastructure coverage.
resource            DRC         Technical training            Number of staff trained (of which women).
development and                sessions of which for           Improved offices.
IT technology)                 women.
                                Graduate scholarships
                               financed by the project of
                               which for women.
                    Ethiopia                                   Organizational strengthening and infrastructure
                                                              development at NSO.
                                                               Number of staff trained in strategy planning,
                                                              management and IT, and statistical subjects.
                                                               Number of branch offices equipped with modern
                                                              tools, transport and work methods.
                                                               IT data and videoconferencing centers
                                                              operational.
                    Ghana      Improvement in statistical      Number of full-time staff employed by NSO.
                               capacity score disaggregated    Proportion of staff with professional
                               by: methodology, sources of    qualifications.
                               data, periodicity and           MDA and regional statistics offices fully
                               timeliness.                    equipped and operational.
                    Lao PDR                                    Inter-agency coordination mechanism for
                                                              statistics in place and operational.
                                                               Human resource management strategy in place.
                                                               IT plans including staff training developed and
                                                              implemented.
                                                               Efforts to retain trained staff.
                    Nigeria                                    Number of staff competent in core areas.
                                                               Availability and furnishing of state statistical
                                                              agency offices.
                    Rwanda                                     Training of NSO and other ministry staff in ICT
                                                              and statistical subjects.


                                                 164
                                       Project
     Project
                    Country          Development                       Intermediate Results Indicators
   component
                                      Objectives

Data collection,   Afgha-     Number of MDG indicators         Number of data with proper metadata (data
analysis and       nistan     supported by NSO and            collection methodologies).
quality control               sourced as NSO data.             Number of provinces where price data are
                                                              collected and included in the national estimates.
                                                               Percentage of source data developed for national
                                                              income accounts.
                   DRC         National surveys using         Population and enterprise censuses.
                              the revised master sampling      Provisional master sample for surveys developed
                              frame.                          and available in electronic format.
                               National accounts              Quality of census mapping.
                              produced annually.               Availability of final census documentation.
                               Statistical products           Revision of enterprise sampling frame.
                              available on the NSO
                              website.
                   Ethiopia   Improved data quality and        Use of manual for standards in the collection,
                              timeliness.                     compilation and verification of data.
                                                               Increased frequency of publication of key
                                                              statistics.
                                                               Full implementation of surveys and other
                                                              statistical tasks for key statistics.
                                                               Release of major statistical publications as per
                                                              release calendar.
                   Ghana      Timely and robust statistics.    Proportion of planned censuses/surveys
                                                              implemented.
                                                               Time lag between end of data collection and
                                                              release of report.
                                                               Economic statistics produced in accordance with
                                                              internationally accepted standards (CPI, PPI, Supply
                                                              and Uses tables, and GDP).
                                                               Use of master sampling frame based on updated
                                                              cartographic maps for household surveys.
                   Lao PDR    Improvement in                   Internationally accepted standards,
                              macroeconomic and poverty       classifications and methodology adopted for
                              related statistics including    macroeconomic, poverty, social and demographic
                              methodology, source data,       statistics.
                              periodicity and timeliness.
                   Nigeria     Publications publicly          Release calendar established and functional.
                              available according to           Various actions at six pilot states including
                              release calendar.               integration of micro-data into National Data
                               Internationally accepted      Archive Centre (NADA); mapping of economic and
                              common concepts adopted         social statistics; availability of data on website;
                              and used for selected           increase in numbers of pilot registration centers; and
                              thematic areas.                 increase in electronic birth/death data capture.
                   Rwanda     Adherence to standards on        Granting of visas for surveys, use of manuals for
                              data quality (methods of        balance of payments and government finance
                              compilation).                   statistics.
                                                               Full and timely implementation of surveys and
                                                              censuses.
                                                               Routine statistics developed/strengthened in five
                                                              sectors.


                                                165
                                                        Project
      Project
                               Country                Development                           Intermediate Results Indicators
    component
                                                       Objectives
                                                                                   Improvement in economic statistics (in particular
                                                                                  CPI and national income accounts).

 Data access and             Afgha-           Improvement in user                  Percentage of users satisfied with statistical
 dissemination               nistan           satisfaction with services of       products and services.
                                              the NSO.                             Growth in number of hits on the NSO website.
                                                                                   Average number of months taken for surveys to
                                                                                  be published.
                             DRC              Statistical products available       Data sets covered by the dissemination policy.
                                              on the NSO website.
                             Ethiopia         Improvement in data quality          Percentage of users satisfied with statistical
                                              access and in user                  products and services.
                                              satisfaction.                        Modernization of open data portal.
                                                                                   Launch of mobile education unit for user
                                                                                  outreach.
                             Ghana            Improvement in user                  Communication and dissemination policy
                                              satisfaction with statistical       adopted by NSO technical committee.
                                              products and services of the         Proportion of statistical products released in
                                              NSO.                                accordance with release calendar.
                             Lao PDR          Improvement in user                  Percentage of users satisfied with statistical
                                              satisfaction with                   products and services.
                                              macroeconomic and poverty            Data user-producer dialogue established and
                                              statistics.                         functional (annual conferences).
                                                                                   Dissemination strategy developed and
                                                                                  implemented.
                                                                                   Improved web portal with increased data
                                                                                  availability.
                             Nigeria          Improvement in user                  Percentage of users satisfied with statistical
                                              satisfaction.                       products and services.
                             Rwanda            Timeliness and frequency           Design and storage capacity enhanced.
                                              of publication of key                Open Data Portal in place.
                                              statistics.                          Implementation of the statistical information
                                               Availability of data              dissemination policy.
                                              through the Open Data                Level of user satisfaction.
                                              Portal.
 
 Financial                   DRC                                                   Execution of annual work plans including
 monitoring and                                                                   government and externally-financed budget.
 audits
         a/
 Note:        The generic term NSO is used to designate the national statistical offices in the various countries.

11.     For the three projects under implementation namely Afghanistan, Lao PDR, Nigeria and
Rwanda, project implementation supervision is provided by the World Bank teams. One key
document produced by supervision missions as a requirement is the Implementation Status and
Results (ISR) which provides: i) implementation status overview of progress compared against
Project Development Objective (PDO) indicators as well as against Intermediate Results
Indicators which are summarized in the previous table; ii) disbursements expressed in dollar
terms and as a share of total grants; and iii) ratings of progress towards achievement of PDOs, of
overall implementation progress of intermediate results indicators, and of the overall project risk.

                                                                  166
The ISR form may be supplemented by other documents such as aide-memoires which provide a
more detailed description of project implementation, progress in achieving various indicators
together with remedial actions where necessary. The ISR and other supporting documents focus
on the project development objectives and intermediate results indicators but do not cover
broader issues such as those highlighted in the SRF generic results framework. Table IV.5
below shows the overall ratings for the projects currently under implementation.
                                  Table IV.5: Overall Project Ratings

                                     Afghanistan           Lao PDR         Nigeria        Rwanda
                                     (June 2013)          (July 2013)    (May 2013)     (April 2013)

Progress towards achievement of      Moderately           Moderately
                                                                         Satisfactory    Satisfactory
PDO                                  satisfactory         satisfactory
                                                          Moderately     Moderately
                                     Moderately                                          Moderately
Overall implementation progress                           satisfactory   satisfactory
                                     satisfactory                                        satisfactory
Overall risk rating                  Substantial          Substantial       Low           Moderate

                 d) Assessment

12.     The review of the SRF generic results framework and of the seven country-specific M&E
arrangements -- the Senegal project M&E arrangements are not yet available -- highlighted the
limited success so far by the project teams in their effort to blend the key elements of the generic
results framework with country priorities based on individual country NSDSs. Six output
indicators constitute the core of the generic results framework, namely: i) more efficient and
effective delivery of support; ii) adoption of a program-based approach to statistics; iii) increased
resources; iv) improved response to national and sectoral monitoring needs; v) improved
dialogue between users and producers of statistics; and vi) sustained improvement in capacity to
produce and use statistics. Since improvements in statistical capacity, and to a lesser extent data
access, form the core of most developing country NSDSs, it is not surprising that data collection,
analysis, quality control and dissemination and the capacity needed to achieve the above
constitute the core of most SRF pilot project M&E arrangements. Although it may be premature
to come to any firm conclusion on the impact of the SRF on the quantity and quality of data and
access to official statistics, trends in the SCI (see Appendix) do show significantly larger
improvements among the SRF pilot countries compared to the larger sample of developing
countries. But we should not, without the benefit of a longer time frame, draw any definitive
conclusion on this issue.
13.      Based on the generally positive responses from the questionnaire survey and on the field
visits, the Evaluation Team believes that the experiences in the pilot countries in areas such as
assessing user satisfaction and improving data dissemination policies and practices have the
potential to make it easier for the M&E arrangements in future SRF projects to better reflect the
objectives of the SRF generic results framework, particularly those concerning a system-wide
approach to statistics, user-producer dialogue, strong linkages to national and sector monitoring
needs, and alignment of partner support to statistics with the NSDS. Information on resources,
domestic and externally funded, while remaining a major challenge for lack of readily available
data, is critical to ensuring the financial sustainability of the process of support to statistics.
Table IV.6 proposes a short list of ‘high-level’ indicators which the Evaluation Team suggests

                                                    167
could be used as inputs in the design of results indicators for future SRF projects. These are
based on key SRF principles which have served as the basis for this evaluation. In addition to the
indicators, the table also highlights the sources and availability of information as well as
recommended accompanying measures to facilitate the operationalization of the proposed
indicators.
14.     On resources for statistics, Rwanda’s basket-fund arrangements provide an example of
good funding practices for statistics but may require organizational and human skills which are
beyond the reach of most low-income countries. The positive response to the survey that SRF
resources should be seen as core finance for the implementation of NSDSs may reflect a broader
support of a system-wide approach to statistics through the NSDS. Lastly on the issue of more
efficient and effective aid to statistics, the majority of survey respondents are generally
optimistic about the impact of the SRF on helping to align support to statistics. National
partnership groups in pilot countries also appeared to help promote better coordination and
harmonization of donor support to statistics, and more sustained efforts will be needed.




                                               168
                                   Table IV.6: SRF – Proposed High-Level Indicators

Key SRF           Desired                 Proposed             Sources of       Availability of       Recommended
principles       objectives              indicators           information        information      accompanying measures

Promoting     Encouraging the        Existence of a         Reports of NPG                        - Monitor role and
a system-     development of         statistical            supplemented by                       activities of NPG such as:
wide          statistical            coordination           interviews with                       frequency of meeting,
approach to   systems based on       mechanism (e.g.        key informants                        composition of NPG (is it
statistics.   country                National               and stakeholders.                     inclusive?), degree and
              ownership,             Partnership                                                  level of active participation
              broader                Group or NPG)                                                by NPG members, NPG’s
              accountability,        in place and                                                 role in reviewing NSDS
              more predictable       operational in the                                           implementation progress
              funding and            national statistical                                         reports.
              coordinated            system.                                                      - Encourage the
              support by                                                                          preparation of annual
              donors.                                                                             NSDS implementation
                                                                                                  progress reports.
                                                                                                  - Promote stronger
                                                                                                  synergy between NSO and
                                                                                                  sector ministry statistical
                                                                                                  units.
                                                                                                  - Promote the role of
                                                                                                  the in-country donor
                                                                                                  statistician on coordination
Increasing    Ensuring               - Trends in            Reports of NPG      Published         - Promote a more
financial     financial              donor funding          supplemented by     information       systematic exchange of
resources     sustainability for     for statistics         interviews with     may not be        information on funding
for           long-term              (yearly).              key informants      readily           intentions within NPGS.
statistical   statistical            - Proportion of        and stakeholders.   available and     - Promote engagement
systems.      development.           budget for             Analysis of         will require      with initiatives such as
                                     national               existing            additional        Paris21’s Country’s
                                     statistical system     documentation       work (help by     Reports on the Support to
                                     covered by             on support and      the in-country    Statistics (CRESS).
                                     domestic               budgets.            donor
                                     resources                                  statistician).
                                     (yearly).
Linking       Focusing on the        Percentage             User satisfaction   Results of user   - Make the importance of
improveme     use of                 increase in user       surveys (USS).      satisfaction      the use of data more
nts in the    information to         satisfaction of                            surveys where     explicit in projects’
statistical   improve                official statistics.                       available.        development objectives.
system to     decision-making.                                                                    - Need to revise the SRF
the needs                                                                                         Guidelines on USS with
of national                                                                                       the view to improving the
and                                                                                               quality and efficacy of
sectoral                                                                                          such surveys including
monitoring                                                                                        making it lighter and more
framework                                                                                         selective on key data users.
s.                                                                                                - Availability of official
                                                                                                  websites on statistics.

Promoting     Encouraging the        - Number of            Reports of NPG      Published         - The number of events
dialogue      shift from a           partnership            and NSO             information       will need to be placed in
between       focus on               events involving       supplemented by     may not be        the context of the overall


                                                                 169
Key SRF           Desired             Proposed          Sources of       Availability of       Recommended
principles       objectives          indicators        information        information      accompanying measures

producers     availability of     users and          interviews with     readily           SRF project and all its
and users     data to greater     producers of       key informants      available and     other various activities;
of            use of              data.              and stakeholders.   will require      comparisons could be on a
statistics.   information.        - Number of                            additional        financial basis, or on a
                                  events or                              work (help by     measure of person-days as
                                  programs                               the in-country    possible sub-
                                  designed to                            donor             indicators. Where
                                  increase the                           statistician).    possible, post-event
                                  capacity to                                              assessment of the
                                  analyze and use                                          effectiveness of these
                                  statistics.                                              events will need to be
                                                                                           conducted.
                                                                                           - Encourage efforts to
                                                                                           identify key users of
                                                                                           statistics, better understand
                                                                                           their needs, and facilitate
                                                                                           the use of statistics
                                                                                           (examples such as: creating
                                                                                           media relations unit;
                                                                                           consultation with users on
                                                                                           statistics to identify gaps).
Delivering    Promoting aid       Proportion of      Reports of NPG      Published         More information on
more          effectiveness       support to         supplemented by     information       related issues such as: i)
effective     through better      statistics by      interviews with     may not be        the predictability of
aid.          alignment and       development        key informants      readily           funding and ii) and joint
              harmonization.      partners that is   and stakeholders.   available and     donor missions on
                                  aligned to the                         will require      statistics.
                                  country                                additional
                                  strategies.                            work (help by
                                                                         the in-country
                                                                         donor
                                                                         statistician).
Capacity      Ensuring            Number of          Records of          Published         Identification of training
(skills)      adequate human      people trained     training.           information       needs and HR development
building.     resource for        broken down by                         may not be        plans including for users of
              long-term           categories:                            readily           data.
              sustainability of   government staff                       available but
              statistical         v. other data                          should be
              development.        users; technical                       relatively easy
                                  v. broader                             to collect.
                                  organizational.




                                                          170
15.     The review of the World Bank’s supervision mission reports shows a relatively narrow
focus on the project development objectives and intermediate results indicators. It would be
useful for supervision teams to also cover the broader issues reflected in the SRF generic results
framework. In practical terms, this may require some modifications in the SRF guidelines to
TTLs to stress this point, so as to be able to respond to SRF requirements. More standardized
reports on the broader SRF principles by the in-country donor statisticians would also be helpful.




                                               171
Appendix to ANNEX 4: Note on the Statistical Capacity Indicator30

1.       The Statistical Capacity Indicator (SCI) provides an overview of the statistical capacity of
a country and is available for over 140 developing countries. It is based on a diagnostic
framework developed with a view to assessing the capacity of national statistical systems using
metadata information generally available for most countries, and monitoring progress in
statistical capacity building over time. The framework has three dimensions: statistical
methodology; source data; and periodicity and timeliness. For each dimension, a country is
scored against specific criteria, using information available from the World Bank, IMF, UN,
UNESCO, and WHO. This multi-dimensional approach is based on the notion that producing and
disseminating reliable, relevant and timely statistics requires a certain level of capacity in all
dimensions. Any imbalance would point to weaknesses in some aspects of the statistical process.
2.       A composite score for each dimension and an overall score combining all three
dimensions are derived for each country on a scale of 0 to 100. A score of 100 indicates that the
country meets all the criteria. The first dimension, statistical methodology, measures a country’s
ability to adhere to internationally recommended standards and methods. This aspect is captured
by assessing guidelines and procedures used to compile macroeconomic statistics, and social
data reporting and estimation practices. Countries are evaluated against a set of criteria such as
use of an updated national accounts base year, use of the latest BOP manual, external debt
reporting status, subscription to IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standard, and enrolment data
reporting to UNESCO. Known as the Practice sub-score in the overall SCI, this component is
based on 10 indicators with each carrying the same weight of 10 yielding a maximum score of
100.
                                      Table IV.7: Statistical Methodology

                                                                                                          Max.
              Indicators                                        1                              0                Weight
                                                                                                          score
     1. National accounts base year     Within last 10 years or annual chain                Otherwise       1    10
     2. Balance of payments manual in   linking
                                        Balance of Payments Manual, the
                                                                                            Otherwise       1        10
     use                                fifth edition
     3. External debt reporting status  Actual or preliminary                               Otherwise       1        10
     4. Consumer Price Index base year  Within last 10 years or annual chain                Otherwise       1        10
     5. Industrial production index     linking and available from IMF
                                        Produced                                            Otherwise       1        10
     6. Import/export prices            Produced and available from IMF                     Otherwise       1        10
     7. Government finance accounting   Consolidated central government
     concept                                                                                Otherwise       1        10
                                        accounts
     8.   Enrolment reporting to UNESCO Annual or missed reporting only
                                        once in the last 4 years                            Otherwise       1        10

     9.   Vaccine reporting to WHO        Nationally reported data on measles
                                          vaccine coverage consistent with                  Otherwise       1        10
                                          WHO estimates
     10. IMF’s Special Data
                                          Subscribed                                        Otherwise       1        10
     Dissemination Standard
                                                                                        Maximum total score is 100


30
    Individual countries’ scores can     be   viewed   online       from   the   Bulletin    Board   on    Statistical    Capacity:
http://www.worldbank.org/data/bbsc

                                                         172
3.       The second dimension, source data, reflects whether a country conducts data collection
activities in line with internationally recommended periodicity, and whether data from
administrative systems are available and reliable for statistical estimation purposes. Specifically,
the criteria used are the periodicity of population and agricultural censuses, the periodicity of
poverty and health related surveys, and completeness of vital registration system coverage. The
Collection sub-score is based on only 5 indicators with each single source data indicator having a
weight of 20, again yielding a maximum score of 100.

                                           Table IV.8: Source Data

                                                                                          Max.
            Indicators                                       1          1/2         0     score Weight
1. Periodicity of population census                    <_10 years               Otherwise   1         20
2. Periodicity of agricultural census                  <_10 years               Otherwise   1         20
3. Periodicity of poverty related surveys (IES, LSMS, <_ 3 years    <_ 5years   Otherwise   1         20
etc.)
4. Periodicity of health related surveys (DHS, MICS, <_ 3 years     <_ 5years   Otherwise   1         20
Priority
5.       survey, etc.)
   Completeness   of vital registration system        Complete                  Otherwise   1         20
                                                                                Maximum total score is 100


4.      The third dimension, periodicity and timeliness, looks at the availability and periodicity
of key socioeconomic indicators, of which nine are MDG indicators. This dimension attempts to
measure the extent to which data are made accessible to users through transformation of source
data into timely statistical outputs. Criteria used include indicators on income poverty, child and
maternal health, HIV/AIDS, primary completion, gender equality, access to water and GDP
growth. Like the Collection sub-score, the Availability sub-score is based on 10 indicators with
each carrying the same weight of 10 yielding a maximum score of 100.




                                                       173
                                      Table IV.9: Periodicity and Timeliness

                                                                                                    Max.
  Indicators               1                     2/3            1/2            1/3           0            Weight
                                                                                                    score
1. Periodicity of     ≤ 3 years       ≤ 5 years                           > 5 years    Not
income poverty                                                                         available/     1     10
indicator                                                                              accessible
 2. Periodicity of    ≤ 3 years       ≤ 5years                            > 5 years    Not
 child                                                                                 available/     1     10
 malnutrition                                                                          accessible
 indicator
 3.  Periodicity of   National or                                                      Not
 child mortality      international                                                    available/     1     10
 indicator            estimates                                                        accessible
 4. Periodicity of    available
                      Annual          Not annual/ available/ accessible
 Immunization                                                                                         1     10
 indicator
 5. HIV/AIDS      National or     Not available/ accessible
 indicator        international
                  estimates
                  available for                                                                       1     10
                  at least one
                  year out of the
                  last 3 years
6. Periodicity of ≤ 3 years       ≤ 5 years                               > 5 years    Not
maternal health                                                                        available/
indicator                                                                              accessible     1     10
7. Periodicity of  Observed for       Observed for at                     Observed for Not
gender equality    at least 5 out     least 3 out of 5                    1 out of 5   available/
in education       of 5 latest        latest years                        latest years accessible     1     10
indicator          years
8. Primary         Observed for       Observed for at                    Observed for Not
completion         at least 5 out     least 3 out of 5                   1 out of 5   available/    1        10
indicator          of 5 latest        latest years                       latest years accessible
9. Access to       years
                   Observed for                          Observed for 1               Not
water indicator    2 out of 6                            out of 6 latest              available/    1        10
                   latest years                          years                        accessible
10. Periodicity of Annual             ≤ 1.5 years                        > 1.5 years Not
GDP growth                                                                            available/    1        10
indicator                                                                             accessible
                                                                                      Maximum total score is 100




                                                          174
5.      By the nature of how it is computed, the SCI can move substantially from one year to the
next. As an illustration, while the SCI has not changed very much in the last 10 years for
Ethiopia (Table IV.10 below), the index experienced a significant improvement in the 2008-10
period reaching 80 out of a maximum of 100; that ranked Ethiopia as top among the 8 pilot
countries at that time. The SCI dropped precipitously in 2011-12 to go back to the level
prevailing in 2004, on account of several developments including the fact that the 2000 base year
for national accounts went beyond the 10 year mark in 2011, causing a 10 point drop in the
Statistical Methodology (Practice) sub-score. Furthermore, the Government of Ethiopia went
from consolidated accounts capturing all the central government’s fiscal activities -- which were
introduced in 2006 -- to a more restrictive ‘central government accounts’ accounting definition,
causing the Collection sub-score to decline from 80 in 2010 to 70 in 2011. In the case of
Senegal, not having an agriculture census conducted in the last 10 years caused the Collection
sub-score to decline by 20 points in 2011, since that sub-score relies on only 5 indicators.




                                              175
          Table IV.10: Statistical Capacity Indicator by Sub-Component of SRF Pilot Countries
                                                (1999-2013)
                            1999   2004   2005    2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013

Afghanistan
Overall score                17     24     31      32     34     46     47     52     51     53     53
Practice sub-score            0      0     20      20     20     40     30     40     40     50     50
Collection sub-score          0     20     20      20     20     30     40     40     40     40     40
Availability sub-score       50     53     53      57     63     67     70     77     73     70     70
DRC
Overall score                39     32     41      38     38     38     34     36     43     43     50
Practice sub-score           40     40     50      40     40     30     20     20     30     30     40
Collection sub-score         20     10     20      20     20     30     30     30     30     30     30
Availability sub-score       57     47     53      53     53     53     53     57     70     70     80
Ethiopia
Overall score                60     67     68      64     68     79     80     80     73     66     67
Practice sub-score           40     40     40      50     60     70     70     70     60     40     40
Collection sub-score         70     80     80      60     60     80     80     80     70     70     70
Availability sub-score       70     80     83      83     83     87     90     90     90     87     90
Ghana
Overall score                50     51     53      56     56     59     59     66     62     59     62
Practice sub-score           30     30     30      30     30     40     40     50     50     50     60
Collection sub-score         40     40     40      50     50     50     50     50     40     40     40
Availability sub-score       80     83     90      87     87     87     87     97     97     87     87
Lao PDR
Overall score                52     69     70      70     69     68     68     70     66     70     72
Practice sub-score           30     50     50      50     50     50     40     40     50     50     60
Collection sub-score         50     70     70      70     70     70     80     80     60     70     70
Availability sub-score       77     87     90      90     87     83     83     90     87     90     87
Nigeria
Overall score                49     44     50      48     60     68     67     69     73     74     72
Practice sub-score           20     20     40      30     40     40     40     40     50     50     50
Collection sub-score         60     40     40      40     60     80     80     80     80     80     80
Availability sub-score       67     73     70      73     80     83     80     87     90     93     87
Rwanda
Overall score                49     61     63      64     67     67     74     68     68     77     77
Practice sub-score           30     40     40      50     60     60     60     40     40     60     60
Collection sub-score         50     60     60      60     60     60     80     80     80     80     80
Availability sub-score       67     83     90      83     80     80     83     83     83     90     90
Senegal
Overall score                68     79     77      73     78     72     70     73     67     63     71
Practice sub-score           60     60     60      60     70     60     50     60     60     50     50
Collection sub-score         60     80     80      70     70     70     70     70     50     50     70
Availability sub-score       83     97     90      90     93     87     90     90     90     90     93
Source: World Bank.

6.      To minimize the impact of the year-on-year variations, using three-year averages may be
a better way to look at progress over time, as shown in Table IV.11 below. Starting with the year
2004, which happens to coincide with the Marrakech Action Plan for Statistics (MAPS), most

                                                 176
SRF countries (or rather, most of the countries which became SRF countries) have indeed
advanced in terms of statistical capacity, and have done so (much) more than the average
country. With the exception of Lao PDR and Senegal, both of which started from surprisingly
high figures and which have experienced stagnation and moderate decline, respectively, between
2004-06 and 2011-13, other SRF pilot countries have experienced rates of progress that are very
much higher than the average rate of statistical capacity increase of IDA countries. While it is
premature to draw any conclusion from this trend, the rapid increase of the SCI in Afghanistan
and Nigeria is noteworthy.

Table IV.11: Statistical Capacity Indicator, 3-year Moving Averages (2004-06 to 2011-13)

     Overall SCI          2004-2006 average       2011-2013 average         Percentage increase
 Afghanistan                    29.0                     52.3                       80.3
 DRC                            37.0                     45.3                       22.4
 Ethiopia                       65.3                     68.7                        5.2
 Ghana                          53.3                     61.0                       14.4
 Lao PDR                        69.7                     69.3                       -0.6
 Nigeria                        47.3                     73.0                       54.3
 Rwanda                         62.7                     74.0                       18.0
 Senegal                        76.3                     67.0                      -12.2

 All BBSC                       66.3                     68.5                      3.3
 countries
 IDA countries                  60.3              63.0 (2011-12 avg.)              4.5




                                               177
           ANNEX 5: Report on missions undertaken by the Evaluation Team


1.      As part of the evaluation of the SRF-CF, Brian Ngo and Andrew Flatt travelled during
the period of June 13-27 to: 1) meet with PARIS21 and OECD/Development Co-operation
Department (DCD) staff on June 14 to discuss and obtain information on national development
strategies for statistics in the 8 SRF pilot countries; and 2) visit Nigeria (June 16-21) and Rwanda
(June 22-26) to experience first-hand the implementation of the SRF-CF projects and their
impacts. In Nigeria, besides meetings with relevant stakeholders in Abuja, we also visited
Minna, the capital city of Niger State which is one of the six pilot states covered by the SRF
project. Arrangements were made by Alain Gaugris, Senior Statistician, in Nigeria and by Tom
Bundervoet, Poverty Economist, in Rwanda. Alain and Tom attended most of the meetings and
their help in facilitating the mission's visit is very much appreciated. During the country visits
the mission focused its attention more on the impact of the SRF approach than on the
implementation of the respective SRF projects.

               a) Meetings in Paris - Main Points

2.      The mission met with Eric Bensel, Administrator and Samuel Blazyk, Program
Coordinator in charge of Africa at PARIS21. The meeting discussed PARIS21's early support for
the system-wide approach to statistical capacity building in order to facilitate the scaling up of
government and donor support for statistics and using the country's national strategy for the
development of statistics (NSDS) as the framework for coordination. The prerequisites for SRF -
- dialogue with donors, formal request of support at a high political level, the use of the NSDS as
a framework, and the in-country statistician -- are very much in line with the approach by
PARIS21 towards statistical capacity building. But in spite of the very similar approaches
towards statistics between PARIS21 and the SRF and the fact that the SRF Charter stipulates that
the developing country co-chair of PARIS21 or a designated alternate is a member of the SRF
Catalytic Fund Council, PARIS21 staff have been detached from the implementation of the SRF-
CF country projects and appreciated the opportunity to discuss the objectives of and approaches
to the evaluation of the SRF pilot phase with the mission.

3.      The meeting reviewed the status of statistical capacity building and the NSDS in the 8
pilot countries. Generally speaking, with possibly the exception of the Democratic Republic of
Congo, the NSDS has contributed to raising the profile of statistics in these countries. The
meeting touched upon the selection of countries for the SRF pilot phase, including the targeting
of some fragile states, without arriving at any conclusion.
4.     The meeting then discussed the Partner Report on Support to Statistics (PRESS), which is
conducted annually to estimate financial commitments to statistical development worldwide.
PARIS21 colleagues reiterated that while the PRESS is a useful tool, it should not be taken as a
pure accounting exercise (indeed, a small element of double-counting is present) but is intended
primarily to serve as a tool to facilitate collaboration and co-ordination among developing
countries and providers of development co-operation. PARIS21 staff explained the sources of
information, of which the main one is the OECD’s Creditor Reporting System. The latest PRESS
report (2012) shows that financial commitments to statistical development for the period
2010–12 amounted to roughly US$ 2.3 billion with Africa receiving a little less than h alf
(46%) of total statistical support. The other important conclusions of the report are 1) that

                                                178
support to statistics continues to be highly concentrated both in terms of recipients, with the
top 15 countries accounting for almost 55% of total commitments, and in terms of donors,
with four providers (including the Bank) furnishing 73% of total support; 2) that little
relationship can be drawn from the volume of support and the recipient's statistical capacity;
and 3) that fragile states receive considerable attention. PARIS21 staff also mentioned efforts
to collect financial commitments at country level through the Country Report on Support to
Statistics (CRESS) for which responses have been rather weak. The mission decided, as a
result, to make some changes to the draft questionnaire to be administered to stakeholders.

5.      The mission also met with Rudolphe Petras, Policy Analyst at the OECD Development
Co-operation Directorate to discuss the aid management platform in some of the pilot countries
and possible relevance to statistical development support. Two of the 8 SRF pilot phase countries
(Lao PDR and Senegal) have issued aid reports while two others (Ethiopia and DRC) have begun
to collect the information. Mr. Petras suggested that the mission contact the Washington-based
Development Gateway for more detailed information on the pilot phase countries.

               b) Meetings in Nigeria

6.      With Alain's efficient help, the mission was able to meet with most of the relevant
stakeholders both in Abuja (for the federal level) and in Minna (for the State level). In Abuja,
the mission held separate discussions with the project coordinators representing the National
Bureau of Statistics (NBS) and the National Population Commission (NPopC) which jointly
ensure the implementation of the SRF project, other representatives of these two institutions
including the Statistician-General of the NBS, some of the local donors (DfID, UNAids,
UKAid/ESSPIN on Education, and AfDB), and a representative of the local media. At the end of
the visit to Abuja, the mission met with most of the members of the SRF Technical Committee
led by the Ministry of Finance and including representatives of the National Planning
Commission, the Central Bank of Nigeria, the Accountant General as well as of the National
Bureau of Statistics and the National Population Commission. The representative of the Nigerian
Statistical Association was absent. The mission also had a separate discussion with Ms. Esther
Forgan of DfID on the role of the in-country donor statistician.

7.      The mission also met with the World Bank's Country Director who shows a very strong
support for statistics and has empowered Alain to play an active role in decision meetings on
various WB projects in Nigeria with a focus on data. Ms. Marie-Françoise Marie-Nelly, Country
Director for Nigeria, highlighted the importance of statistics as a key sector in the country
assistance strategy and that the SRF has helped raise the profile of statistics. She also mentioned
that the development partners group in Statistics is performing best among the various sectors in
Nigeria. From her perspective, the challenges are 1) where do we start (including how best to
position the SRF in order to achieve concrete results); 2) how to sequence statistical capacity
building (mentioning that the Bank is preparing a larger IDA project to support statistics in
Nigeria); and 3) what does it take to build a strong technical base at NBS. She also suggested
that the mission brief her and other country directors/managers on the findings and
recommendations before finalizing the evaluation report. The mission took note of the request
but thinks that, in view of the short deadline for the completion of the report; there may not be
sufficient time for the briefing as requested. The mission also met with the Lead Economist and
briefed other WB colleagues on the evaluation mission at the weekly Bank staff meeting.

                                               179
8.      In Minna, the mission was able to get a first-hand exposure to the workings of statistical
development at the State level. Following a thorough briefing by the State Statistician-General
on recent developments in statistics in Niger State (new publications, a separate budget for the
State Bureau of Statistics which was formerly included under Planning, and a huge increase in
funding from Naira 1 to 52 million), the mission met with the State Consultative Committee on
Statistics (SCCS) including its chairman, various board members, University researchers, and the
local media to go over recent developments in statistics in Niger State. Subsequently, the mission
met with the permanent secretaries of the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Education
and witnessed first-hand the close and constructive relationships between the Statistician-General
and senior managers at other State-level ministries on their respective roles in promoting both the
reliance on and concerns for timely and relevant data for economic planning and its
implementation. The mission was also shown numerous pieces of furniture and equipment that
had been purchased with SRF project funds, including some cartographic equipment for the State
NPopC that was literally still under wraps.

9.     One positive effect of SRF funding was that the NBS and NPopC, reportedly previously
at loggerheads, were now working harmoniously together on the project. The mission did
however hear concerns that this cooperation could be threatened by recent changes in the
leadership of NPopC.

               c) Meetings in Rwanda

10.     The mission met separately with the Director-General of the National Institute of
Statistics of Rwanda (NISR) and subsequently with several of the NISR senior staff on the
impacts of the SRF project. What transpired from the focused discussions with the NISR was: 1)
although Rwanda was already implementing the NSDS (2010-14), the SRF has played a
significant role in helping to give statistics a more powerful and relevant role in economic and
social management in Rwanda by providing significant additional resources and by helping to
attract other resources to statistics; 2) differently from earlier World Bank projects that focused
on capacity building, the SRF had a direct impact on the production of data which was
considered to be critical in raising the profile of statistics in Rwanda; and 3) there was a sharp
acceleration in the use of statistics in Rwanda although it is hard to attribute this development to
the SRF.

11.     The mission had detailed discussions on the workings of the 'basket fund' for Statistics
which currently includes DfID, the European Commission, and the World Bank. The fact that
the Bank joined the basket fund as a latecomer while implementation of the NSDS and
particularly the population census was already well advanced meant that procurement procedures
and clearance for funding by the Bank had caused problems at the beginning of the SRF project
implementation. Delays in implementation were avoided thanks to the basket fund arrangements
which make it possible to move funding by the various members of the basket fund to cover
funding gaps. It was highlighted to the mission that the rapid turn-over of the WB resident
project officer was also a major stumbling block. Subsequent discussions with the World Bank's
Country Manager, Ms. Carolyn Turk, pointed to the need for more clarity, in the early phase of
the Rwanda project implementation, in supervision assignment and resources.
12.     The mission met with other producers of data such as the National Identification Agency
(in charge of the issuance of IDs, driver's license and of civil registration), the National Bank of

                                                180
Rwanda, and the Rwanda Development Board (in charge of the promotion of investments) and
received confirmation of the strong coordination within the government of Rwanda on matters
related to statistics (for example, agencies need clearance from the NISR before conducting a
survey). Meetings with the Institute of Policy Analysis and Research of Rwanda (IPAR), the
Kigali Institute of Science and Technology (KIST) and the Managing Director of New Times, a
major local newspaper, again confirmed the strong relationships between producers and users of
data in Rwanda although there remain challenges as to the timeliness of data in some areas and
weak capacity in comprehending statistics by the local media. There was however, unanimous
recognition that the NISR website has significantly improved in the last year. Currently, in
addition to economic and sectoral data, the website also allows for the online retrieval of micro
data as well as a comprehensive literature on techniques and methods (metadata).
13.    The mission also met separately with representatives of some of the development partners
involved in Statistics namely the European Union, UNFPA which represents the One-UN in
Rwanda, and the Head of Development Cooperation at the Embassy of the Netherlands.
Arrangements are being made to reach the DfID representative in East Kilbride later this week or
early next week. The discussions revealed a number of useful insights. First, the EC/DfID had
conducted an institutional assessment of NISR in 2010/11 which highlights the very strong
achievement by the latter with a limited budget.
14.     Second, in relation to the in-country donor statistician, the mission was informed that the
technical advisor to the DG of NISR has recently left the country and his replacement is being
advertised. However, it was not clear to the mission that this person has played the role of the in-
country statistician particularly since the DG of NISR mentioned that he didn’t need or want an
in-country donor statistician. On the use of consultants, the former approach by UNDP to bring
in West African consultants in Statistics was not considered satisfactory by the NISR. Currently,
faced with the challenge of producing credible data on a timely basis, the NISR relies rather
heavily on Oxford Policy Management (OPM) consultants for a wide array of specialized tasks.
Concerns were expressed by some of the people we met about the overreliance on OPM and the
lack of hands-on training for local NISR staff, many of whom were recruited in the past 2 years
and thus have little experience.




                                                181
                           ANNEX 6: List of persons met and contacted

* Contacted by telephone

World Bank, Washington DC (May 21-24 2013)
Development Economics Data Group (DECDG)
Grant Cameron              Manager
Barbro Hexeberg            Senior Economist, SRF Project Coordinator
Ghislaine Delaine          Senior Statistician, TTL for DR Congo
John Ngwafon               Senior Economist/Statistician, TTL for Ghana and Nigeria
Morgan Brannon             Consultant
Annette Kinitz*            Consultant
Christelle Kouame          Program Assistant
Lisa M Burke               Program Assistant

Other World Bank staff contacted in Washington
Waleed Malik                 Senior Public Sector Management Specialist, TTL for Ethiopia and
                             Rwanda
Chris Rockmore               Economist, former TTL for DRC Congo

World Bank and DfID staff contacted in the field (various dates)

Afghanistan
Aphichoke Kotikula*             Economist, TTL
Jill Fletcher*                  DFID Statistics Adviser, IDS (outgoing)
Omar Joya*                      Economist, World Bank Country Office

DR Congo
Abdoullah Beidou*               Statistician, DECDG (IDS)

Ghana
Lynne Henderson*                Statistician, DECDG (IDS)

Lao PDR
Somneuk Davading*               Economist, TTL

Senegal
Mamadou Ndione*                 Senior Economist, former TTL
Djibril Ndoye*                  Poverty Economist, TTL



PARIS21 Secretariat, Paris (June 14 2013)
Eric Bensel                     Partnership and Studies Programme Coordinator
Samuel Blazyk                   Programme Coordinator, NSDS in Africa




                                                 182
OECD, Paris (June 14 2013)
Rudolphe Petras                 Policy Analyst, Development Co-operation Directorate


Nigeria (June 17-21 2013)

Abuja
World Bank
Marie-Françoise Marie-Nelly (Ms)       Country Director
John Litwack*                          Lead Economist
Alain Gaugris                          Senior Statistician, DECDG (IDS and co-TTL)
Kabiru Mohammed                        Team Assistant

National Bureau of Statistics
Yemi Kale*                             Statistician General
Simon Harry                            SRF Co-Project Coordinator and Assistant Director, Corporate
                                       Planning and Technical Coordination Department
Samanja Maudo                          Deputy Director
Peter Mbamo                            Senior Statistician

National Population Commission
Alfa Mohammed                          SRF Co-Project Coordinator and Director, Demographic
                                       Statistics
Babagana Wakil                         Project Manager/Deputy Director, Vital Statistics
Abubakar Madaki                        Project Assistant

Federal Ministry of Finance
Ihechukwu Madubuike A.A. (Mrs)         Secretary, Technical Committee for the Implementation of the
                                       SFR (SRF Technical Committee), Director, International
                                       Economic Relations Department, Federal Ministry of Finance
Pius Ailoyafen                         Assistant Director (Member, SRF Technical Committee)
Suleiman Kolo                          Principal Administrative Officer (Member, SRF Technical
                                       Committee)

Central Bank of Nigeria
Ibrahim Adamu                          Member, SRF Technical Committee
Mainasara S.                           Member, SRF Technical Committee

Office of Accountant General of the Federation
Onojeta Solomon                       Deputy Director (Member, SRF Technical Committee)

Local media
National Mirror                        Tola Akinmutimi, Assistant Editor (Business)

Development partners
Esther Forgan                          Results and Statistical Adviser, DfID
Kingsley Ogbonna                       Monitoring and Evaluation Coordinator South, ESSPIN-DfID
Ifeanyi Ugwuoke                        Niger State Programme Manager, SPARC-DfID
Masauso Nzima                          Senior Strategic Information Advisor, UNAIDS

                                                 183
Andoh Mensah                         Acting Chief Country Economist, African Development Bank

Niger State: Minna

Abubakar Aliyu                       Permanent Secretary, Niger State Planning Commission
Alhaji Ahmadu Umaru                  Chairman, Board of Directors, Niger State Bureau of Statistics
                                     (NSBS)
Dr. Audu Isan                        Statistics Unit of Polytechnic , NSBS Board Member
Abdu Idris                           NSBS Board Member
Usman Liman                          Statistician General, NSBS
Abdul Gamyn Bells                    NSBS
Abubakar Garba                       NSBS
Hassan A. Mohd                       NSBS
Ahmed Sam                            NSBS
Naibi Adamu                          NSBS
Mohammed Am                          NSBS
Dr. Mohammed N. Mahmud               Permanent Secretary, Niger State Ministry of Education
Muhammed Idrisu Guregi               Head of Department, Administration, Niger State Office,
                                     National Population Commission
Muhammed Shehu Yisako                Head of Department, Technical, NPoPC
Nma Alhaji Shehu                     Head of Department, Public Administration, NPoPC
Muhammad Aliyu Mahmood               GIS Lab Operator, NPoPC
Abu Mbodi                            Leadership (newspaper)


Rwanda (June 24-26, 2013)

World Bank
Carolyn Turk                         Country Coordinator
Tom Bundervoet                       Poverty Economist
Yoichiro Ishihara                    Senior Economist
Antoinette Kamanzi                   Procurement Assistant
Sylvie Ingabire                      Team Assistant

National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda
Yusuf Murangwa                          Director General
Odette Mbabazi                          Deputy Director General of Corporate Services
Yahya Hassani                           Coordinator of the NSDS Coordination Team
Dominique Habimana                      Director of Statistical Methods, Research and Publications
                                        Department
Antoinette Habinshuti                   Planning Officer

National Bank of Rwanda
Willybrold Nizeyimana                Manager of Monetary Statistics
Jean Chrysostome Rwililiza           Manager, Economic Statistics & MIS Database, Statistics
                                     Department

National ID Agency
Pascal Nyamulinda                    Director General


                                               184
Rwanda Development Board
Zephanie Niyonkuru                       Acting Head of Planning Division

Other national users
Institute for Policy Analysis and
Research of Rwanda
Pamela Abbott                     Director of Research Unit
Dickson Malunda                   Senior Research Fellow

Kigali Institute of Science and
Technology

Anselme Sano                      Director of Planning and Development
Kevin Ganza                       Statistician
The New Times Publications
Collin Haba                       Managing Director

Development partners
EU Delegation
Ruben Alba Aguilera               Attaché, Economy & Governance
Mugeni Kayitenkore                Program Officer, Economy & Governance
Netherlands Embassy
Pieter Dorst                      Head of Development Cooperation, Netherlands Embassy
Gaspard Ndagijimana               Regional Adviser Water and Land, Netherlands Embassy
UN System
Bolaji Taiwo                      Chief Technical Adviser, UNFPA


United Kingdom DfID, East Kilbride (July 24 2013)
Frances Harper                    Team Leader, Global Statistics Partnership Department
Kim Bradford-Smith*               Senior Statistics Adviser, IDS for Afghanistan




                                                   185
                                      ANNEX 7: References

SRF-CF Administration Unit

SRF-CF Administration Unit, Statistics for Results Facility-Catalytic Fund, Charter, July 2009.
SRF-CF Administration Unit, Statistics for Results Facility-Catalytic Fund, Guidelines and
     Procedures for Country Implementing Agencies, January 2010.
SRF-CF Administration Unit, Statistics for Results Facility-Catalytic Fund, Guidelines on
     Terms of Reference for Lead Donors and In-Country Donor Statisticians, February 2010.
SRF-CF Administration Unit, Statistics for Results Facility-Catalytic Fund, Monitoring and
     Evaluation Arrangements, March 2010.
SRF-CF Administration Unit, Statistics for Results Facility-Catalytic Fund, User Satisfaction
     Survey on the Quality and Use of Official Statistics for Informed Policy- and Decision-
     Making – Guidelines, June 2010.
SRF-CF Administration Unit, Statistics for Results Facility-Catalytic Fund, Status Update as of
     August 2013.
The World Bank, Note on the Statistical Capacity Indicator (no date).
The World Bank, Statistics for Results Facility-Catalytic Fund, Annual Report, April 2010,
     SRF-CF Administration Unit, Washington DC.
The World Bank, Statistics for Results Facility-Catalytic Fund, Annual Report, April 2011,
     SRF-CF Administration Unit, Washington DC.
The World Bank, Statistics for Results Facility-Catalytic Fund, Annual Report, April 2012,
     SRF-CF Administration Unit, Washington DC.
The World Bank, Statistics for Results Facility-Catalytic Fund, Annual Report, May 2013, SRF-
     CF Administration Unit, Washington DC.

Afghanistan

Central Statistics Organization, Application of the Central Statistics Organization of the
       Government of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the Statistics for Results Facility
       (SRF), February 2010.
Central Statistics Organization, User Satisfaction Survey - Initial Results, October 2012.
Central Statistics Organization, Capacity Development Plan (2011-2014), June 2011.
Joint Inter-Agency Mission, Afghanistan: A Statistical Master Plan, July 2004.
The World Bank, Project Appraisal Document On a Proposed Statistics For Results Facility Grant
      In The Amount Of US$ 14 Million To The Islamic Republic Of Afghanistan For
      Strengthening The National Statistical System Project, October2010.
The World Bank, Implementation Status & Results (ISR). Afghanistan: Strengthening the
     National Statistical System (P121883), various dates.



                                                186
The World Bank, Statistics for Results Facility of Central Statistics Organization of the Islamic
     Republic of Afghanistan: Summary Report, January 2013

Democratic Republic of Congo

National Statistical Institute, Roadmap for the Elaboration of a National Strategy for the
       Development Statistics in the Democratic Republic of Congo (Feuille de route pour
       l’élaboration de la stratégie nationale de Développement de la statistique en République
       Démocratique du Congo), November 2005.
National Statistical Institute, Proposed Grant Request for the Statistics for Results Catalytic Fund,
       August 2010.
The World Bank, Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Grant in the Amount of US$ 11.8
     Million to The Democratic Republic of The Congo for the Catalytic Project to Strengthen
     the National Statistical Institute, August 2013.

Ethiopia

Central Statistical Agency, National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (2009-14).
Central Statistical Agency, Application of the Central Statistical Agency for the Statistics for
       Results Facility, September 2012.
The World Bank, Draft Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Grant in the Amount of US$
     10 Million to the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for a Statistics for Results
     Project, August 2013.

Ghana

Ghana Statistical Service, Ghana Grant Application for the Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic
      Fund, December 2009.
Ghana Statistical Service, the Satisfaction of Users of Official Statistics in Ghana, December 2012
Government of Ghana, Ghana Statistics Development Plan, 2009-2013, November 2008.
The World Bank, Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed IDA Credit in the Amount of SDR
     18.8 Million (US$ 30 Million Equivalent) and a Proposed Grant from the Statistics for
     Results Facility Catalytic Fund in the Amount of US$ 10 million to the Republic of Ghana
     for the Statistics Development Project, July 2011.
The World Bank, Implementation Status & Results (ISR). Ghana: Ghana Statistics Development
     Program (P 118858), various dates.

Lao PDR

Lao Department of Statistics, Ministry of Planning and Investment, The Strategy for the
     Development of National Statistical System 2010-2020, May 2010
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, National Assembly, Statistics Law, June 2010 (unofficial
      translation).


                                                187
Lao Statistics Bureau, Lao PDR Grant Application for the Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic
       Fund, June 2011.
National Statistics Center, Strategies and Measures for the Official Statistical System
       Development of the Lao PDR 2006-2010, 2005.
The World Bank, Project Appraisal Document On A Proposed Statistics For Results Facility
     Grant In The Amount Of US$ 8,000,000 To The Lao People’s Democratic Republic For
     Strengthening The National Statistical System Project, March 2013.
The World Bank, Implementation Status & Results (ISR), Lao PDR: LAOSTAT – Strengthening
     the National Statistical System Project (P129825), July 2013

Nigeria

Federal Republic of Nigeria, Statistical Master Plan for the Nigeria National Statistical System
       2004/5-2008/9.
Federal Republic of Nigeria, Strategy for National Development of Statistics, 2008/09 - 2012/13.
International Development Association, Country Partnership Strategy for the Federal Republic of
        Nigeria (2010-13), July 2, 2009.
National Bureau of Statistics, Nigeria - Grant Application for the Statistics for Results Facility
       Catalytic Fund (SRF-CF), December 2009.
National Bureau of Statistics and the World Bank, Nigeria Statistical Development Project
       Statistics for Results Facility (SRF). Report of User Satisfaction Baseline Survey –
       National; States of Anambra, Bauchi, Edo, Niger, Ondo and Kaduna (November 2012).
National Bureau of Statistics, Corporate Strategy Implementation Plan 2013-2014, 2012.
Niger State, Vision 3:2020 (no date).
Niger State Bureau of Statistics, Niger State Statistical Yearbook 2011 Edition.
The World Bank, Nigeria Office, Nigeria Economic Report, May 2013.
The World Bank, Nigeria Office, Minutes of Nigeria Development Partners’ Statistics,
     Monitoring and Evaluation Group Meeting, various dates.
The World Bank, Nigeria Office, Terms of Reference of the Nigeria Development Partners’
     Statistics, Monitoring and Evaluation Group, February 2012
The World Bank, Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Grant from the Statistics for Results
      Facility Catalytic Fund in the Amount of US$ 10 million to The Federal Republic of
      Nigeria for a Statistical Development Strategy Implementation Project, April 2011.
The World Bank, Aide Memoire: Nigeria Implementation Support Mission for Statistics for
     Results (SRF) Project (TF 099783), various dates.
The World Bank, Nigeria Office, Note to the file - Round of visits to development partners to
     facilitate and strengthen effective donor coordination mechanisms in the field of statistical
     development, May 2013.



                                               188
The World Bank, Implementation Status & Results (ISR), Nigeria: Nigeria Statistics
     Development Program (NSDP) (P119872), various dates.

Rwanda

Abbott, Pamela and John Rwirahira, Millennium Development Goals Progress Report, Rwanda
       Country Report 2010, Institute of Policy Analysis and Research of Rwanda. United
       Nations Development Programme 2010.
Edmunds, Roger, Mid-Term Review of the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics,
     National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, August 2012.
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN), Memorandum of Understanding For
       NSDS1 Basket Fund between the Government of Rwanda Represented by the Ministry Of
       Finance and Economic Planning and Development Partners Contributing to the Basket
       Fund to Support Implementation of the National Strategies for the Development of
       Statistics, 2009-2014, October 2010.
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (MINECOFIN), Memorandum of Understanding For
       NSDS1 Basket Fund between the Government of Rwanda Represented by the Ministry Of
       Finance and Economic Planning and Development Partners Contributing to the Basket
       Fund to Support Implementation of the National Strategies for the Development of
       Statistics, 2009-2014 – Addendum for the World Bank, July 2012.
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, NISR Strategic Plan 2007-2011, March 2007.
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, National Strategy for the Development of Statistics
       2009-2014.
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, Integrated Annual Work Plan: July 2013-June 2014.
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, NSDS Steering Committee/National Partnership Group
       for Statistics, Annual Report July 2011-June 2012, June 2012.
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, NSDS Steering Committee/National Partnership Group
       for Statistics, Mid-Year Report July-December 2012, December 2012.
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, NSDS Steering Committee/National Partnership Group
       for Statistics, Annual Report July 2012-June 2013, June 2013.
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, Statistics for Results Facility Catalytic Fund, Rwanda’s
       Grant Application, January 2010.
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, User Satisfaction Survey on the Quality and Use of
       Official Statistics for Informed Policy and Decision-Making in Rwanda, February 2013.
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, Capacity Building Strategy for Rwanda National
       Statistical System 2013-2018, April 2013.
NSDS Steering Committee, Minutes of NSDS Steering Committee Meetings, various dates.
Office of the Auditor General of State Finances, Final Audit Reports for the Year Ended 30 June
       2012, March 2013.



                                                189
The Republic of Rwanda, Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy 2008-2012,
      September 2007.
The World Bank, Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Grant in the Amount of US$ 10
     Million to the Republic of Rwanda for the Statistics for Results Project, December 2011.
The World Bank, Implementation Status & Results (ISR), Rwanda: Statistics for Results Facility
     (P124629), various dates.
The World Bank, Aide Memoire: Rwanda – Statistics for Results Project (P124629),
     Implementation Support Mission February 2013
The World Bank, Rwanda Economic Update: Maintaining Momentum, May 2013

Senegal

National Agency for Statistics and Demography, National Strategy for the Development of
       Statistics 2008-13 (Schéma Directeur de la Statistique du Sénégal - Stratégie Nationale de
       Développement de la Statistique, Rapport Principal), June 2007.
National Agency for Statistics and Demography, Application for Statistics for Results Facility
       Catalytic Fund, April 2011.

Other References

African Development Bank, Situational Analysis of the Reliability of Economic Statistics in
       Africa: Special Focus on GDP Measurement, Statistical Capacity Building Division,
       Statistics Department, June 2013.
Jerven, Morton, Poor Numbers. How We Are Misled by African Development Statistics and
       What to Do about It, Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London, 2013.
Morrison, Thomas, Mid-Term Evaluation Report on the Enhanced Data Dissemination Initiative
       Project (covering the period April 1, 2010 to September 30, 2012), International Monetary
       Fund, March 2013.
Oxford Policy Management, Evaluation of the Implementation of the Paris Declaration -
      Thematic Study of Support to Statistical Capacity Building, Synthesis Report, May 2009.
Oxford Policy Management, Evaluation of the Implementation of the Paris Declaration -
      Thematic Study of Support to Statistical Capacity Building, Synthesis Report and
      Evidence Report, Part 2, May 2009.
PARIS21, New NSDS Guidelines (draft for comments), fall 2013.
PARIS21, Statistics for Transparency, Accountability and Results: A Busan Action Plan for
     Statistics, November 2011.
PARIS21, PARIS21 Meeting on Bridging the User-Producer Divide: Statistical Capacity
     Development in a Post Busan World, February 2013, New York.
PARIS21, Draft Record of the Proceedings, Annual Meetings, 9-11 April 2013, Paris, France.
PARIS21 Secretariat, A Guide to Using a System-wide Approach to Implement National
     Strategies for the Development of Statistics, October 2007.

                                              190
PARIS21, A Scoring System to Measure the Use of Statistics in the Policy-Making Process -
     Summary Report, September 2012.
PARIS21 Secretariat, Partner Report on Support to Statistics – PRESS 2012 Round, Final Report,
     December 2012.
PARIS21 Secretariat, NSDS Status in IDA and Lower Middle Income Countries - Progress
     Report as of November 2013.




                                             191
          ANNEX 8: Terms of Reference for the Evaluation of the SRF-CF Pilot Phase

                                     Overview of the SRF-CF
Background

1.     Improving the ability of countries, agencies, and institutions to manage for results is
central to the international community’s aim to support country outcomes such as the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The Managing for Development Results (MfDR)
process – often termed the “results agenda” – has emphasized the importance of better statistical
data for highlighting issues, making policy choices, allocating resources, monitoring outcomes
and evaluating impact.

2.       The Statistics for Results Facility (SRF), which began its pilot phase in 2009, with
support from UK/DFID and the Netherlands, is a multi-donor initiative designed to increase the
level of investment in statistical systems in developing countries and to improve the
effectiveness of financial and technical assistance. The objective of the SRF and of the Catalytic
Fund (SRF-CF) is to support capacity building, and better policy formulation and decision
making through a sustained improvement in the production, availability and use of official
statistics in these countries.

3.      The SRF is part of a long-term process to improve the effectiveness of development aid
and a key part of (MfDR). The SRF builds on substantial progress that has been achieved since
2004, when delegates to the Second International Roundtable on MfDR set forth the Marrakech
Action Plan for Statistics (MAPS). The MAPS plan identified six key actions to help develop
and strengthen national statistical systems and international coordination. Recognizing that long-
term and sustained improvements in national statistical systems could be achieved only if
countries themselves took the lead in setting priorities and in managing change, MAPS focused
on helping countries prepare National Strategies for the Development of Statistics (NSDS).

4.     The SRF was specifically designed to support the implementation of NSDSs. However,
recognizing that the challenge then (in 2010), was to move from the preparation of plans to their
implementation, focus was immediately turned to preparation of plans for implementation. The
SRF-CF was also designed to promote and support efforts to improve the effectiveness of aid, as
well as providing an increase in the financial resources for investment in statistics, specifically
by applying the principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness to statistical projects and
programs. The SRF was expected to:

           a) Ensure that developing countries exercise effective ownership and leadership in
              developing their national statistical systems and that donors respect this
              leadership;

           b) Promote the alignment of donor support for statistics in the context of an effective
              strategic framework and work program for national statistical development
              (NSDSs or similar);
           c) Harmonize donor support through well-planned and well-coordinated projects and
              programs;


                                                192
           d) Support developing country efforts to manage for results not only by generating
              better statistical data and indicators but also by ensuring that these outputs are
              used to support evidence-based decision making; and
           e) Promote mutual accountability by monitoring the implementation and outcomes
              of NSDSs within a framework of mutual accountability, recognizing that
              developing a sustainable statistical system may take a long time.
5.     As part of this process, Paris Declaration partners agreed on the indicators and targets
that would be used to monitor the delivery of inputs, the production of outputs, the achievement
of wider outcomes, the impact of better statistics and a more effective statistical system.
Agreement was also made on the targets that were to be achieved and what action needed to be
taken when implementation was not on track.

6.       The SRF promotes a comprehensive system-wide approach to strengthening national
statistical systems. This approach draws on lessons learned from the sector-wide approaches
used successfully in sectors such as health, education and agriculture as well as a number of
system-wide statistical capacity building operations undertaken by the Bank. In particular it
stresses the provision of support to a locally owned and led program to develop the national
statistical system in a comprehensive and coordinated way, using country systems and
procedures for implementation. A system-wide approach also focuses on strategic issues and
coordination, promotes dialogue across the national statistical system and the involvement of line
ministries, allows more scope for country leadership and ownership, helps to harmonize
approaches and align donor support with country policies and provides for the more effective
scaling up of support while optimizing capacity building. The process of preparing a statistical
strategy covering the whole national statistical system, or at least its most important parts,
provides a framework within which the system-wide approach can deliver coordinated and
harmonized financial and technical assistance.

7.     The requirements for developing a system-wide approach at the country level for SRF
funding include:

           a) A well-prepared statistical strategy (NSDS) in place or being developed, with
              high-level political endorsement;
           b) A formal request to the SRF-CF from the government seeking support for the
              implementation of the NSDS and proposing the use of a system-wide approach;
           c) Identification of resource requirements for statistics in government budgetary
              allocations and national resource frameworks, such as medium-term expenditure
              frameworks where they exist;
           d) Initiation of a dialogue with local donor representatives;
           e) Agreement to the approach by all donors (or at least a core set) with an interest in
              supporting statistics, where appropriate, identification of a lead donor to assist in
              coordinating the dialogue with government; and
           f) Identification of existing initiatives in statistics and a clear understanding of how
              these support the implementation of the NSDS.


                                               193
8.     For these elements to be in place, capacity will be needed both in participating countries
and within the development partners. Essential components for participating countries include:
leadership and the political will to improve statistics; effective financial management capacity;
and sufficient institutional and professional expertise. In many countries technical assistance
may be needed in some or all of these areas. Statistical agencies, especially the central
organization, will have to have the capacity to lead the reform process while, at the same time,
being able to maintain their regular work programs.

       The pilot phase

9.      The pilot phase of the SRF-CF was set up to provide financial and technical support to a
limited number of pilot countries that had a low level of statistical capacity or had recently
emerged from conflict. The experience from these countries would serve to identify what
elements of the program worked well, and what require modifications to improve impact. Once
the findings from the pilot countries had been evaluated, modifications to the approach would be
developed, where needed. Then, the Catalytic Fund would consider inviting other countries to
apply to the SRF-CF. In the meantime, other countries would be encouraged to make
investments in their statistical systems in line with the SRF principles.

10.     The SRF-CF Council is responsible for determining the criteria by which countries were
identified for the pilot phase – both to receive grants from the SRF-CF or technical assistance.
The criteria included current levels of statistical capacity and the extent of the commitment to the
SRF principles. In line with the SRF Charter, the Council identified five countries that were
invited to submit applications for assistance during the pilot phase. These countries were:
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Ghana, Nigeria, and Rwanda -- all IDA
eligible countries. Pilot countries represented a mixture of different levels of statistical
development, different types of statistical systems and different problems and concerns. Two of
the countries – Afghanistan and DRC – were included because they were fragile states emerging
from conflict and presented particular problems relating to the development of statistics. The
SRF-CF Council agreed to invite Lao PDR, Senegal and Ethiopia to apply later in the pilot phase
as some initial lessons had been learned in improving the application process. In light of new
approaches and technologies that had emerged since SRF inception, the pilot phase was also
extended to fund testing the use of innovative approaches to data collection.

The Evaluation

11.      According to the SRF charter, once the programs of the pilot countries were well
underway, progress towards achieving results would be evaluated and assessed to learn what
worked well and what elements would require modifications to increase its impact. With the
evidence from the assessment, the SRF could then be more confidently expanded to include
additional countries. The main purpose of the evaluation would be to assess the experience of the
pilots, to identify the achievements and to recommend changes in policies and practices in order
to improve results.

12.     It is on this basis that the SRF administration is seeking consultants to evaluate the
impact of the SRF-CF pilots, by assessing what has worked well (and less well) vis-à-vis its
objectives, particularly:

                                                194
           a) How successful the SRF-CF has achieved its objectives particularly in:

                   i) Promoting a system-wide approach in statistics at country level;
                   ii) Increasing resources for implementing country owned National Statistical
                       Plans;
                   iii) Linking improvements in the statistical system to the needs of national and
                        sectoral monitoring frameworks and promoting an improved national
                        dialogue and partnership between statistics users and statistical producers;
                   iv) Delivering more efficient and effective aid and technical assistance for
                       strengthening statistical systems and results measurement, through better
                       coordination and alignment to agreed National Statistical Plans and
                       through better alignment to the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness;
                       and
           b) The impact of the in-country donor statisticians in reaching the SRF objectives;
           c) How the governance arrangements and operational practices and procedures are
              working; and
           d) To recommend what changes may be needed to enable the SRF-CF to reach its
              objective (as amended).
Management of the evaluation

13.     The SRF administration at the World Bank will hire 2-3 consultants as outlined below.
The consultants will report to Barbro Hexeberg, SRF Project Coordinator, Development
Economics Data Group (DECDG), liaise with the SRF Administration Unit and provide regular
updates of progress. The Administration Unit will be responsible for providing access to relevant
project documentation.

Timing

14.     The assignment will be carried out between May and September 30, 2013.

Work Program

15.     It is expected that the work program for the team will be as set out below.

      Activities                                                          Date

      Initial review of documentation, consultations and preparation May, 2013
      of the inception report

      Preparation of instruments to be used to collect information        Mid-May, 2013

      Consultations with implementing agencies, donors, TTL and in- Mid-May to June,
      country statisticians                                         2013



                                                195
      Activities                                                          Date

      Analysis of the information collected from field trips and Late June, 2013
      questionnaires etc.

      Drafting of the final report                                        Summer, 2013

      Presentation of Final report                                        September, 2013

      Presentation of evaluation report to SRF Council                    TBD



16.      It is anticipated that a variety of methods will need to be employed to collect information
and get feedback from grant recipients, donors, government officials involved in implementation
of the project and others. The team will be responsible for the design, implementation and
analysis of questionnaires, reporting forms and other instruments. The consultants will be
expected to make two visits to Washington DC and also to undertake field trips to a minimum of
2 of the recipient countries and projects. The countries will be selected in collaboration with the
SRF administration and the program for field trips will be agreed with the World Bank and set
out in the Inception Report. The World Bank will be responsible for making arrangements for the
field trips.

Outputs

17.     The consultant(s) will be required to prepare an inception report within 10 days of the
start of the assignment setting out how the tasks will be carried out, what information will be
required and what kind of information will be prepared. The inception report should also contain
an outline of the final report.

18.     A draft final report will be prepared after 11 weeks of work. This will be reviewed by the
SRF administration, at the World Bank, who will provide comments and feedback within 14
days. The draft report will also be sent to the recipients for comments and validation of the
results and findings. A final report, which will have an executive summary, be based on the
discussions with recipient countries and reflect the views of those consulted, will then be
provided by the consultants within a further fifteen days of work. The lead consultant may be
required to make a presentation on the final report to the SRF Council.

Consultants

19.     The World Bank will hire suitably qualified consultants with skills/experience in the
        following domains:

           An experienced statistician, manager of statistical capacity building projects and
            programs, or someone deeply familiar with statistics and national statistical systems
            in developing countries;

           Knowledge and experience in evaluation of statistical systems;

                                                196
            Knowledge and experience in project management specialist with a background in the
             financial management and procurement aspects of donor funded projects and
             programs.

20.    It is anticipated that a total amount of 45-60 working days would be needed. One
member of the team will be designated team leader. Those bidding for the evaluation will be
required to set out how they propose to undertake the evaluation as well as submitting a financial
proposal.

21.    The contract will cover fees as well as mission costs.

Point(s) of contacts

22.    The World Bank contact points for administrative and financial matters linked to the
execution of this evaluation are:

Name:           Grant J. Cameron
Address:        World Bank 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA
Telephone:      + 1-202 458 0144
Fax:            + 1 202 522 3645
E-mail:         gcameron1@worldbank.org

Name:           Barbro Hexeberg
Address:        World Bank 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA
Telephone:      + 1-202 473 3733
Fax:            + 1 202 522 3645
E-mail:         bhexeberg@worldbank.org




                                               197
                  ANNEX 9: Management’s response to recommendations
                                                 Table 1
                   Management’s response to detailed recommendations
    SRF               Assessment                 Recommendations                         Management’s
  Objectives                                                                              Responses

Promotion of a    Positive findings but    i) One particular aspect that         i) Agree. Terms of references
system-wide      the survey results         may need further consideration        are to be strengthened on this
approach to      suggest that               is the role of the in-country         point. When SRF funds are
statistics       implementation of such     donor statistician on                 utilized, this point will be
                 an approach would pose     coordination.                         included.
                 a moderate to
                                            ii) The World Bank should lead        ii) Agree that this could be a
                 significant challenge.
                                            by example by ensuring that it        criterion for country selection.
                                            has staff in the country office
                                            suitably qualified in statistics or
                                            M&E to serve on the National
                                            Partnership Group and should
                                            encourage other development
                                            partners to do likewise.
Resource          The direct effect of     i) Promote a more systematic          i) Agree. Encourage the
mobilization     the SRF on increases in    exchange of information on            introduction of an annual
                 resources, both from       funding intentions within             ‘Country Report on Support to
                 domestic and external      national partnership groups.          Statistics’ by the National
                 sources, has so far been                                         Partnership Group, or a similar
                 quite modest.                                                    report on domestic and foreign
                                                                                  funding intentions.
                                            ii)        Given the role of          ii)       Continued efforts to
                                            funding in ensuring                   increase resources to statistics
                                            sustainability of the support for     should be encouraged within the
                                            statistics generated by the SRF,      National Partnership Group, as
                                            it is desirable for all concerned     well as domestically with the
                                            parties to increase efforts to        government and Bank teams to
                                            generate additional funding and       include statistical operation in
                                            to actively explore additional        the Country Program Strategy.
                                            resource mobilization methods,        This could be a possible
                                            for example through matched           criterion for SRF funding.
                                            funding arrangements.
                                            iii)     Promote the practice of      iii)      Agree, though it should
                                            producing regular NSDS                be clear that the preparation of
                                            implementation reports to help        NSDS/work program
                                            in monitoring the commitment          implementation progress reports
                                            of resources and their delivery.      is the responsibility of the
                                            The TORs of the in-country            government. TORs will be
                                            donor statisticians should            strengthened on this issue, as
                                            specifically mention the              necessary.
                                            provision of support to national
                                            authorities in the preparation of
                                            NSDS implementation reports.




                                                    198
                                                  iv)      Basket funds as in         iv)       Agree, but the
                                                  Rwanda are proven to be             applicability of basket funds is
                                                  effective for NSDS                  difficult in many countries.
                                                  implementation and the SRF          Another option that can also be
                                                  should be used to encourage         explored is the use of Results
                                                  them taking country                 Based approaches.
                                                  circumstances into
                                                  consideration.
Linking Statistical    In implementing           i) Highlight the importance of      i) SRF guidelines will be
Systems to            countries, the SRF has      the use of statistics in future     modified to include this aspect
National              played a significant role   SRF projects.                       in all projects.
Monitoring            in enhancing the
Frameworks                                        ii)      More research aimed at     ii)      Agree. To make user
                      production, quality and
                                                  improving the quality and           surveys more manageable, their
                      timeliness of data.
                                                  efficacy of user satisfaction       scope and sample size should be
                       Its impact on             surveys. In the interim fully       reduced as necessary. Guidelines
                      enhancing the               support the proposal by the SRF     are to be revised by the end of
                      accessibility and           Administration Unit to lighten      June 2014.
                      usability of data is        the surveys and to be more
                      somewhat less but still     selective on key data users.
                      significant.
                                                  iii)      Opportunities             iii)      This will be considered.
                      .                           should be taken to                  The most likely source of
                                                  critically assess initiatives       information is the user
                                                  to measure the use of               satisfaction survey.
                                                  statistics in the policy
                                                  process.
Promoting              A modest majority of      i) Implementing agencies need to    i) Agree. This should be strongly
Dialogue Between      respondents in              mainstream user satisfaction        encouraged, as part of
Statistics Users      implementing countries      surveys in their work programs,     NSDS/work program
and Statistical       consider the SRF to be      to inform other stakeholders and    implementation process.
Producers             at least somewhat           to publicize the results of these
                      successful in promoting     surveys.
                      this dialogue.
                                                  ii)       Pay more attention to     ii)       This could be part of
                       But users of statistics   user-oriented awareness raising     each government’s
                      generally professed         activities through greater          dissemination policy. SRF
                      ignorance about the         publicity and outreach.             projects could include a “user”
                      status of user                                                  component for outreach
                      satisfaction surveys in                                         activities and training in use of
                      their countries and were                                        statistics.
                      not well informed about
                                                  iii)     Encourage sharing          iii)     To be envisaged within
                      capacity building
                                                  among countries of various          the project training program or
                      activities designed for
                                                  practices such as workshops,        special events organized by the
                      their benefit.
                                                  training of journalists and         SRF Administration Unit.
                                                  mobile education for user
                                                  outreach.
Delivering More        A small majority of       i) The importance of sustaining     i) The strength of the national
Effective Aid         respondents felt that the   these relationships needs to be     partnership group is critical in
                      SRF was successful in       borne in mind, particularly given   this area, as is the presence of an
                      delivering more             the frequent staff rotation.        in-country donor statistician.
                      efficient and effective
                      aid and technical



                                                          199
                    assistance.
                                                 ii)      The SRF                    ii)       Agree. An important
                     Progress in this area      Administration Unit should be       criterion for country selection is
                    depends to a great           kept up-to-date on staff changes    the Bank’s commitment to the
                    extent on personal           by the respective World Bank        SRF approach. The SRF
                    relationships between        offices so as to brief new TTLs     Administration Unit will also
                    members of the local         on the special features of the      pay more attention to
                    development partners.        SRF approach.                       accountability, and will review
                                                                                     Bank operational procedures to
                                                                                     ensure effective and timely
                                                                                     execution of projects.
Other survey-                                                                             Management
 based issues            Assessment                  Recommendations                       Responses

In-country donor     The statisticians have     i) Emphasize the coordinating       i) The terms of references are to
statisticians       been an almost               role of the statisticians, both     be strengthened for statisticians.
                    unqualified success in       between producers and users of
                    facilitating the system-     statistics and among
                    wide approach and            development partners.
                    helping coordinate
                                                 ii)      Fund the post of in-       ii)      Agree, depending on
                    donor activities.
                                                 country donor statistician for a    the country situation and
                     The fact that the          substantial period of time.         financial availability.
                    statistician represented a
                                                 iii)      Consider more than one    iii)     Agree, depending on
                    major donor was seen as
                                                 statistician in larger SRF          the country situation and
                    having a positive impact
                                                 projects subject to funding         financial availability.
                    on their effectiveness.
                                                 availability.
Issues related to    The SRF approach is        i) While retaining the country      i) Move cautiously on this. The
the SRF Charter     certainly broad and          focus of the SRF approach, the      preference is to focus on
                    flexible enough to have      SRF Council should actively         information sharing of SRF
                    a significant impact in      explore the extension of the SRF    experience among pilot
                    each of the diverse          to further regional initiatives.    countries, prospective SRF
                    situations represented                                           countries, and with regional
                    by the three                                                     entities.
                    implementing countries.
                                                 ii) The Council should promote      ii) Agreed, sharing of
                     A small majority of        the sharing of experiences across   experiences should be done at all
                    respondents considered       countries.                          levels.
                    that the expectations of
                                                 iii)     Take steps for the         iii)     The Administration
                    the SRF in terms of its
                                                 Charter to be publicized, so that   Unit will ensure that the Charter
                    impact and timing were
                                                 countries and institutions          remains accessible and visible
                    realistic.
                                                 become more knowledgeable           on the SRF/World Bank web-
                     A rich vein of             about the SRF initiative and the    site.
                    suggestions for regional     approach and principles
                    activities was put           underlying it. This action could
                    forward, featuring           be taken in conjunction with
                    south-south exchange of      more visibility of the SRF on the
                    experiences and the          World Bank internal and
                    sharing of best practices    external websites.
                    and expertise.




                                                        200
SRF governance      The majority of           i) The actions already identified   i) Agree. Must be in line with
arrangements and   respondents in the          by the SRF Administration Unit      the Bank’s rules and procedures.
operational        implementing countries      to improve SRF governance and
practices and      rated their experience in   operational issues should
procedures         implementing the grant,     continue to be pursued.
                   in terms of reporting
                                               ii) Extend the support to           ii) This support will be
                   arrangements and
                                               implementing agencies in            continued, depending on the
                   support from Bank staff,
                                               procurement, financial              time availability of country
                   as either very or
                                               management and overall project      Bank staff.
                   somewhat positive.
                                               management to World Bank
                    Problems faced            staff where necessary.
                   included inadequacy of
                                               iii)     Endeavor to ensure         iii)     Agree. This is an
                   counterpart government
                                               greater continuity in post of       ongoing issue, given the
                   budgetary support, a
                                               TTLs and other staff assigned to    required mobility of staff within
                   lack of coordination,
                                               SRF project implementation.         the Bank. Will implement
                   low levels of capacity,
                                                                                   improved hand-over procedures.
                   and overly bureaucratic
                   processes on the part of    iv)      Promote and pursue         iv)     Agree. Meetings will be
                   both the Bank and           proactive lesson learning and       organized on a regular basis, as
                   national                    experience sharing among the        warranted.
                   administrations.            pilot countries.
                                               v) Modify SRF guidelines to         v) Agree. Guidelines will be
                                               TTLs to stress the point that the   modified.
                                               coverage of broader SRF issues,
                                               as noted in the generic SRF
                                               Results Framework needs to be
                                               taken into account during project
                                               supervision, so as to be able to
                                               respond to SRF requirements.
Other issues        Respondents in all        i) The SRF Council should re-       i) Agree, but given the limited
                   countries expressed the     examine the current notional        resources, there are tradeoffs
                   wish that SRF funding       country specific resource           between greater country
                   should continue, citing     allocation ceiling and consider     coverage and more in-depth
                   achievements to date        upward flexibility in specified     support to specific countries.
                   and tasks yet to be         circumstances
                   addressed




                                                      201
                                                     Table 2
   Management’s response to the proposals on specific issues assuming the extension and
                                 expansion of the SRF
   Issues              Assessment                                 Proposals                          Management’s
                                                                                                      Responses
                                                                                               i) This will be discussed
Country       While country selection                i) Fragile states versus other IDA
                                                                                               with the SRF Council,
selection    principles are clear, the SRF            countries. Based on the current
                                                                                               but preference is to
             Charter is not sufficiently specific     classification by the World Bank
                                                                                               keep flexibility on
             to help the actual decision process      which includes 36 fragile states out
                                                                                               country selection.
             and pilot country selection was          of 82 IDA-eligible countries, it is
             based on a compromise between            suggested that future SRF funding
             analytical and political                 may roughly be allocated 1/3 to
             considerations.                          fragile states and 2/3 to other
                                                      countries.
              The SRF approach, as
             highlighted in the annual reports,       ii)       Open competition versus        ii)       Fully agree.
             revealed a continuing focus on           ‘by invitation’. As the generally
             difficulty, variety and fragility for    positive reactions to the SRF
             the selection of countries. The          approach become better known,
             positive feedback of the SRF from        which would normally be expected
             all 8 pilot countries including post-    to enhance the attractiveness of the
             conflict countries appears to            SRF-CF as support for statistical
             confirm the original belief that the     capacity building, it is the opinion
             SRF approach does work in all            of the Evaluation Team that open
             country circumstances although           competition should be the primary
             more care and support should be          option for SRF funds allocation
             provided to fragile states.              going forward (while
                                                      acknowledging that there may still
              All SRF pilot countries were           exist justification for specific
             ‘invited’ to apply for SRF grants,       countries to be ‘invited’ to apply).
             allowing for greater subjectivity                                                 iii)     Agree in
             compared to an ‘open competition’        iii)      Country selection criteria.
                                                                                               principle with the ‘two -
             approach among all IDA countries         The Evaluation Team believes that a
                                                                                               step procedure’. The
             where defined criteria and               ‘two-step procedure’ would allow
                                                                                               suggested criteria will
             prerequisites play an important          for a more practical approach to
                                                                                               be considered.
             role.                                    country selection for future SRF
                                                      funding. The first-order criteria
                                                      would consist of prerequisites while
                                                      the second-order criteria would help
                                                      to differentiate countries in terms of
                                                      their eligibility for SRF funding.
                                                      This two-step approach would apply
                                                      to both regular IDA-eligible
                                                      countries and to fragile states, with
                                                      some minor adjustments for the
                                                      latter.




                                                      202
The SRF            Translating the generic results       i) A more systemic consideration of       i) Suggested selective
generic results   framework into specific indicators      the two results frameworks. A             generic Results
framework         which are measurable and which          useful way to help bridge the gap         Framework indicators
and country       can be monitored over time has          between the two results frameworks        will be considered.
applicability     proven to be much more                  is to view the SRF generic results
                  challenging than originally             framework as an effort to monitor a
                  expected with data availability         medium- to long-term, system-
                  being the most critical constraint.     focused effort to sustainably
                  While the approach adopted by the       develop the statistical capacity of
                  SRF Administration Unit to delete       countries, while specific project
                  several indicators including most       M&E mechanisms monitor time-
                  of those related to financial           bound, data and action-focused
                  resources for statistics may be         operations. Much more thinking is
                  justified on the basis of data          required to translate the above into
                  unavailability, without information     operational practices.
                  on resources, there is the risk that
                  the sustainability of support
                  provided by the SRF projects may        ii) Greater efforts to obtain             ii) Agree. An indicator
                  not be assured.                         information on budgetary                  on budgetary resources
                                                          commitments and support. Based on         will be re-introduced
                   There has been limited success        the field mission to Nigeria and          into the generic Results
                  by the project teams in blending        Rwanda, the Evaluation Team               Framework.
                  the indicators of the generic results   believes that information on
                  framework with country priorities       resources for statistics is available
                  based on individual country             but does require special efforts to
                  NSDSs.                                  monitor. The Team proposes the re-
                   The results frameworks of the         introduction of some measure of
                  pilot projects have a strong focus      budgetary resource monitoring,
                  on the production of data and their     while acknowledging that various
                  accessibility.                          challenges must be overcome
                                                          including access to information on
                   World Bank’s supervision              resources provided by development
                  mission reports show a relatively       partners.
                  narrow focus on specific project                                                  iii)      Agree. An
                  development objectives and              iii)      Going beyond the
                                                                                                    indicator on trainings
                  intermediate results indicators and     production of and accessibility to
                                                                                                    and activities to
                  limited efforts by supervision          statistics and highlighting user-
                                                                                                    promote the use of
                  teams to attempt to cover the           oriented awareness raising
                                                                                                    statistics will be
                  broader indicators of the SRF           activities. It would be useful for
                                                                                                    introduced into the
                  generic results framework.              future SRF projects to have specific
                                                                                                    generic Results
                                                          provisions for the active support of
                                                                                                    Framework.
                                                          other government agencies outside
                                                          the NSO as well as users of all sorts
                                                          and local development
                                                          partners. This would include
                                                          revising the content of the new
                                                          indicator of the generic results
                                                          framework -- the number of
                                                          government staff trained under the
                                                          SRF -- which should be
                                                          supplemented by ‘total number of
                                                          persons trained’ to reflect training of
                                                          users and emphasize ‘type of
                                                          training’ to distinguish technical
                                                          training from user-oriented and
                                                          other types of training.

                                                          203
Greater                                                                                          i) Present efforts will be
                  The nomination of experienced         i) On World Bank procedures. More
                                                                                                 strengthened.
flexibility in   and committed TTLs and local            awareness of and training in SRF
project          support staff was seen by               principles, norms and procedures
implementatio    respondents to the questionnaire        was needed on the part of both Bank
n and to         survey as key to successful project     staff and government officials in the
enhance          implementation.                         SRF project team.
greater
ownership by      The       questionnaire      survey   ii) Greater ownership by countries      ii)      Agree.
countries and    showed that ‘ownership’ is most         and the World Bank. Discussions on
the World        pronounced among NSOs and is            country ownership, which is at the
Bank             much less evident among the other       core of the SRF approach, need to
operations       government agencies and the users       highlight the importance of the SRF
units            or potential users of statistics.       being ‘owned’ by a broad range of
                  The      Evaluation     Team’s        stakeholders and not exclusively by
                 impressions indicate a wide range       the government statistics office. The
                 of interest and involvement by          promotion of more systematic
                 World Bank country teams in the         dialogue between producers and
                 SRF projects.                           users of statistics would go a long
                                                         way in promoting ownership for
                  The      review    of     country     local stakeholders. Having the
                 experiences shows that there may        degree of World Bank support to
                 well be a case for linkage of SRF       statistical capacity building in the
                 grants with IDA credits where the       country as a prerequisite for country
                 IDA funds are meant to address          selection could help in improving
                 high-level, non-technical concerns,     the situation.
                 while more technical topics are
                 focused     on    in    the    SRF      iii)     Linkages with matching         iii)     Agree.
                 project. Properly combined, the         IDA credits. More in-depth
                 two could in principle be very          assessment of the experiences of
                 effective.                              Ghana and Nigeria where efforts
                                                         have been made to combine the SRF
                                                         with IDA funds -- in parallel for
                                                         Ghana and sequentially in the case
                                                         of Nigeria.




                                                         204
