                                        88448




KNOWLEDGE
CLIMATEACTION
PROCEEDINGS & RECOMMENDATIONS FROM
BE THE MOVEMENT
An International Workshop

November 20, 2013
Warsaw, Poland




                                     United Nations
                                     Alliance on Climate
                                     Change Education,
                                     Training and
                                     Public Awareness
©2014 Connect4Climate                                REPORT AUTHORS
www.connect4climate.org
                                                     Max Thabiso Edkins
World Bank Group, Italian Ministry of Environment    Lucia Grenna
All rights reserved.                                 Caryle Murphy
                                                     Simona Palummo
This work is a product of the staff of The World     Leszek Jan Sibilski
Bank with external contributions.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect
the views of the World Bank Group, its Board
of Executive Directors, or the governments they
represent.

Because the World Bank Group encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may
be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution
to this work is given. Any queries on rights and
licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be
addressed to Connect4Climate, World Bank Group,
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA,
Email: connect4climate@worldbank.org

Attribution – Please cite the work as follows:
Connect4Climate. 2014. Knowledge4Climate Action:
Proceedings and Recommendations from Be The
Movement, An International Workshop. Washington,
DC: Connect4Climate, World Bank Group.

Front cover photos from Connect4Climate
competitions: Adil Moumane, Laurent Pignot, Adela
Nistora, Georges Tadonki, Stephanie Rabemiafara,
Lana Wong, Adela Nistora, Max Thabiso Edkins,
Ngalim Njaiwo, Kristina Bychkova
                                                      INDEX




4	     FOREWORD:                                39	   WORKSHOP HIGHLIGHTS:
	      MOVEMENT FOR                             	     CLIMATE INTERVIEW, PECHA KUCHA
	      CLIMATE ACTION                           	     AND PANEL DISCUSSION
                                                40	   Eliza Anyangwe and Zbigniew Kundzewicz
                                                41	   Pecha Kucha Presentations
7	     CONNECT4CLIMATE:                         44	   Movement Makers Panel Debate
	      WHO WE ARE
10	    Acknowledgements
                                                47	   MOTIVATIONAL SPEECHES:
                                                	     CALLS FOR CLIMATE ACTION
12	    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:                       48	   Yvo de Boer
	      BE THE MOVEMENT                          49	   Nick Nuttall
                                                50	   Peter Bakker
                                                51	   Stefan Maard
19 	   THE GLOBAL CONTEXT:
	      UNDERSTANDING THE
	      CLIMATE CHALLENGE                        53	   YOUTH PLEDGE:
                                                	     RIGHT HERE,
                                                	     RIGHT NOW,
23	    BREAKOUT SESSIONS:                       	     TOGETHER
	      FIVE VITAL NEEDS OF
	      THE CLIMATE CHANGE
	      MOVEMENT                                 57	   WORKSHOP FINDINGS
24	    NEED 1. Messaging for New Audiences      	     AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
26	    NEED 2. Empowering Educators             	     TAKING THE MOVEMENT FORWARD
27	    NEED 3. Innovating Campaign Strategies
28	    NEED 4. Considering Costs
31	    NEED 5. Leading for Solutions            61	   CONCLUSION:
                                                	     WE HAVE TO CONNECT

35	    RACHEL KYTE:
	      EVERY INDIVIDUAL
	      CAN MAKE A DIFFERENCE
FOREWORD:
MOVEMENT FOR
CLIMATE ACTION
Climate change is the biggest challenge of our generation.

In 2013, the World Bank Group raised the alarm in its report, Turn Down the
Heat: Climate Extremes, Regional Impacts, and the Case for Resilience.
It warned that if we continue on our current course, the earth will warm 2° degrees
Celsius (3.6° Fahrenheit) above pre-industrial levels in just 20 to 30 years from
now. The poorest will be hit hardest.

Climate change is undermining the Bank’s mission of eliminating extreme poverty.
This is why, under the leadership of Jim Yong Kim, President of the World Bank
Group, the Bank has made addressing climate change a top priority.

Now is the time to strengthen global climate action and raise the level of ambition.
There are no more excuses. The evidence is in front of our eyes. The science is
clear. The facts are known. What we have to do is find a way to connect so that
we can be more effective in everything we do. Each and every one of us must
step up to the challenge. We have to ask ourselves, ‘What am I prepared to do?’
We have to be focused, and we have to be disciplined on the most important
things that need to be done.

The World Bank, in cooperation with Italy’s Ministry of the Environment, supports
Connect4Climate’s efforts to bolster the global movement dedicated to climate
action. One of its significant initiatives was Be the Movement, an international
workshop held in November 2013 in cooperation with the University of Warsaw on
the sidelines of COP19. It was an inspiring gathering of climate change activists
and concerned citizens. They exchanged ideas and strategies on how to fortify
the climate action movement.

I hope you enjoy this summary of the workshop’s events and its recommendations.
I urge you to take them to heart and put them into practice.

Before it is too late, let us Connect4Climate.




		      Rachel Kyte
		      World Bank Group Vice President and Special Envoy for Climate Change




                                                                                  5
photo credit: Robert Denton
CONNECT4CLIMATE:
WHO WE ARE
photo credit: Leigh Vogel/Connect4Climate




                                       Connect4Climate is a World Bank Group initiative aimed at raising global
                                       awareness about climate change and inspiring climate action. The World Bank
                                       Group, the Italian Ministry of Environment, and the Global Environment
                                       Facility (GEF) founded the initiative in 2011.

                                       The objectives of Connect4Climate involve connecting with existing climate
                                       initiatives and activities and amplifying the global dialogue on climate change.
                                       This helps advance the global climate movement, generates innovative solutions,
                                       brings together thought leaders on climate change, and enables new audiences
                                       to be inspired.

                                       Connect4Climate fosters connections between organizations to create strong,
                                       active networks. The leaders of this initiative believe strongly in the creation of
                                       what one study on the global future called “creative coalitions,” which unite many
1. Now for the Long Term: The          stakeholders in acting toward their common goal.1
Report of the Oxford Martin
Commission for Future Generations,
(Oxford, UK: Oxford Martin School,     Above all, the initiative seeks to reach new, untapped audiences who may never
University of Oxford, October 2013),   have heard about climate change. A primary target audience for engagement is
7. http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.
uk/downloads/commission/Oxford_
                                       young people, who are powerful agents of social change and whose creativity
Martin_Now_for_the_Long_Term.pdf       and energy are needed to strengthen the climate action movement.

                                       Through all these efforts, Connect4Climate aims to create the social currency
                                       and political capital that will result in effective and enforceable policies for climate
                                       change mitigation at the highest governmental levels.



CONNECT4CLIMATE’S                      >	 Communicating about climate change and sharing knowledge on the science
CORE ACTIVITIES                        of climate change, the need for behavioral changes to protect the environment and
INVOLVE                                mitigate climate change, and the threat posed by climate change to the Bank’s
                                       primary mission of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity;

                                       >	 Providing access to research and educating the public on sustainability,
                                       carbon footprints, and water consumption, with particular attention to the areas of
                                       energy, food, automotive, fashion, film, tourism, sports, and urban environments;

                                       >	 Advocating for urgent action in mitigating climate change by individuals,
                                       communities, local governments, private sector, and senior national government
                                       policy makers;

8
                     >	 Establishing partnerships. Connect4Climate now has approximately 180
                     partnerships, which include more than 80 international and local nongovernmental
                     organizations (NGOs) and approximately 50 academic institutions, as well as 22
                     media networks, 17 multilateral organizations, and 10 private sector companies.



CONNECT4CLIMATE      >	 Creating an interactive online presence with Connect4Climate’s website and
STRATEGIES FOR       social media such as Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, Vimeo and Instagram;
THE CLIMATE ACTION
MOVEMENT             >	 Staging high profile international art, photo, and video competitions, such as
                     Action4Climate, which is soliciting short documentaries about climate change
                     from young aspiring filmmakers. The entries will be judged by a jury of renowned
                     filmmakers headed by Italian director Bernardo Bertolucci;

                     >	 Establishing a presence at notable international events such as movie festivals
                     like the Palm Springs International Film Festival, United Nations Framework
                     Convention on Climate Change Conferences of the Parties (UNFCCC COP)
                     annual meetings, World Bank Spring and Annual meetings, Ecocity conferences,
                     and fashion industry gatherings such as Milan Fashion Week;

                     >	 Organizing knowledge-sharing events to examine and promote best practices
                     and lessons learned on climate change communication, as well as to develop
                     ideas for hopeful, positive solutions that can empower individuals, corporate
                     bodies, and government entities to mitigate climate change and build resilience.
                     International workshops, such as Right Here Right Now at the World Bank
                     Headquarters, Alcantara Dialogues Re-Think, Re-Design, Re-New, and Be
                     the Movement, serve as models for future knowledge-sharing events.

                     This document is an extended report on Connect4Climate’s Be the Movement
                     workshop activities, findings, and recommendations.




                                                                                                     9
photo credit: Kamil Leziak




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS              Connect4Climate and the University of Warsaw thank all of the speakers and
                              moderators for their powerful and insightful messages.

                              Eliza Anyangwe           Sepo Hachigonta            Irene Peccetti
                              Peter Bakker             Jamie Henn                 Kelly Rigg
                              Geoff Barnard            Wael Hmaidan               Jean-Pierre Roux
                              David Cadman             Michelle Kovacevic         Arno Scharl
                              Bruce Campbell           Zbigniew Kundzewicz        Camilla Torpe
                              Corrado Clini            Rachel Kyte                Moritz Weigel
                              Tan Copsey               Stefan Maard               Michael Williams
                              Marion Davis             Antonio Navarra
                              Yvo de Boer              Nick Nuttall




CONNECT4CLIMATE                                        Professor Alojzy Nowak, Vice Rector of the University
WOULD ALSO LIKE                                        of Warsaw, for his enthusiasm and important closing
TO THANK:                                              remarks.




                                                       Professor Andrzej Lisowski, Dean of the Faculty of
                                                       Geography and Regional Studies of the University of
                                                       Warsaw, for his support.




                                                       Professor Krzysztof Blazejczyk, for his valuable help
                                                       and dedication.



Photo credits: Tomasz Wawer

10
Connect4Climate’s team is acknowledged for organizing the workshop, with
special thanks given to the following team members:

Max Thabiso Edkins
Lucia Grenna
Caryle Murphy
Simona Palummo
Leszek Jan Sibilski




Connect4Climate and the University of Warsaw thank all the participants, in
particular the students who took the pledge for climate action, and the following
volunteers who helped make the Be the Movement workshop a success:

Łukasz Błaszczyk           Grzegorz Kalinski           Julia Podgórska
Brygida Borkowska          Bozena Kicinska             Michał Pogodziński
Maja Bujalska              Natalia Kłopotekn           Joanna Popławska
Renata Całka               Ewelina Korcz               Weronika Rucińska
Aneta Cholewińska          Weronika Kuna               Kinga Rucinska
Paula Cygańska             Kamil Leziak                Agata Sawicka
Ada Dobrzyńska             Katarzyna Lindner-          Daria Sawicka
Agata Drązikowska          Cendrowska                  Magda Szczepankowska
Żaneta Drożdżewska         Monika Lisowska             Jakub Tekielski
Agnieszka Floriańczyk      Kinga Nelken                Piotr Wielecki
Martyna Golenia            Maria Niedźwiecka           Mateusz Wielgosz
Katarzyna Grabowska        Magdalena Parzniewska       Elwira Zmudzka
Ewelina Jonczyk            Zuzanna Piszczako




                                                                               11
photo credit: Kamil Leziak
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY:
BE THE MOVEMENT
     Connect4Climate and the University of Warsaw co-hosted Be the Movement,
     an international workshop addressing the means of expanding and strengthening
     the global climate change movement during the November 2013 United Nations-
     sponsored climate change talks (UNFCCC COP19) in the Polish capital.

     The daylong workshop focused on strategies for attracting greater participation,
     especially from youth, in the movement.

     The event’s dominant theme – expressed in its title, Be the Movement – was
     that each person can make a difference when it comes to climate change by
     taking individual actions in the mitigation of global warming.

     The workshop drew more than 500 attendees representing 50 countries,
     including prominent climate change activists and scientists, representatives of
     the media, private sector companies, NGOs, and international organizations, as
     well as students and concerned citizens. The workshop also reached an online
     audience of more than 300,000 Twitter users in a day.

     The event took place at an important stage in the decades-long effort of building
     a global movement dedicated to meeting the challenge of climate change and
     addressing the looming environmental threats that it poses.

     Although much has been accomplished, much more needs to be done, as is
     evident in an assessment of the movement’s current situation in the Global
     Context: Understanding The Climate Challenge section of this report.

     Lucia Grenna, Program Manager of Connect4Climate, said in her opening
     remarks to the workshop:


                                “The question is … how do we
                                get into people’s daily behavior?
                                How do we get to the people
                                who don’t know, who don’t care,
                                or maybe are just waiting
                                for a better solution?”

     During the workshop’s morning session, 85 participants broke into small
     brainstorming groups to devise creative ways of strengthening five vital areas of
     concern to the climate change movement.

     These areas include communicating climate change to new audiences,
     empowering educators to give environmental information, innovating new
     climate change campaign strategies, considering costs (and demonstrating that
     economic development does not conflict with climate change mitigation policies),
     and inspiring bold leadership to spark climate solutions.

     These group discussions provided valuable insights that are summarized in
     the section Breakout Sessions: Five Vital Needs of the Climate Change
     Movement.
     	

14
                                    Rachel Kyte, World Bank Group Vice President and Special Envoy on Climate
                                    Change, gave the workshop’s keynote address. She spoke of the need to
                                    encourage more young people to be involved in the climate change movement
                                    and stressed each individual’s “power of one” to have an impact on local
                                    communities. Her remarks are summarized in the section Rachel Kyte: Every
                                    Individual Can Make a Difference.

                                    An interview with University of Poznan climatology Professor Zbigniew Kundzewicz
                                    came next, followed by 10 presentations by climate change experts and a panel
                                    discussion with leading figures in the climate change movement. These events
                                    are summarized in the section Workshop Highlights: Climate Interview,
                                    Pecha Kucha, and Panel Discussion.

                                    Kelly Rigg, Director of the Global Call for Climate Action, was on the panel
                                    discussion. She highlighted the challenge of tackling climate change and
                                    emphasized the need to connect all actors in an urgent acceleration of global
                                    action to mitigate global warming. Rigg said, referring to the IPCC’s Fifth
2. See http://www.ipcc.ch/report/
ar5/ to access the reports
                                    Assessment Report issued in September 2013:2

                                                               “We are running our of time.
                                                               We need to reach people
                                                               who are probably increasingly
                                                               concerned about [climate
                                                               change] but don’t quite know
                                                               what to do or how to engage.
                                                               We all need to do the right thing,
                                                               and we need to all play a role.”

                                    Other workshop sessions were devoted to presentations from climate change
                                    activists who gave first-hand accounts of their experiences in spreading climate
                                    change awareness and offered advice about the way forward. Such sharing
                                    events are a major component of Connect4Climate’s strategy to “connect the
                                    dots” around the globe and build up empowered networks.

                                    The section Motivational Speeches: Calls for Climate Action provides an
                                    overview of the climate change professionals’ remarks. Nick Nuttall, Director of
                                    the Division of Communications and Public Information of the UN Environmental
                                    Programme, emphasized the financial and economic aspects of cliamte change:


                                                               We need to move beyond GDP
                                                               [gross domestic product]. We
                                                               need to change the rules of the
                                                               game. The rules are not working
                                                               in favour of climate change.”
                                                                                                                  15
photo credit: Tomasz Wawer



                             Displaying the enthusiasm for climate change action that the workshop had
                             kindled in them, three Polish student representatives read a pledge of action
                             before the packed auditorium on the campus of the University of Warsaw:


                                                       “We … have a duty to tackle the
                                                       climate change emergency right
                                                       now and to change our lifestyles
                                                       accordingly.”

                             Picking up the workshop’s theme of Be the Movement, the students declared:


                                                       “Whatever sacrifices we have
                                                       to make now, we firmly believe
                                                       our passion for this movement
                                                       will spur global action to
                                                       secure better livelihoods for
                                                       humankind.”

                             The youth’s contributions can be found in the section Youth Pledge: Right
                             Here, Right Now, Together.

                             The section Workshop Findings and Recommendations: Taking the
                             Movement Forward outlines the best practices and recommendations of the
                             workshop.

                             Attendees left the workshop energized and with a renewed sense that there
                             are many new avenues to explore in their urgent challenge of broadening and


16
invigorating the global climate change movement. This optimism, as presented
in the Conclusion: We Have to Connect, is important to engage youth and a
broader audience in the movement.

As Vice President Kyte emphasized,


                          “This is about building
                          a movement. You’re the
                          movement … If you look at
                          the examples of the women’s
                          movement, of the gay rights’
                          movements, of the movements
                          that have transformed within
                          a generation not just what is
                          happening in the world, but
                          the way in which young people
                          think about what their lives
                          might be, then every single
                          person has made a difference.”




                                                                          17
photo credit: Kamil Leziak
THE GLOBAL CONTEXT:
UNDERSTANDING THE
CLIMATE CHALLENGE
photo credit: Tomasz Wawer




                                       The global climate change movement is strong and growing. Many developments
                                       are stimulating growth in climate change awareness and action. Yet, much still
                                       needs to be done to balance the climate and help citizens adapt to the changes
                                       that they are already witnessing and will see more of in the future.

                                       The science on climate change has become clearer than ever. The IPCC’s Fifth
3. See http://www.ipcc.ch/report/      Assessment Report 3 clarified that climate change is caused by human activities
ar5/ to access the reports
                                       and that countries have to reduce global emissions quickly to have a chance of
4. For example: Turn Down The          achieving a warming target of less than 2°C by the end of the century.
Heat: Why a 4°C Warmer World
Should Be Avoided (Washington,
DC: World Bank, 2012). http://
                                       In addition, research conducted by the World Bank Group4 and many others
documents.worldbank.org/curated/       confirmed the scale of the climate threat and suggested that the situation may in
en/2012/11/17097815/turn-down-
                                       some ways be more challenging than previously thought.
heat-4%C2%B0c-warmer-world-
must-avoided
                                       In a 2°C warmer world the Earth will have fundamentally changed, in particular
5. Turn Down The Heat: climate
extremes, regional impacts, and
                                       the global water cycle is being affected, resulting in increased floods and more
the case for resilience (Washington,   extreme droughts. A 2°C warmer world would trap the poorest in extreme poverty
DC: World Bank, 2013). http://         turning back decades of achievements in development5. If climate change is not
documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/2013/06/17862361/turn-down-         confronted, extreme poverty will not be eradicated.
heat-climate-extremes-regional-
impacts-case-resilience-full-report
                                       In the words of World Bank President Jim Yong Kim, 6
6. World Bank President Jim Yong
Kim, July 10, 2013: Od-Ed: Ending
Poverty Includes Tackling Climate
Change (Washington, DC: World                                     “I am convinced
Bank, 2013). http://www.worldbank.
org/en/news/opinion/2013/07/10/
op-ed-ending-poverty-includes-
                                                                  we can end extreme poverty
                                                                  in this generation.
tackling-climate-change




                                                                  But, … we won’t get there
                                                                  without taking immediate,
                                                                  decisive steps to slow
                                                                  climate change.
                                                                  Join us in this fight.”

20
One of the most urgent challenges facing countries across the world today is
how to achieve economic prosperity and development while combating climate
change.  The economic risks and opportunities that arise from climate change
need to be better articulated and communicated to all sectors of society.

The debate over what countries should do to mitigate climate change appears
to be stuck at the political level under the UNFCCC negotiations. As a result,
climate action may need to be driven from the bottom up to influence the political
process. Individuals, businesses, towns, and cities have the opportunity to drive
climate action.

By making their needs heard and by leading local actions, the grassroots
movement for climate action can advance on a global scale and realize an
international political agreement by 2015.

Many of the climate solutions are already known, calls for climate action have
been made at the highest levels, and still more action is needed on the ground.




                                                                               21
photo credit: Tomasz Wawer
BREAKOUT SESSIONS:
FIVE VITAL NEEDS OF
THE CLIMATE CHANGE
MOVEMENT
photo credit: Tomasz Wawer




                                     NEED 1. MESSAGING FOR NEW AUDIENCES
7. Maxwell Boykoff and Ami
Nacu-Schmidt. World Newspaper
                                     Overall, direct media coverage of the phrases “climate change” and “global
Coverage of Climate Change           warming” has decreased after a huge spike in 2009 (see Figure 1).7
or Global Warming, 2004-2013.
(Boulder: Cooperative Institute
for Research in Environmental        Since then, there have been jumps in coverage around the annual UNFCCC COP
Sciences, Center for Science         meetings. Nonetheless, there has been a sustained, gradual increase in the total
and Technology Policy Research,
University of Colorado, 2013).
                                     number of media articles on topics related to climate change and global warming,
http://sciencepolicy.colorado.       in particular, articles covering energy issues or extreme weather events.8
edu/media_coverage (accessed
December 2013).
                                     Media coverage that does not link topics to climate change is an issue that
8. Douglas Fischer. Climate          needs to be addressed. Efforts must be made to influence media coverage of the
Coverage Soars in 2013, Spurred
by Energy, Weather. Daily Climate,
                                     impacts of climate change so that it includes discussion or reference to the core
January 2, 2014,                     problem of climate change. In this way, the urgency of mitigating climate change
http://www.dailyclimate.org/tdc-     will be communicated to new, untapped audiences.
newsroom/2014/01/2013-climate-
change-reporting (accessed
January 2014).                       Tan Copsey and Eliza Anyangwe led the small group discussion on ways to
                                     communicate more effectively with new audiences to draw them into the climate
                                     change movement and thus expand its reach. They concluded that the following
                                     are key aspects to any successful climate change campaign:

                                     > Knowing your audience is crucial. Whether the audience is rural,
                                     urban, middle class, low income, coastal, desert-dwelling, highly educated,
                                     illiterate, professional, or agricultural will determine the campaign’s theme. The
                                     audience’s geographic location must also be considered, as well as any external
                                     (governmental) or internal (psychological, social and cultural) constraint on the
                                     audience’s ability to act on climate change.

                                     > Determining the most appropriate communication channels (face-to-face
                                     conversations, television, radio, social media, posters) and formats (social media,
                                     contests, songs, radio dramas, TV reality shows, public service announcements,
                                     training courses) depends on the target audience.

                                     > Asking the targeted audience about their personal, everyday experiences
                                     with climate change is crucial to the development of a meaningful campaign theme.
                                     The audience’s experiences should set the campaign’s theme, for example the
                                     community’s health or homes endangered by climate change, or future threats to
                                     local agriculture or water supplies.


24
                                     100




                                       0
                                           2004           2006             2008             2010             2012              2014


                                               Africa              Middle East                South America, Africa
                                               Asia                North America
                                               Europe              Oceania




                                     300
  Number of Articles per newspaper




                                     200




                                     100




                                       0
                                        2004            2006             2008             2010            2012              2014

                                           Africa   Asia       Europe      Middle East      North America        Oeania
                                           South America, Africa


9. Maxwell Boykoff and Ami
Nacu-Schmidt. World Newspaper                                                                                    FIG. 1 Study shows
Coverage of Climate Change                                                                                       downward trend in media
or Global Warming, 2004-2013.
(Boulder: Cooperative Institute                                                                                  coverage of climate
for Research in Environmental                                                                                    change since 2007, with a
Sciences, Center for Science
and Technology Policy Research,
                                                                                                                 spike in 2009 9
University of Colorado, 2013).
http://sciencepolicy.colorado.
edu/media_coverage (accessed
December 2013).




                                                        > Choosing partners (individuals, agencies, politicians, business leaders,
                                                        community organizers, academics, NGOs, local media) who are influential with
                                                        the targeted audience can help make the campaign message more trustworthy
                                                        and effective.

                                                        > Including real, practical, and easily implemented solutions to environmental
                                                        problems in the campaign message is important. It is crucial that these types of
                                                        solutions give communities ways in which their lives and work can be improved.



                                                                                                                                        25
                                      NEED 2. EMPOWERING EDUCATORS

                                      School and university curricula have increasingly included environmental issues
10. Princeton Review 2012 - Green     in the past few decades. For example, in 2012 the Princeton Review10 reported
Rating Honor Roll for Schools
                                      that 642 U.S. institutions of higher education offered degrees in environmental
Includes Four University Affiliate
Schools, National Council for         sustainability. In addition, the World Bank has just launched its first climate change
Science and the Environment,          Massive Open Online Course (MOOC).11
August 11, 2011. http://ncseonline.
org/princeton-review-2012-green-
rating-honor-roll-schools-includes-   Higher institutions have taken a leadership role in climate mitigation and are
4-university-affiliate-schools        now doing the same on climate adaptation. Although the trend is encouraging,
11. World Bank Massive Open           educators, particularly those in schools without access to climate knowledge,
Online Course on Climate Change       need to be empowered to teach the fundamentals of climate change and propose
http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/
stories/take-mooc-climate-change-
                                      community-based solutions toward mitigating and adapting to climate impacts.
starting-january-27-2014
See also: http://www.                 In some countries, educators are hindered in their efforts to teach climate change
usatodayeducate.com/staging/
index.php/pulse/new-degrees-          by outsiders (parents or politicians) who object to the content of the instruction,
focus-on-climate-change-              particularly when it focuses on ways human activities are causing global warming.
sustainability
                                      In such instances, educators need back-up support from well-informed outsiders
12. Teachers Endure Balancing         such as their administrative superiors, local media, and scientists.12
Act Over Climate Change
Curriculum, May 2, 2012, PBS
Newshour. Transcript available        The U.S.-based National Association of Geoscience Teachers (NAGT) states that
at: http://www.pbs.org/               climate change is “best taught in an interdisciplinary manner, integrating the many
newshour/bb/climate-change-
jan-june12-teachclimate_05-
                                      relevant sciences into a holistic curriculum approach,” adding that “a current and
02/?utm_medium=twitter&utm_           comprehensive level of understanding of the science and teaching of climate
source=twitterfeed                    change is essential to effective education.”13
13. NAGT position statement
available at http://nagt.org/nagt/    Krzysztof Blazejczyk chaired the small group discussion on empowering
policy/ps-climate.html
                                      educators. Participants concluded the following:

                                      >	 School children are one of the audiences most interested in climate change.
                                      Helping educators transfer climate change knowledge to their young students
                                      should be an essential goal of the movement.
                                      	
                                      >	 Children are an important audience because they are likely to educate their
                                      parents and make them change their environmental habits. Like children, senior
                                      citizens are often hearing about the climate phenomena for the first time in their
                                      lives.

                                      >	 Contrary to popular belief, children are capable of understanding
                                      complicated environmental processes if the language used is comprehensible
                                      to them.

                                      >	 The most efficient method of introducing environmental knowledge
                                      is combining scientific information with emotional content.

                                      >	 There should be an emphasis on the practical side and on showing possible
                                      courses of action to mitigate and adapt to climate change.

                                      >	 By combining elements of environmental awareness with other school subjects,
                                      pupils will discuss the topic more often. For this reason, teachers should be
                                      encouraged to show connections between their academic discipline
                                      and the environment. Unfortunately, there are many reasons why teachers do
                                      not do this. Often, they do not acquire knowledge beyond their discipline, they
                                      fail to keep up-to-date on climate change science, or they are overloaded with
                                      curriculum material and administrative duties.



26
                                     >	 Teachers and parents should be role models for good environmental
                                     stewardship so that what children learn in the classroom becomes practical
                                     and second nature to them.

                                     >	 Social media can raise environmental awareness among youth, and portals
                                     like Facebook and Twitter are some of the best ways to reach youth, arouse
                                     their curiosity, and inspire them to act. However, social media’s ability to motivate
                                     action is limited; therefore, other methods are needed to produce climate action.




                                     NEED 3. INNOVATING CAMPAIGN STRATEGIES

                                     Awareness of the threats posed by climate change has increased. This fact was
                                     clear in a global 2013 survey by Pew Research Center. The survey showed that,
                                     overall, climate change took top place as a global threat, although residents of
                                     some regions, such the United States, Europe, and the Middle East, said they
                                     believed other threats were more dangerous (see Figure 2).14 The increased
14. Climate Change and Financial     awareness may be linked to the growing severe impacts of climate change.
Instability Seen as Top Global
Threats (Washington, DC: Pew
Research Center, June 24,            Campaigns aimed at climate change action should advance this trend to
2013). http://www.pewglobal.
org/2013/06/24/climate-change-
                                     encourage a global acceptance of climate change as a leading threat to this
and-financial-instability-seen-      generation.
as-top-global-threats/ (accessed
January 2014).

15. Ibid.
                                                                                                    FIG. 2 Pew Research
                                                                                                    Center survey finds
                                                                                                    global climate change
                                                                                                    as top concern.15



                                                Median % saying each is a major threat to their countries

 Global Threats                                    U.S.   Canada Europe       Middle     Asia/   Latin      Africa      ALL
                                                                               East     Pacific America              COUNTRIES
                                                    %        %         %        %         %       %          %          %

 Global climate change                              40       54        54       42        56        65      54         54

 Int’l financial instability                        52       45        63       54        49        49      54         52

 Islamic extremist groups                           56       41        55       41        47        31      56         49

 Iran’s nuclear program                             54       44        56       41        44        39      41         44

 N. Korea’s nuclear program                         59       47        52       17        46        38      39         42

 U.S. power and influence                           23       23        20       36        42        33      21         27

 China’s power and influence                        44       34        38       17        29        23      26         27

 Political instability in Pakistan                  37       22        31       9         24        20      25         22


                                                                                                                            27
                                         David Millard chaired the small group that considered ways to enhance movement
                                         strategies and to identify missing ingredients in those strategies. They concluded
                                         the following:

                                         >	 Effective campaigns must be sustainable, and short-term events are better
                                         than long-term ones because they attract more people, keep their attention, and
                                         engage them successfully in projects. However, short-term events should be
                                         repeated at regular intervals and be integrated into larger, long-term campaigns
                                         because these enduring campaigns are the only ones that can permanently
                                         change society’s environmental attitudes.

                                         >	 Climate change awareness should begin in primary schools because positive
                                         attitudes are easy to shape in children.

                                         >	 Campaigns should be designed specific to their audience. For example,
                                         business communities should be targeted with campaigns that are different from
                                         campaigns directed at nonbusiness audiences.

                                         >	 The most successful campaigns work from the bottom to the top and
                                         give high priority to personal connections and relationships. This strategy
                                         works because people tend to trust information coming from friends and are
                                         more likely to participate in projects with friends.

                                         >	 Internet-only campaigns are sometimes ineffective because they do not
                                         reach low-income or poor communities who generally suffer most from climate
                                         change’s harmful effects.

                                         >	 Visuals that bring home the tangible detriments of climate change are
                                         important for getting communities to accept the message of any campaign.




16. Adam B. Smith and Richard W.         NEED 4. CONSIDERING COSTS
Katz, U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather
And Climate Disasters: Data
Sources, Trends, Accuracy And            There is increasing awareness of the costs of climate change, in particular, the
Biases. Natural Hazards, 67, no. 2       huge financial impacts of extreme weather and climate disasters. Since the 1980s,
(2013): 387–410. http://link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/s11069 -013-
                                         the number of billion-dollar climate disasters has increased from an average of
0566-5                                   about two per year to a high of 14 in 2011 (see Figure 3).16
17. PwC: Supply Chains
Threatened by Six-Degree                 Companies such as PricewaterhouseCoopers have released studies warning
Global Warming. Environmental            business communities of impending significant risks to assets as a result of
Leaders, November 5, 2012.
http://www.environmentalleader.
                                         climate change.17
com/2012/11/05/pwc-preparing-
for-climate-change-as-competitive-       On another note, carbon prices have been on a downward trend, thus increasing
advantage/ (accessed January
2014).
                                         the attractiveness of carbon-emitting fuels. From highs in 2005 and 2008, the
                                         price of carbon in the European Union has fallen below €5 (6.91 USD) per ton of
18. Mapping Carbon Pricing
Initiatives: Developments and
                                         equivalent carbon dioxide in 2013 (CO2e; see Figure 4).18
Prospects. Washington, DC: World
Bank and Ecofys, 2013. http://www.       This trend should be reversed, and the adoption of a higher and stable carbon
ecofys.com/files/files/world-bank-
ecofys-2013-mapping-carbon-
                                         price should be encouraged to help businesses and governments take action on
pricing-initiatives.pdf                  climate change.

28
    Daily prices
                                                                                                                                                                      European Union Allowance
           € 30
                                                                         Peak of demand                                                                               Secondary Certified Emission Reductions
                                                                         in “sellers market”
                                                   14                                                                                                                                                                             200
                 € 25
          Number of Events Exceeding $ 1 Billion



                                                   12                                                                                                                              EU debt crisis & oversupply–in175




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Damage Amounts in Billions of Dollars
                                                                                                                   2 years of relatively low
                                                                                                                  volatility and stable prices                                  Kyoto Protocol and EU ETS post-2012
                 € 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             – 150
                                                   10

                 € 15                                                                                                                                                                                              – 125
                                                   8                                                                                                                                                CERs & EUAs decouple
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ETS rescue plan vs.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CERs & ERUs issuance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             – 100
                 € 10
                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             – 75
                          €5                       4               2008–2009 ﬁnancial crisis
                                                                    and economic downturn                                                                                                                                    – 50
                                                   2
                          €0                                                                                                                                                                                                 – 25

                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                           9
                                                                                                09
                                                                         8
                                                             08




                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                   10




                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                           2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                           9
                                                                                  9
                                                        8




                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              –0




                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 1
                                                                                                                                                             Apr 1
                                                                                                                                                    Jan 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oct 1
                                                                                                      Oct 0
                                                                    Oct 0




                                                                                                                                           Oct 1




                                                                                                                                                                                               Apr 1
                                                                                                                                                                                      Jan 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Apr 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan 1
                                                                                      Apr 0
                                                                             Jan 0
                                                   Apr 0




                                                                                                                        Apr 1
                                                                                                               Jan 1




                                                                                                                                                                      July




                                                                                                                                                                                                        July
                                                                                               July
                                                            July




                                                                                                                                  July




                                                        1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010

                                                                                                                        Years (1980 - 2011)
19. See Adam B. Smith and Richard
W. Katz, U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather
And Climate Disasters: Data                                                                                                                                                                                     FIG. 3 Billion dollar
Sources, Trends, Accuracy And
                                                                                                                                                                                                                weather/climate
Biases. Natural Hazards 67, no.
2(2013): 387–410. http://link.springer.                                                                                                                                                                         disasters, 1980 – 2011.19
com/article/10.1007/s11069-013-
0566-5




                  Daily prices                                                                                                                                        European Union Allowance (EUAs)
                                                                                                                                                                      Secondary Certified Emission Reductions (CERs)
                 € 30 –
                                                                         Peak of demand
                                                                         in “sellers market”

                 € 25 –

                                                                                                                  2 years of relatively low                                      European Union debt crisis & oversupply
                                                                                                                  volatility and stable prices                                   in Kyoto Protocol and Eueopean Trading
                 € 20 –                                                                                                                                                          System post-2012



                 € 15 –

                                                                                                                                                                                                        CERs & EUAs decouple

                 € 10 –



                          €5–                                      2008–2009 ﬁnancial crisis
                                                                   and economic downturn


                          €0–
                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                09
                                                                      8
                                                             08




                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                        2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                        9
                                                                               9
                                                     8




                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                             Oct 1
                                                                                                                                                             Apr 1
                                                                                                                                                    Jan 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oct 1
                                                                                                      Oct 0
                                                                    Oct 0




                                                                                                                                           Oct 1
                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                               Apr 1
                                                                                                                                                                                      Jan 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Apr 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan 1
                                                                                      Apr 0
                                                                             Jan 0
                                                   Apr 0




                                                                                                                        Apr 1
                                                                                                               Jan 1




                                                                                                                                                                      July




                                                                                                                                                                                                        July
                                                                                               July
                                                            July




                                                                                                                                  July




20. Mapping Carbon Pricing
Initiatives: Developments and
Prospects. (Washington, DC: World                                                                                                                                                                              FIG. 4 Trend shows
Bank and Ecofys, 2013). http://www.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               decline of carbon price 20
ecofys.com/files/files/world-bank-
ecofys-2013-mapping-carbon-
pricing-initiatives.pdf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   29
                                                                                                            FIG. 5 Fossil fuel
                                                                                                            subsidies as compared
                                                                                                            to climate finance in
                                                                                                            different countries21




      Fossil fuel subsidies                       Climate finance delivered average annual
      ($ million 2011)                            ($ million 2010-2012)
                00




                                           46




                                                          0



                                                                     3



                                                                             9



                                                                                      8


                                                                                                 1


                                                                                                       3


                                                                                                                 3


                                                                                                                          8


                                                                                                                                   4
                                                        45



                                                                    08



                                                                            81



                                                                                     82


                                                                                             28


                                                                                                      95


                                                                                                               59


                                                                                                                       09


                                                                                                                                  42
              ,2




                                          ,1




                                                       8,



                                                                7,



                                                                           6,



                                                                                     3,


                                                                                             3,


                                                                                                      2,


                                                                                                              2,


                                                                                                                     1,
            23




                                        13




               n/a                       2,500          198         566     830
                                                                              do d   1,826    403      118     112        4       4,600
              01 ia




                                          at d




                                                                            ng te
                                                                      y



                                                                                m
                                                          lia




                                                                                                                              l
                                                                    an
                                        St nite




                                                                                                                          ga
                                                                                                  a
            (2 uss




                                                                          Ki Uni




                                                                                      ce


                                                                                                 ad
                                                        ra
                                            es
                 0)




                                                                                                                                       n
                                                                                                                 n
                                                                 m




                                                                                                                       rtu



                                                                                                                                  pa
                                                       st




                                                                                     an




                                                                                                                ai
                                          U
               R




                                                                                                       ly
                                                                                             an
                                                                er




                                                                                                              Sp


                                                                                                                     Po
                                                     Au




                                                                                                      Ita




                                                                                                                                  Ja
                                                                                     Fr
                                                                G




                                                                                             C

21. Time to Change the Game: Fossil
Fuel Subsidies and Climate. London:
Overseas Development Institute,
November, 2013. http://www.odi.org.
uk/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/    Meanwhile, fossil fuel subsidies from governments continue to sabotage the
publications-opinion-files/8668.pdf      climate change movement’s goal of reducing carbon emissions. Climate financing
22. Ibid.                                is outpaced by fossil fuel subsidies in almost all countries around the world (see
                                         Figure 5).22

                                         Japan stands out as a leader in that it delivered an average of $4,600 million in
                                         climate financing annually (2010–2012), while it made only $424 million available
                                         for fossil fuel subsidies.

                                         Professor Zbigniew Kundzewicz led the small group discussion on costs; this
                                         group examined economic issues relating to climate change, in particular, the
                                         costs of greenhouse gas emissions.

                                         They concluded the following:

                                         >	 Energy production costs should include the harm inflicted on the
                                         environment and society (negative externalities).

                                         >	 Economic growth is not always blocked by measures to reduce
                                         greenhouse gas emissions and investing in such reduction efforts will have
                                         only a minor impact on overall economic growth.

                                         >	 Energy production decisions are not always predictable. For example,
                                         Poland, where close to 90 percent of the electricity used comes from coal, buys
                                         coal from abroad because it is cheaper than domestic coal as a result of local
                                         production costs.

30
                                      >	 The sooner that efforts are made to mitigate climate change by lowering
                                      greenhouse gas emissions, the lower the long-term cost will be to the
                                      economy.

                                      >	 The benefits of reducing greenhouse gas emissions must be presented as a
                                      societal benefit.

                                      >	 Another potential cost of climate change concerns health because
                                      extreme weather events can cause widespread injuries and disease.

                                      >	 People must be educated on ways that they can reduce energy costs
                                      through simple, everyday behavioral changes.

                                      >	 Public awareness of the true costs of climate change is insufficient. Only
                                      people who are well informed about climate change will accept higher energy
                                      costs, which are a by-product of mitigation projects.




                                      NEED 5. LEADING FOR SOLUTIONS

                                      Climate solutions and mitigation options are increasingly available across the
                                      world; for example, energy efficiency measures, clean-energy generation, smart
                                      city engineering, climate-smart agriculture, or stable carbon prices. In addition,
                                      climate change adaptation measures are increasingly being examined and refined.

                                      The question remains whether these advances are being implemented quickly
                                      enough to prevent dangerous outcomes from climate change.

23. Global Trends in Renewable        The renewable energy industry, for example, has undergone exceptional
Energy Investments 2013. Frankfurt,
Germany: Frankfurt School-UNEP
                                      expansion over the past 10 years, and every year more global capacity is being
Centre/BNEF, Frankfurt School of      installed.23 However, investment in 2012 stabilized rather than grew (see Figure
Finance and Management GmbH,          6). For low-carbon economic development to be achieved in the future, clean
2013. http://www.unep.org/pdf/
GTR-UNEP-FS-BNEF2.pdf                 technology deployment must be aggressively encouraged.
24. The Radical Emissions
Reduction Conference: 10–11
                                      Policies that will implement effective climate change solutions “will only advance
December 2013. Tyndall Centre,        if accompanied by radical social movements,” socialist writer and activist Naomi
2013. http://www.tyndall.ac.uk/       Klein told the Radical Emission Reduction Conference in London.
radical-emission-reduction-
conference-10-11-december-2013
                                      “Transformative policies … must be backed by transformative politics.”24 The New
25. Larry Elliott, Richard Murphy,
Tony Juniper, Jeremy Legget, Colin
                                      Economics Foundation advocates a Green New Deal, inspired by Franklin D.
Hines, Charles Secrett, Caroline      Roosevelt’s New Deal of the 1930s,25 which would feature substantial investments
Lucas, Andrew Simms, and Ann          in low-carbon infrastructure, carbon taxes, and trading.
Pettifor. A Green New Deal. nef,
2013. http://www.neweconomics.
org/publications/entry/a-green-new-   For the economic mind-set to be changed when it comes to climate change
deal
                                      mitigation, the long-term benefits need to be articulated better.

                                      Individuals, businesses, and local leaders need to unite behind the goal of acting
                                      to prevent climate chaos. Such a demand-driven approach to the challenge of our
                                      generation will have to be guided by climate knowledge and advocacy.


                                                                                                                     31
                                                                                  Corporate R&D
                                                                                  Government R&D
                                                                                  Venture Capital
                                                                                  Public markets
                                                                                  Small distributed capacity
                                                                                  Asset finance




       2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
photo credit: Tomasz Wawer




                                       Growth:
                                        63%      55%   46%   17%    -2%     35%     23%        -12%


     Corporate R&D
     Government R&D
     Venture Capital/Private Equity
     Public markets
     Small distributed capacity
     Asset finance




                                      2004   2005   2006   2007   2008    2009    2010     2011      2012



                                                                                  FIG. 6 Renewable
                                                                                  energy investment
                                                                                  trends are stabilizing,
                                                                                  rather than increasing
26. Global Trends in Renewable
Energy Investments 2013. Frankfurt,
                                                                                  (R&D = research and
Germany: Frankfurt School-UNEP                                                    development) 26
Centre/BNEF, Frankfurt School of
Finance and Management GmbH,
2013. http://www.unep.org/pdf/
GTR-UNEP-FS-BNEF2.pdf




32
Antonio Navarra led the discussion on leading for solutions. This group concluded
the following:

>	 A consistent message from the climate change movement should
clarify that the twin goals of global economic development and climate protection
are not in conflict.

>	 Clean energy is the key to effective mitigation of climate change and
greenhouse gas emissions in the future.

>	 Change needs to be driven from the grassroots, and individuals and
communities must develop real action.

>	 Government officials not usually involved in the global climate change
conversation – such as ministers of finance, economic development, infrastructure,
health and water – need to be brought into this discussion.

>	 More emphasis needs to be placed on educating today’s young people.
At the moment, young people are not involved enough in the climate change
movement, and there is no lobbying effort for drawing in future generations.




                                                                               33
photo credit: Tomasz Wawer
RACHEL KYTE:
EVERY INDIVIDUAL
CAN MAKE
A DIFFERENCE
                                      Rachel Kyte, World Bank Group Vice President and Special Envoy on Climate
                                      Change, took the stage at midday to a packed house and gave an inspirational
                                      keynote address in which she underlined the urgency of investments in climate
                                      change solutions and the need for the new generation to build an activist
                                      movement to demand such solutions.

                                      In the beginning, Kyte focused on the topics previously discussed by the
                                      brainstorming groups. She stressed that one person can make a difference.
                                      Maybe “that person is Michael Bloomberg [who] decides that he will push through
                                      new building regulations in New York City,” she said. Maybe that person is “the
                                      farmer who decides to plant a different type of crop.


                                                                  It might be you, it might be me.
                                                                  Yes, one person can make a
                                                                  difference.”

                                      In terms of climate change education, Kyte said that the solutions are known and
                                      that most are multidisciplinary.


                                                                  “Another challenge is effectively
                                                                  communicating scientific trends
                                                                  and data,”

                                      Kyte said, adding that there is a great need for science to inform policy and to
                                      have good policies.

                                      Kyte affirmed that poverty and climate change “are inextricably linked and are
                                      the moral challenge of this generation.” Several times she highlighted the need to
                                      invest more in resilience and mitigation, stating that


                                                                  “making the world resilient costs
27. See Shaping Climate-Resilient
Development: A Framework for
Decision-Making. Economics of

                                                                  more up front, but ... it will save
Climate Adaption Working Group,
ClimateWorks Foundation, Global
Environment Facility, European
Commission, McKinsey & Company,
The Rockefeller Foundation,                                       money over time because you
Standard Chartered Bank and Swiss
Re, 2009. http://media.swissre.com/
documents/rethinking_shaping_                                     will save lives and you will save
                                                                  money from that resilience.”
climate_resilent_development_
en.pdf




                                      Costs of climate impacts have been growing over the years, and increased
                                      investment commitment for climate change adaptation is required. It is already
                                      known that adaptation measures are generally cost-effective and reduce the
                                      long-term costs that would accrue if such measures were not implemented.27




36
                              Solidarity is also required accoding to Kyte: “For your generation, and my
                              generation, and for my kids, climate change is redefining what it means to be in
                              solidarity and redefining what it means to be generous.”


                                                         “This is about building
                                                         a movement. You’re the
                                                         movement. As you said at
                                                         the very beginning, every one
   Rachel Kyte                                           person can make a difference.
                                                         If you look at the examples
   Video of speech: youtu.be/FwuP66m4BOY
                                                         of the women’s movement,
                                                         of the gay rights’ movements,
                                                         of the movements that have
                                                         transformed within a generation
                                                         not just what is happening
                                                         in the world but the way
                                                         in which young people think
                                                         about what their lives might be,
                                                         then every single person has
                                                         made a difference.”

                              Kyte concluded her speech by inviting and challenging youth to take the “brave”
                              path if they really want to make change.




Photo credits: Tomasz Wawer

                                                                                                           37
photo credit: Tomasz Wawer
WORKSHOP
HIGHLIGHTS:
CLIMATE INTERVIEW,
PECHA KUCHA AND
PANEL DISCUSSION
photo credit: Tomasz Wawer




                                   ELIZA ANYANGWE AND ZBIGNIEW KUNDZEWICZ


                                   In the first afternoon session of the workshop, Eliza Anyangwe of The Guardian
                                   newspaper interviewed Professor Zbigniew Kundzewicz, head of the
                                   Laboratory of Climate and Water Resources in the Institute for Agricultural and
                                   Forest Environment, Polish Academy of Sciences, University of Poznań. Professor
                                   Kundzewicz is also a senior scientist in the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact
                                   Research (PIK) in Germany and contributed to the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment
                                   Report as a lead author of chapter 13.

                                   Reflecting Kyte’s observation about the difficulties in effectively communicating
                                   the reality of climate change, Anyangwe asked Kundzewicz why he thought there
                                   is “such a divide between what you know and what people are told?”

                                   Professor Kundzewicz replied:


                                                              “Paul Simon wrote
                                                              ‘A man hears what he needs
                                                              to hear and disregards the rest.’
                                                              In Poland, the inconvenient
     Professor Kundzewicz and Eliza Anyangwe                  truth is very inconvenient
                                                              because we sit on [a lot of] coal.
     Video of interview: youtu.be/vb4E2gEoqD0
                                                              Poland is a country of many
                                                              [climate change] skeptics.”




40
                                      Kundzewicz also emphasized how one person can make a difference. He said:

                                                                  “We can do a lot by changing
                                                                  our habits, by doing things that
                                                                  make sense anyway. It’s always
                                                                  good to save energy, to save
                                                                  water.”




                                      PECHA KUCHA PRESENTATIONS
28. PechaKucha is a simple            Tan Copsey from BBC Media Action moderated an afternoon session of dynamic
presentation format, in which 20
slides are presented, each for 20
                                      Pecha Kucha28 case studies from representatives of the World Meteorological
seconds, followed by a question and   Organization, Climate and Development Knowledge Network, MAPS
answers session. See http://www.      Program, Stockholm Environmental Institute, Consultative Group
pechakucha.org/
                                      on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), LEGO, the UNFCCC
                                      and others.

                                      Michelle Kovacevic from the Center for International Forestry Research
                                      (CIFOR) presented her organization’s approach to climate communication
                                      solutions, introducing three different aspects: (a) the challenges CIFOR faces in
                                      crafting its messages, (b) the models used to communicate these messages, and
                                      (c) media and methods chosen to reach and resonate with audiences.

                                      “Communications has many different objectives,” Kovacevic noted. It can “en-
                                      courage people to secure food, water, and shelter and improve their economic
                                      opportunities,” as well as help children think about their future. She explained:



                                                                                                                      41
                                                     “There are real opportunities for
                                                     us to encourage these effective
                                                     actions, provided that we
                                                     use the right approaches and
     Michelle Kovacevic                              outlets that know the needs and
                                                     preferences of our audiences.”
     Video of presentation: youtu.be/d2OfvzXeBNI


                           Sepo Hachigonta, who is responsible for coordinating the Food, Agriculture,
                           and Natural Resources Policy Analysis Network’s climate change projects,
                           highlighted the role of government policies for addressing food and nutrition
                           security in light of the climate threat.

                           He noted that building partnerships, developing capacity and generating
                           knowledge are extremely important steps in driving for climate-relevant policy
                           action.


                                                     “In Africa it is not always
                                                     about gloom or doom … people
                                                     have got the knowledge and
                                                     they are the custodians of the
     Sepo Hachigonta                                 knowledge.”

     Video of presentation: youtu.be/ypb3ZjmGezk


                           Marion Davis, from the Stockholm Environmental Institute, pointed out
                           another aspect of the communication challenge: language and cultural barriers.
                           “Language, language, language,” she emphasized.


                                                     “Climate change talks are
                                                     happening in English.
                                                     We need to translate
                                                     a lot more.”
     Marion Davis



     Video of presentation: youtu.be/LvC_-a8eKdE


42
                     Camilla Torpe, Event Manager at the Danish toy firm LEGO®, discussed one of
                     the company’s engagement activities, Build the Change, in which children are
                     given LEGO bricks to build environmentally friendly structures and even cities.

                     Torpe stressed the importance of engaging children and getting them to
                     understand global problems such as climate change. She too underlined the
                     importance of effective communication: “We want the children to talk together
                     and we think LEGO is a great tool to do that.”


                                                “Our vision from LEGO is
                                                to develop the builders of
                                                tomorrow and empower
                                                children to build what
Camilla Torpe                                   they want to see
                                                in their future.”
Video of presentation: youtu.be/6WsrMM4RMzA




                     Moritz Weigel from the UNFCCC presented the work of the UN Alliance
                     for Climate Change Education, Training and Public Awareness, which
                     was launched in 2012 to unite the expertise and comparative strengths of UN
                     organizations working with governments and other stakeholders on building
                     knowledge and skills and mobilizing public support for ambitious climate action:


                                                “Education is key to bring
                                                about urgently needed changes
                                                in the way we think and act
                                                for building low emission and
Moritz Weigel                                   climate resilient societies.”

Video of presentation: youtu.be/YkqPGQL96gA




                     View all the Pecha Kucha presentation videos on the Connect4Climate
                     YouTube channel: youtube.com/Connect4Climate




                                                                                                  43
                          MOVEMENT MAKERS PANEL DEBATE

                          Connect4Climate brought together four of the most active NGOs for an inspiring
                          panel discussion on Building a Movement. These “movement makers”
                          included David Cadman, President of International Council for Local
                          Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI Local Governments for Sustainability), Kelly
                          Rigg, Executive Director of the Global Call for Climate Action (GCCA),
                          Jamie Henn, Communications Director and Co-Founder of 350.org, and
                          Wael Hmaidan, Director of Climate Action Network (CAN).

                          Each panelist presented his or her organization’s mission, goals, and activities.
                          They also spoke about the urgency of climate action, the behavioral changes that
                          the younger generations need to make, and the need for young people to engage
                          and inspire others.

                          “We also need to look within ourselves and within rooms like this, within our own
                          movement and say: ‘With these many people, what can we do?’” said Henn.


                                                     “We can do a lot of pretty
                                                     creative actions! … We can’t keep
                                                     talking to ourselves, we need to
                                                     get more people onboard and
     Jamie Henn                                      then together we can figure out
                                                     the ways we can all take action.”
     Video of speech: youtu.be/w7DyWBUc6O8


                          Rigg supported Henn and affirmed,


                                                     “We need to mobilize the people
                                                     who do feel passionately
                                                     already and get them
                                                     to take stronger action.
     Kelly Rigg                                      We need to get some people
                                                     who have never been engaged
     Video of speech: youtu.be/NmBK8_LT5xU
                                                     before to take the very first step
                                                     on what we call the ladder
                                                     of engagement.”
                          She added, “We are running out of time. We need to reach people who are
                          probably increasingly concerned about [climate change] but don’t quite know
                          what to do or how to engage. We all need to do the right thing, and we need to

44
                              all play a role.” Rigg added that around the world there are “climate heroes” who
                              already have made their own communities more environmentally friendly. “We
                              need to celebrate that and make that visible.”

                              Cadman intervened with a passionate speech that began by quoting Shakespeare.
                              “‘To be or not to be, that is the question,’” Cadman said. “We either change the
                              path we’re on, or we, and all of the beauty of creation on this Earth, will go with
                              us.”

                              Cadman highlighted that climate action was already taking place at the local level:
                              “There are cities around the world that are declaring that they are moving to
                              carbon neutral or zero carbon.” Stressing the urgency to act, Cadman advised
                              his audience to


                                                          “start where you are! You know
                                                          your network of friends, begin
                                                          to engage them, ask them to
                                                          engage their friends. ... That’s
   David Cadman                                           where change really begins.”

   Video of speech: youtu.be/Ed6DveKd0Hg

                              He continued, “When young people begin to insist for their future, their parents
                              act in another way, so start where you are! You are part of a whole raft of networks
                              out there.”

                              Hmaidan started IndyACT with two others in the Arab World, and is now
                              the International Director of the Climate Action Network. He spoke about his
                              organization’s activities and the results it has achieved. “It’s important to start
                              pushing change and I think we will win,” Hmaidan said. He added,	


                                                          “The key for success is not IQ,
                                                          … not anything related
                                                          to discipline, … but it is grit,
                                                          which is having the courage
   Wael Hmaidan                                           to stand up and continue with
                                                          full motivation and dedication
   Video of speech: youtu.be/18WAjNYTwu8
                                                          to achieve something.”

                              Video of the Q&A of the panel: youtu.be/wzZYQ_m2oGU


Photo credits: Tomasz Wawer

                                                                                                               45
photo credit: Tomasz Wawer
MOTIVATIONAL
SPEECHES:
CALLS FOR CLIMATE
ACTION
              To generate more enthusiasm and drive for building up the climate change
              movement, Connect4Climate invited key personalities to share their experiences
              with the workshop audience. These personalities included Yvo de Boer,
              KPMG’s Special Global Advisor on Climate Change and Sustainability;
              Nick Nuttall, Director of the Division of Communications and Public
              Information of the UN Environmental Programme (UNEP); Peter Bakker,
              President of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development
              (WBCSD); and Stefan Maard from the biotech company Novozymes.




YVO DE BOER   Yvo de Boer, who came on stage with the clear purpose of challenging his
              listeners, confronted them with two challenging questions.

              “Which one of you feels that your standard of living is better than that of your
              parents?” he asked. After a show of hands, he said, “So, pretty much all of you
              think the standard is better.”

              Then he asked, “Which one of you expects the standard living of your children
              will be better than yours?” There were fewer hands, which prompted de Boer to
              observe that “Poland is a very optimistic country, you’re confident you’re going to
              live on a planet much better than the one your parents used to live in.”

              Yvo de Boer expressed doubt about their optimism and depicted the climate
              situation in a very realistic way, explaining the interaction between deforestation,
              water scarcity, biodiversity loss, food, and other climate-related issues, and
              adding that he found the situation frightening.


                                          “There is a massive cost to the
                                          environment, a massive cost
                                          to society, which is not reflected
                                          in the price of what you choose
                                          to buy and, therefore, you
                                          are not confronted with the
                                          consequences of the choices
                                          that you decide to make,”

              “We basically have no choice but to fundamentally change the ways in which we
              produce and consume,” de Boer added, lamenting that those changes are not
              yet happening to the extent needed.

              He also spoke of his disillusionment with the international political process; he
              referred to the global financial crisis and to the fact that many politicians are
              unclear about the way forward.



48
                                                    “I think you could argue that
                                                    for many politicians the notion
                                                    of green growth, the notion of
                                                    sustainable growth is much
  Yvo de Boer                                       more of a faith rather than a
                                                    real conviction. People believe
  Video of speech: youtu.be/PHIQlwcZi4s
                                                    this is the direction in which
                                                    we should go, people believe
                                                    this is the right thing to do, but
                                                    they don’t know how to make it
                                                    work in practice and there is a
                                                    massive fear to be a first mover,
                                                    to begin to drive that change.”



NICK NUTTALL           Nick Nuttall’s speech focused on the financial and economic aspects of climate
                       change. He mentioned how much has been invested so far in sustainability
                       and raised the issue of externalities. According to Nuttall externalities are how
                       businesses pass on the cost of their production to society, in terms of air pollution
                       that makes people sick or in terms of over using water. He explained how
                       externalities can be calculated in economic terms, “The top global one hundred
                       externalities of the businesses and industries on this planet is costing the world-
                       wide economy about 4.7 trillion dollars a year.”


                                                    “Currently there is no price on
                                                    carbon, no price that means
                                                    anything to anyone. ... Basically
                                                    a lot of companies, a lot of
  Nick Nuttall                                      businesses around the world are
                                                    on a free ride.”
  Video of speech: youtu.be/8ZOO3aR00aY

                       He emphasized that this was because companies have not embraced the
                       sustainability policies and carbon emission regulations of their governments.

                                                                                                         49
                          Though on a positive note, the “parallel universe” of progressive climate action
                          shows that there is a lot of good news. “In the last ten, fifteen, twenty years nearly
                          140 countries now have renewable energy targets or policies in place”, Nuttall
                          explained and highlighted the examples of Costa Rica setting a target of being
                          carbon neutral by 2020 and Denmark planning to generate 50% of its electricity
                          from renewables by the same date.

                          “We need to do something about how we deal with the capital market,” Nuttall
                          said.

                                                       “We need to move beyond
                                                       GDP [gross domestic product].
                                                       We need to change
                                                       the rules of the game.
                                                       The rules are not working
                                                       in favor of climate change.”

                          If that is not done, he added, “We will continue to live in parallel universes where
                          [governments] will be still debating about what to do … and we’ll never achieve
                          what we all want to achieve ultimately, which is a sane, sensible, equitable, honest
                          world.”




PETER BAKKER              Peter Bakker was unable to participate in the workshop in person but sent a
                          prerecorded video message to the young people in the audience.


                                                       You are the youth of the world.
                                                       This work, the COP, everything
                                                       here eventually is done for your
                                                       generation. So your generation
     Peter Bakker                                      needs to step up, dream big,
                                                       find solutions, and add them to
     Video of speech: youtu.be/hcttCg9Wkg8
                                                       Action2020,”
                          Bakker said, referring to his organization’s roadmap for member businesses to
                          create sustainable development policies by 2020.




50
STEFAN MAARD                  Stefan Maard closed the motivational speeches with a presentation on the role
                              of business in sustainable development:


                                                           “More and more companies
                                                           are embracing sustainability
                                                           solutions, and there’s been
                                                           a sort of maturing of the way
                                                           in which companies engage
                                                           with sustainability.”
                              Maard referred to the fact that companies can be good housekeepers, meaning
                              they would not just give money away but also look at their own operations and try
                              to make those as sustainable as possible.

                              “The function of the sustainability innovation division at Novozymes is to find ways
                              in which institutions, agendas, players, and partnerships with a sustainability
                              interest can be leveraged to mobilize large-scale amounts of capital and resources
                              from the company into sustainable solutions,” Maard added. “And that’s frankly
                              where we need to be going and where we are going.”

                              Maard issued a call to action to the youth in the audience,


                                                           “In sum, make sure
                                                           you have one voice
                                                           on sustainability, including
                                                           climate change, so that
   Stefan Maard                                            there is this revolution
                                                           of capitalism that harmonizes
   Video of speech: youtu.be/hcttCg9Wkg8
                                                           financial and social needs.”

                              He also urged the young people to select their employers carefully, making
                              sure that “only the companies that are most aggressive in pushing sustainable
                              solutions… have a chance of hiring the best and the brightest. So especially those
                              of you that are really top in [your] class, just don’t offer yourself up to anyone who
                              is not going to be pushing the envelope on [climate change] solutions.”

                              “If you do these things, I think you can be a truly formidable force in creating a
                              new, sustainable world order,” Maard concluded.




Photo credits: Tomasz Wawer

                                                                                                                 51
photo credit: Robert Denton
YOUTH PLEDGE:
RIGHT HERE,
RIGHT NOW,
TOGETHER
                     THE 2013 WARSAW
                     YOUTH PLEDGE
     #c4cMovement

     We, the participants of "Be The Movement", a global forum organized by the
     University of Warsaw and Connect4Climate on this day, November 20, 2013,
     jointly and solemnly declare:

     1. We are fully aware that climate change is a dangerous threat not just to our
     generation, but to our sons and daughters, and all future generations.

     2. We and all our fellow citizens on Earth have a duty to tackle the climate
     change emergency right now and to change our life styles accordingly.

     3. While respecting diverse opinions, we should come together to reinforce our
     common potential and drive collective action to conserve the environment.

     4. We expect that:

          Researchers will provide us with objective data and seek innovative
          solutions for climate change,

          Educators will assist us in passing on knowledge and awareness to
          students,

          Local governments will support our activities to make sure our communities
          continue to be liveable and vital,

          The private sector will commit to including climate change considerations
          in all its business planning,

          The media will impartially report all information to raise awareness and
          encourage open discussion,

          National governments will create legislation to enable greater conservation
          of our planet and its climate.

     5. Whatever sacrifices we have to make now, we firmly believe our passion for
     this movement will spur global action to secure better livelihoods for
     humankind.

     6. We will 'Be The Movement'! Right here, right now, together!




54
                                   The workshop called for bold action to curb climate change. An overarching
                                   theme was that every individual could be the change. Whatever level they are
                                   active in, they can contribute to advancing the climate movement, encouraging
                                   climate action, and embracing climate solutions.

                                   In a display of enthusiasm for climate change action kindled by the workshop
                                   Polish students Roch Jasielski, Piotr Brachowicz and Karolina Gumiezna, as
                                   representatives of the student participants, read a pledge of action before the
                                   packed auditorium on the campus of the University of Warsaw.


                                                              “We … have a duty
                                                              to tackle the climate change
                                                              emergency right now
                                                              and to change our lifestyles
                                                              accordingly,”

                                   the students declared, picking up on the workshop’s theme of Be the Movement.


                                                              “Whatever sacrifices
                                                              we have to make now,
                                                              we firmly believe our passion
                                                              for this movement
   Roch Jasielski, Piotr Brachowicz & Karolina Gumiezna       will spur global action
                                                              to secure better livelihoods
   Video of pledge: youtu.be/md5tFvLg4aA
                                                              for humankind.”




Photo credit: Tomasz Wawer

                                                                                                               55
photo credit: Kamil Leziak
WORKSHOP FINDINGS
AND RECOMMENDATIONS:
TAKING THE MOVEMENT
FORWARD
                                   As Connect4Climate leaders have always declared, bold action is required to
                                   curb climate change. The workshop confirmed this conviction, and participants
                                   recognized that their collective quest to strengthen and expand the global climate
                                   change movement will be enhanced if they



                                                                 Stress at all times
                                                                 the intimate and
                                                                 unavoidable
                                                                 link between
                                                                 eradicating
                                    Increase the                 extreme poverty
                                    collaboration                and mitigating
                                    and cooperation              climate change and
                                    among existing               adapting to climate
                                    climate change               impacts
                                    organizations,
                                    amplify existing
                                    climate change
                                    initiatives, and seek                                     Emphasize more
                                    as much as possible                                       forcefully that early
                                    to connect and                                            climate action
                                    coordinate all climate                                    now will be less
                                    change efforts                                            expensive than
                                                                                              dealing with the
                                                                                              harmful impacts of
                                                                                              climate change in
                                                                                              the future


                                                                 Stress that
                                                                 mitigation
                                                                 policies will not
                                                                 impede economic
                                                                 development




                                     Insist in all our                                        Offer assistance in
                                     campaigns and                                            finding fact-based
                                     communications                                           information and
                                     that each and                                            teaching guides
                                     every individual                                         that educators
                                     can make a                                               can use in the
                                     difference                                               classroom29
                                     in combating
                                     climate change
                                     by changing his
29. For example, the United          or her behavior
Nations Education, Scientific,
and Cultural Organization
                                     and that of their
(UNESCO) publication Climate         neighborhoods,
Change in Africa – A Guidebook       communities, and
for Journalists. Paris: UNESCO,
2013. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/     cities
images/0022/002254/225451e.pdf




58
                                              Encourage
                                              contacts with
                                              local and national
                                              policy makers
                                              so they are
                                              aware of their
Find novel ways                               constituents’
and creative                                  concerns about
messages to                                   climate change
communicate to                                and constituents’     Initiate contacts
new audiences why                             desires to find       with educators,
climate change is                             ways to mitigate it   who are key
important and must                                                  actors in driving
be addressed                                                        climate action
                       Increase efforts                             and spreading
                       to partner with                              environmental
                       private sector                               awareness
                       leaders in a                                 among youth, to
                       common effort                                encourage them to
                       to implement                                 communicate the
                       sustainable and                              need to give climate
                       low-carbon                                   change information
                       practices in                                 to their students
                       the business
                       community


                                              Assist citizens,
                                              through
Prioritize the task                           education and
of finding and                                organization, to
communicating with                            feel empowered
new audiences                                 to address policy
who are not yet                               makers’ resistance
aware of climate                              to or rejection of
change or do not                              climate change
have solutions, and                           mitigation policies   Organize more
proposing activities                                                events that will
they can implement                                                  include policy
to reduce the                                                       makers and new
impacts of climate                                                  audiences that
change                 Initiate contacts                            have not been
                       with leaders of                              invited in the past
                       cities, which are                            to advance the
                       well placed by their                         climate change
                       size and locations,                          message beyond
                       to introduce climate                         those already
                       change mitigation                            aware of this global
                       and adaptation                               challenge
                       strategies and
                       thus provide good
                       examples of climate
                       change activism to
                       other policy makers



                                                                                           59
photo credit: Leigh Vogel/Connect4Climate
CONCLUSION:
WE HAVE TO CONNECT
photo credit: Kamil Leziak




30. Now for the Long Term: The        The Be the Movement workshop contributed to building a “creative coalition”30 of
Report of the Oxford Martin
                                      actors to ramp up the global climate change movement to a new level of activism
Commission for Future Generations.
Oxford, UK: Oxford Martin School,     and to make climate change a mainstream concern in every country in the world.
University of Oxford, October 2013.   Creating a truly global call for climate action is greatly needed, and in the words
http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/
downloads/commission/Oxford_
                                      of climate activist Kelly Rigg, “now is our moment” to take on the challenge of
Martin_Now_for_the_Long_Term.pdf      preventing dangerous injuries to our planet by keeping its temperature rise below
                                      2°C.
31. World Bank President Jim Yong
Kim speech at Right Here Right Now
event, March 1, 2013. http://www.     In this challenging and urgent task, there is a need for collaboration. Partnership
connect4climate.org/blog/jim-yong-
kims-speech-at-right-here-right-
                                      is the key word and guiding principle; partnerships are needed to raise awareness
now-march-1                           and to inspire action. As World Bank President Jim Yong Kim has said,



                                                                  “What we need is a social
                                                                  movement, a social movement
                                                                  that will finally and for once
                                                                  get serious about tackling
                                                                  this epidemic. In order to do it,
                                                                  we cannot think of small-bore
                                                                  solutions anymore ...
                                                                  We have got to get serious.
                                                                  We have got to connect on an
                                                                  emotional level. The young
                                                                  people ... know that they are
                                                                  going to be living in a time

62
that’s unrecognisable today.
We have to listen to them.
We have to listen to the
scientists. But we have to
connect. That’s the whole
purpose of Connect4Climate.”   31




                                    63
November 20, 2013
Warsaw, Poland




                    United Nations
                    Alliance on Climate
                    Change Education,
                    Training and
                    Public Awareness
     JOIN US
Connect4Climate.org
