  DEALING WITH GOVERNANCE AND CORRUPTION RISKS IN PROJECT LENDING


                                                   88497




                                                       http://dfgg
                                              http://gacinprojects


HOW-TO NOTES
Rapid Feedback:
The Role of Community Scorecards
in Improving Service Delivery
This note was prepared by David Post, Sanjay Agarwal, and Varsha Venugopal of the World Bank’s Social
Development Department (SDV) as part of the effort by the Demand for Good Governance team and the GAC
in Projects team to provide guidance on ways to improve governance and accountability in Bank-supported
operations. Portions of this note are adapted from Singh and Shah (2004) and other sources. The authors are
grateful to peer reviewers Meera Kaul Shah, Nilufar Ahmad, and Gabriel Dedu. The authors would also like
to thank Hans Antlov, Blanche Cotlear, Hélène Grandvoinnet, Natasha Hayward, Andrea Liverani, Janmejay
Singh, G.N.V. Ramana, Ritva S. Reinikka, and Rosa Alonso I. Terme for their comments and insights, and to
Stephan Eggli, Laura Johnson, and Sheldon Lippman for editorial and logistical support.
                   Rapid Feedback: The Role of Community Scorecards in Improving Service Delivery  1




Introduction       Social accountability tools are increasingly recognized as a means of improving
                   service delivery and governance in World Bank-supported projects. Social account-
                   ability is an approach that relies on civic engagement in that citizens participate
                   directly or indirectly in demanding accountability from service providers and public
                   officials. Examples of social accountability tools and mechanisms include participa-
                   tory budgeting, public expenditure tracking, citizen report cards, social audits, citizen
                   charters, right to information acts, and community scorecards (CSCs), the focus of
                   this note.1

                   CSCs are citizen-driven accountability measures that enhance citizens’ civic involve-
                   ment and voices and complement conventional supply-side mechanisms of account-
                   ability, such as political checks and balances, accounting and auditing systems,
                   administrative rules, and legal procedures. By establishing mutual accountability and
                   co-responsibility of citizens and their governments, social accountability measures
                   demonstrate to citizens that they can play a critical role in promoting service-delivery
                   improvements.

                   As a community-based social accountability tool, the CSC can be used to gather
                   feedback from service users and improve communication between communities and
                   service providers.2 Box 1 lists some of the major attributes of CSCs. By using focus
                   groups and facilitated interface meetings, the CSC process provides service users
                   with the opportunity to give systematic and constructive feedback to service provid-
                   ers about their performance (see Box 2). It also helps service providers learn directly
                   from service users about what aspects of their services and programs are working
                   well and what aspects are not. As opposed to being a one-time event, CSC initia-
                   tives are typically conducted at regular intervals to track performance and identify
                   additional ways to improve service-delivery performance.

          Box 1
Major Attributes      •	 Uses the community as the unit of analysis
      of a CSC        •	 Conducted at micro, local, and/or facility levels
                      •	 Most frequently used in rural settings
                      •	 Generates information through focus group interactions
                      •	 Enables maximum participation and ownership by the local community
                      •	 Emphasizes immediate response from community and encourages local
                          problem-solving
                      •	 Provides immediate feedback to service providers
                      •	 Identifies potential reforms through mutual dialogue and collaboration between
                          service providers and users

                   1. Despite similar names, community scorecards differ from citizen report cards. Annex 1 highlights the differ-
                   ences between these social accountability tools.
                   2. CSCs can be used in conjunction with other social accountability tools, such as national service delivery
                   surveys and citizen report cards.
2  How-to Notes




                            In contrast to other similar methodologies, “community” is the focus of CSC analysis.
                            The CSC exercise is focused on monitoring at the local or facility level. It is therefore a
                            useful tool for providing service users the opportunity to monitor and evaluate services
                            provided by local governments. Since the CSC is a grassroots process, it is typically
                            most effective in rural settings. The information generated during the exercise allows
                            service providers to implement improvements that respond to the needs, priorities,
                            and preferences of the service users. It also increases community oversight.

                            From a process standpoint, CSCs are relatively low-cost and easy to implement. The
                            process of designing the intervention, collecting background data, and preparing
                            the service users and providers for the CSC process and interface meeting can take
                            between 3–6 weeks. Each phase of the CSC process itself requires only a few com-
                            munity meetings. The financial costs in a single community are quite low and limited
                            mainly to salaries and logistical expenses. For example, a CSC initiative implemented
                            in 178 villages in Satara, India, cost roughly US$150 per village, including facilitation


                   Box 2
          The Benefits of     For Service Users
    Community Scorecards      •	 Encourages local problem-solving
                              •	 Empowers service users by giving them opportunities to provide direct feedback
                                  to service providers
                              •	 Creates an outlet through which the opinions of service users can reach service
                                  providers in a timely fashion
                              •	 Encourages accountability on the part of service providers by presenting input
                                  from service users in a difficult-to-ignore fashion
                              •	 Promotes cooperation between service users and providers

                              For Service Providers
                              •	 Tracks assets and/or spending (e.g., availability of water, medicines at health
                                  centers, textbooks in schools)
                              •	 Generates benchmark performance criteria that can be used in resource alloca-
                                  tion and budget decisions (e.g., at least 8 hours per day of clean and safe water)
                              •	 Monitors user perceptions regarding the quality of services (e.g., absenteeism
                                  rates among health care personnel)
                              •	 Compares performances across facilities and districts
                              •	 Reduces corruption by improving oversight
                              •	 Improves service-delivery performance by allowing it to become more customer-
                                  centered.

                              For Task Teams
                              •	 Mitigates implementation risks by obtaining tangible data that can be used to
                                  track performance and identify potential incidences of corruption
                              •	 Strengthens both “supply” and “demand” for good governance
                       Rapid Feedback: The Role of Community Scorecards in Improving Service Delivery  3




                       expenses (but excluding staff time of government officials.)3 In all cases, the cost is
                       highly dependent on the specific context, size, scope, scale, location, and number of
                       CSCs. Additional costs may also be incurred for publicity campaigns aimed at spur-
                       ring the communities’ participation in the CSC process.

                       Given that much has already been written on CSCs, this note aims to outline a meth-
                       odology in order to help task teams work with clients to implement and scale-up CSC
                       initiatives. To this end, examples from Bank-supported projects in which the use of
                       CSCs has resulted in improved service delivery are showcased. Box 2 summarizes
                       the benefits of CSCs to service users and providers.4



        Six Steps in   The purpose of a CSC exercise is not just to produce a scorecard, but also to initiate
Implementing and       a sustainable dialogue among service users and providers at the community level
                       to produce demonstrable improvements in service delivery. As such, implementing
  Scaling-Up CSCs      teams formulate the objectives and focus areas for the CSC exercise based upon
                       potential synergies with the broader institutional and policy environment (local gov-
                       ernment initiatives, sector strategies/assessments, national development strategies,
                       results frameworks, performance budgeting, etc.). The CSC process itself consists
                       of six main stages:

                       1.	   Preparatory work
                       2.	   Development of input-tracking matrix
                       3.	   Community scoring of performance
                       4.	   Self-evaluation by service providers
                       5.	   Interface meeting between service users and providers
                       6.	   Post-implementation activities (training a cadre of facilitators, standardizing
                             indicators, collecting and consolidating feedback, etc.)

                       An example from Malawi describes these stages in greater detail (Box 3).


                       Step 1. Preparatory Work
                       There are multiple tasks associated with carrying out the preparatory work necessary
                       to implement a CSC initiative.

                       Identify the scope of CSC coverage. At a basic level this involves identifying the
                       services that are going to be monitored/evaluated and the area in which the initiative
                       will be implemented (health or education, etc.). Given that CSCs focus on monitoring


                       3. World Bank (2009a).
                       4. Since the CSC is a perception-based tool that measures the satisfaction of service users, it is possible that
                       users’ feedback may not reflect the actual state of affairs. For example, parents may be satisfied with the perfor-
                       mance of a teacher with good public relations skills even if the teacher is not effective in the classroom.
4  How-to Notes




                    Box 3
     The CSC Methodology        The CSC methodology was developed in Malawi by the nongovernmental organiza-
                in Context:     tion, CARE International, through its Local Initiatives for Health (LIFH) project in 2002.
       Malawi’s Experience      By using the CSC, the initiative aimed at promoting continuous improvement of ser-
                                vices and service provider–user collaboration in 81 poor rural villages served by the
                                Chileka and Nthondo health centers.

                                The CSC methodology applied in Malawi included five basic elements:
                                •	 Facilitators organized community meetings with villages surrounding the specific
                                    health center being evaluated. At these meetings, the participants were asked to
                                    talk about their health problems, their access to and use of health services, and
                                    their opinions of the health center under evaluation. The facilitator then helped
                                    the participants design indicators that could be used to evaluate the health cen-
                                    ter. Finally, participants were asked to rank the performance of the health center
                                    along each one of the indicators.
                                •	 The staff at the health clinic went through a similar process. They were asked to
                                    discuss the present situation at the clinic, develop a series of indicators, and rank
                                    their performance along these indicators.
                                •	 An “interface meeting” was organized at which community members and clinic
                                    staff presented their respective scorecards, compared the outcomes, and tried
                                    to work together to design solutions to the common problems identified.
                                •	 The action plans were developed and implemented.
                                •	 The CSC exercise was repeated at each clinic two times per year.

                                There is evidence that there was significant improvement in the health center
                                services between the two interface meetings and that most of this improvement
                                can be attributed to the implementation of the CSCs. Almost all indicators received
                                higher scores in the second scorecard, and there was significant improvement in the
                                areas of “respect for patients,” “listening to patients’ problems,” “honest and transpar-
                                ent staff,” “giving priority to serious cases,” “no discrimination in providing supplemen-
                                tary nutrition,” and “no preferential treatment.”
                                Source: Shah (2003).


                              activities at the community level, it is typically best practice to use CSCs to analyze
                              service providers with which respective users have direct contact.

                              Solidify other logistics-related issues. Teams should also solidify other logistics-
                              related issues during this phase, such as the financial resources required to carry out
                              the activity, the frequency with which the CSC will be conducted, and the number of
                              facilitators required to conduct the CSC at the desired scale.

                              Identify partners who can help implement the CSCs. Given the high degree
                              of facilitation and mobilization required to carry out a CSC, it is important to find
                              people or groups within the target area who can help with the implementation of the
                              scorecard. These can include traditional leaders, elected representatives from local
Rapid Feedback: The Role of Community Scorecards in Improving Service Delivery  5




governments, workers at regional service facilities, community volunteers, and local
or international NGO staff. It is useful if the local partners have a history of working
with the community so that they already have credibility in the eyes of service users.
Trust is paramount to the success of CSC initiatives; unless participants are comfort-
able, they will not provide feedback with the frankness that is needed for a useful
exercise.

Conduct a stratification exercise within the community. Since CSC data is col-
lected through focus groups,5 it is important to determine beforehand who uses what
services, how much they use, and what the demographics and poverty distribution
of usage are. The initial stratification data—which can be collected either through field
visits/informal interviews or by using existing social/poverty mapping data—provides
implementers with a sense of the potential issues that may arise during the CSC
exercise and the types of indicators that should be included in the CSC.6

Initiate advocacy/awareness campaign. The implementers should aim to inform
people about the goals and benefits of the CSC process. The campaign should focus
on ensuring that the CSC process has broad participation from all segments of the
community. Broad participation is crucial for ensuring that the results of the CSC are
robust and that the input of poor and vulnerable groups is taken into account during
the process. CSC dissemination-related activities should be incorporated into the
project communication plan if feasible.


Step 2. Development of Input-Tracking Matrix
Service users often do not know the entitlements available to them. The input-track-
ing matrix records the differences between what users are entitled to receive and
what a service provider is actually providing. The purpose of the activity is not only
to increase transparency in relation to the availability of resources (thereby empower-
ing communities) but also to identify areas in which there are discrepancies between
entitled and actual resources. This can establish a basis for corrective action. Figure 1
gives an example of a basic input-tracking matrix in the context of school provisions.

Gathering data. In creating the matrix, implementers need to gather “supply-side”
data that can be used to determine what services are supposed to be provided. The
types of data necessary for the purposes of the analysis include:


5. Even with good facilitation, the use of focus groups in CSCs to create aggregate assessments of service qual-
ity means that it is possible that the views of some individuals or groups may overshadow the opinions of other
stakeholders. As such, group samples should be selected carefully to ensure that the results are not biased and
facilitators need to encourage all participants to provide their opinions.
6. If the exercise is being conducted in multiple facilities, it is important for the facilitation team to compile a stan-
dard set of indicators that will be included for all of the CSCs. Without a standardized set of indicators, it is difficult
to make cross-facility comparisons. Additional indicators can be chosen by focus group participants during the
local sessions.
6  How-to Notes




                 Figure 1
                              Input Indicator                          Entitlement          Actual              Remarks/Evidence
     Sample Input Tracking
        Matrix for Schools    Textbooks per child

                              Children per class

                              Functioning sanitation facilities

                              Furniture per classroom

                              Wages of teachers

                             Source: Adapted from Singh and Shah, 2004.


                             •	   Financial records of plans, projects, and/or services in the areas being evaluated
                                  (audits, budget allocations, etc.)
                             •	   Inventories of goods or physical assets related to the services being evaluated
                                  (medicine, furniture, latrines, etc.)
                             •	   Any rights or entitlements related to the service being evaluated (food rationing,
                                  one textbook per child, etc.)

                             Disseminating results. After gathering the data but before the scorecard is gener-
                             ated, the information should be widely disseminated so that service users understand
                             their entitlements and service providers are aware of stated commitments (e.g., stu-
                             dents are supposed to receive two meals per day at school). Given that service users
                             are often unaware of their rights, making this supply-side information public often has
                             empowering effects (see Box 4).

                             Conducting community meeting with focus groups. Facilitators publicize and
                             organize the community meeting. The CSC participants should be divided into focus
                             groups based on their involvement in the service or project (e.g., service users or
                             providers). Individual focus groups should have sufficient diversity in terms of both
                             the roles that participants have in the service (e.g., users, providers, or NGO work-
                             ers) and demographic characteristics (age, gender, ethnicity, region, income, etc.).7
                             This important arrangement increases the likelihood that the feedback collected will
                             be representative of the experience of the community at large. Based on the cultural
                             context, it may be necessary to separate different groups of people into distinct focus
                             groups in order to spur participation. There are instances, for example, when women
                             may not feel comfortable speaking candidly in front of men. In such contexts, the
                             facilitators may consider creating separate focus groups comprised only of women.

                             Finalizing and verifying indicators. The purpose of the focus groups is to deter-
                             mine indicators that can be used to compare the variance between the current
                             state and what the service provider or project is supposed to do. By the end of the

                             7. This can either be a stand-alone meeting or held at the same time as the meeting where the community score-
                             card is developed.
                          Rapid Feedback: The Role of Community Scorecards in Improving Service Delivery  7




                Box 4
Empowering Effects of       The public education system in the Indian State of Andhra Pradesh (AP) faces several
Publicizing Supply-Side     structural challenges. Although the public education system offers a structured space
  Data—Lessons from         for parent and community input into management of schools, these mechanisms
Andhra Pradesh, India       were not systematically used. In 2007, the Centre for Good Governance (CGG) in
                            partnership with the Mamidipudi Venkatarangaiya Foundation (MVF), introduced a
                            social accountability intervention in 20 public schools to mobilize the community to
                            monitor and give feedback on the delivery of education services at the village level.

                            In the course of implementing a comprehensive CSC initiative, the team went
                            through the process of creating an input-tracking matrix. The introduction of supply
                            -side information raised the awareness of parents and the community at large about
                            funds and grants available to the community as well as budget information relat-
                            ing to allocations and expenditures on textbooks and other learning materials. The
                            accountability intervention had significant impacts in several areas: it removed in-
                            formation asymmetries regarding resources; it opened channels of communication
                            between citizens, teachers, school headmasters, and local government functionar-
                            ies; and it altered relationships among these groups to allow for more constructive
                            dialogue.

                            The combination of increased information and the creation of a space for dialogue
                            promoted behavioral changes among parents, the community at large, and service
                            providers. These changes included:
                            •	 The community galvanized to collectively improve public school infrastructure.
                            •	 Parents and the community at large were empowered to seek information and
                                accountability from teachers and administrators on an ongoing basis.
                            •	 Community initiatives that improve the public education system were spurred
                                on. These actions have motivated teachers and instilled a sense of pride in their
                                performance.
                            •	 Parents were able to focus more closely on ensuring that their children attend
                                school regularly.

                            As a result of these changes, the districts in which the CSC initiative was implemented
                            experienced a 10 percent drop in teacher absenteeism, a significant decrease in
                            school dropout rates, and 100 percent enrollment of children in 8 of the 20 villages.
                            Source: World Bank (2009b).


                          exercise, each focus group should have finalized a set of measurable input indica-
                          tors that can be tracked over time. Examples of potential indicators include: wages
                          received for work programs, food rations or medicines received, and number of toi-
                          lets constructed. If possible, facilitators should verify the statements that group mem-
                          bers make in relation to the services received and delivered (e.g., by using receipts
                          or account information). For physical assets (toilets, medicines in stock, etc.), the
                          facilitation team can inspect facilities to determine if quality standards have been met.
8  How-to Notes




                  Completing the input-tracking matrix and analyzing recommendations.
                  Having finalized and verified the input indicators, the facilitation team records the
                  data obtained from each focus group in the input-tracking matrix. The team should
                  then assess the difference between the data provided by service providers and actual
                  services received by beneficiaries in order to generate recommendations for improve-
                  ment. These recommendations should be shared with both beneficiaries (users) and
                  service providers.


                  Step 3. Community Scoring of Performance
                  While the input-tracking matrix highlights the differences between actual and expected
                  performance, the CSCs give communities the opportunity to provide a quantitative
                  assessment of service-delivery effectiveness.

                  Administering the scorecard. After finalizing the input-tracking matrix, facilitators
                  should begin the process of creating and administering the CSCs. The CSC data col-
                  lection process for communities typically involves a community meeting comprised
                  solely of users.8 As mentioned in Step 1, implementers should have initiated a pub-
                  licity campaign to inform service users about the meeting and the CSC process in
                  advance. At the meeting, facilitators should divide the participants into focus groups
                  based on the services that they utilize most. For example, if the CSC is focusing on
                  services in both the health and education sectors, people should be divided into
                  focus groups based on the services that they currently use most. As with the focus
                  group discussed under Step 2, it is good practice to ensure that the focus groups are
                  representative in terms of age, occupation, and gender.

                  Selecting performance criteria. The focus groups encourage service users to
                  generate performance criteria that can be used to assess the performance of service
                  providers. Facilitators should ensure that all focus group participants have the oppor-
                  tunity to contribute, including those who might be marginalized or poor. Based on the
                  feedback of the participants, facilitators should list all problems identified and solu-
                  tions suggested, and help the group categorize them into measurable performance
                  indicators. Examples of potential indicators include the attitude of staff members’
                  (politeness, punctuality, etc.); the quality of services provided (adequate infrastructure
                  and equipment, qualifications of staff, etc.); how well the facility is maintained; and
                  access to services. Indicators should be designed so that a higher score corresponds
                  with better performance (e.g., “transparency” as opposed to “lack of transparency”),
                  with the aim of identifying and prioritizing a maximum of 5–8 indicators.9


                  8. As mentioned earlier in the note, some projects create the input-tracking matrix and the performance and self-
                  evaluation scorecards at the same meeting.
                  9. These indicators can be compared across focus groups, facilities, and communities both cross-sectionally and
                  over time. If the project’s strategy is to use a standardized set of indicators, it is important to provide users’ with
                  the opportunity to include locally generated indicators as well.
                       Rapid Feedback: The Role of Community Scorecards in Improving Service Delivery  9




         Figure 2
                                                                     Score out      Scores after       Reasons
Sample Community        Indicators                                    of 100a        6 months          for change
   Scorecard from
      CARE Malawi       1.	 Positive attitude of staff                   40                 50         Attitude change

                        2.	 Management of health center                  50                 75         No favors
                                                                                                       Clean premises

                        3.	 Quality of services provided                 35                 50         Positive attitude
                                                                                                       of staff

                           Equal access to the health services
                        4.	                                             25                 50         No discrimination in
                           for all community members                                                   service provision

                       a. A scale of 0–100 can be used instead of a scale of 0–5 or 0–10.
                       Source: Adapted from Singh and Shah, 2004.



                       Scoring the performance indicators. After the focus groups have decided upon
                       the performance criteria, facilitators should ask these same participants to generate
                       a score for each measure. The scoring process can either take place through con-
                       sensus in the focus groups or through individual voting followed by group discussion
                       (in which case an average score is used). Scoring typically occurs either on a scale of
                       1–5 or 1–10, with the higher scores indicating “better” performance. Figure 2 shows
                       a sample CSC for a health project. Focus group participants are encouraged to reach
                       a consensus through discussion and come up with one score for each indicator. The
                       scoring process represents a good opportunity to ask people the reasons for low and
                       high scores; doing this helps identify outliers and provides more detailed information
                       about service-delivery performance. In areas where user literacy or numeracy levels
                       are low among focus group participants, symbols or icons (e.g., smiley faces or stop-
                       and-go traffic lights) can also be used to score indicators (Figure 3).




           Figure 3
                                     5-pt Rating Scale                              3-pt Rating Scale
Alternative Symbols
          to Aid the      Score             Criteria       Facial Icon    Score             Criteria        Color Symbol
    Scoring Process         1              Very bad                           1                  Bad

                            2                 Bad                             2                  OK

                            3               Just OK                           3              Good

                            4                Good

                            5             Very Good
10  How-to Notes




                   Step 4. Self-Evaluation by Service Providers
                   In this step, service providers have the opportunity to evaluate their own performance.
                   As part of this step, facilitators should identify which service provider staff members
                   will provide input. Given that the ability to collect this data is largely dependent on the
                   receptivity of service provider staff, facilitators may need to organize advocacy and
                   awareness activities to familiarize stakeholders with the CSC approach.

                   Service providers should identify their own performance indicators following the same
                   process described in Step 3 for service users. In most cases, there will be a con-
                   siderable overlap with service user-generated indicators. In cases where indicators
                   are different, facilitation may be required to refine the indicators for better compari-
                   son with service user-generated indicators. Participants should score each indicator,
                   preferably by consensus, but in cases where a consensus is not reached, by averag-
                   ing the scores. Participants should provide a justification for each score and suggest
                   measures to improve service delivery. Participants should also identify and prioritize
                   what they believe are the key concerns of service users.


                   Step 5. Interface Meeting between Service Users and Providers
                   The next step is a meeting between service users and providers. This process,
                   designed to provide service users with a sense of empowerment, creates a rare
                   opportunity for direct interaction between service users and providers without inter-
                   mediaries. The direct interaction between groups increases the likelihood that service
                   providers will respond to user feedback. It also generates actionable solutions to
                   local problems (see Box 5).

                   Facilitators should lay the groundwork for the interface meeting and encourage
                   productive interactions between service users and providers. One important pre-
                   meeting activity, to be done prior to the joint meeting, is to sensitize service users and
                   providers about their respective positions and constraints. This is accomplished by
                   holding a series of training sessions with members of stakeholder groups and shar-
                   ing the results of the other groups’ scorecard. To the extent that they can effectively
                   carry out these sensitization activities, facilitators can increase the likelihood that the
                   dialogue at the interface meeting does not become adversarial, but can instead serve
                   as a basis for mutual understanding between service users and providers.10

                   At the interface meeting, the primary role of the facilitator is to encourage a pro-
                   ductive dialogue between the service users and providers and help them develop a
                   list of actionable changes that can be implemented immediately. Developing action


                   10. As the meeting day approaches, facilitators should take measures to ensure that that there will be adequate
                   participation from both sides. This often requires mobilization at the community level and making arrangements
                   so that service provider staff are able to attend the meeting. It is also useful to invite other stakeholders (e.g.,
                   local political leaders and senior government officials) to the meeting to act as mediators. This can enhance the
                   legitimacy of the process.
                       Rapid Feedback: The Role of Community Scorecards in Improving Service Delivery  11




               Box 5
       Using CSCs to      The Comprehensive Community Scorecard (CCSC), adopted for the Malawi So-
  Promote Sustained       cial Action Fund (MASAF 3), is the most widely applied mechanism under the social
    Improvements in       accountability framework. The first round of the CCSC was implemented in over 500
   Service Delivery—      communities countrywide. The assessment focused on 5 key issues: (1) account-
Lessons from Malawi
                          ability; (2) satisfaction with the project management processes; (3) performance of
                          project outputs (e.g., water points or classroom blocks; (4) the performance of local
                          authorities and MASAF management; and (5) perceptions on the sustainability of
                          MASAF-funded projects.

                          Key areas identified for improvement included: increasing the frequency
                          of supervision by local authorities, improving transparency in beneficiary recruit-
                          ment for programs executed by local authorities, improving the reporting of financial
                          progress to communities, and improving attitudes of local authorities toward service
                          users.

                          Overall, there was widespread appreciation for the CCSC process. Service users
                          wanted CCSCs to be conducted regularly to strengthen citizen oversight and im-
                          prove public accountability. Anecdotal evidence indicates that, as a result of the
                          CCSC exercise, service users have become more critically aware of their role in
                          subproject management and the responsiveness of local authority officials has
                          improved considerably. MASAF is currently working with local authorities and partners
                          to institutionalize the process at the local authority and community levels. It is ex-
                          pected that, once institutionalized, a framework will have been created to facilitate
                          mutual accountability between service users and local authorities.
                          Source: Agarwal, 2010.



                        plan items gives credibility to the entire process from the perspective of the service
                        users and providers, and makes it easy to use the momentum gained from the CSC
                        process to pursue further changes in the future. Annex 2 provides a sample action
                        plan. Facilitators should compile and send the recommendations in the action plan to
                        appropriate stakeholders who have the ability to implement them.


                        Step 6. Post-Implementation Activities
                        CSC initiatives, especially those that occur as one-off experiments, do not usually
                        succeed in promoting policy and process changes that affect longer-term improve-
                        ments in service delivery unless they are scaled up. To ensure effective scaling-up, it
                        is necessary to make effective use of collected feedback.

                        Aggregating the feedback. If several CSC exercises have been conducted across
                        several locations, facilitators should collect, compile and analyze suggestions and
                        recommendations from all actions plans and send them to appropriate authorities
12  How-to Notes




                              (i.e. service providers, local or provincial or national government officials) for further
                              action. Compilation of these recommendations enables decision makers in identify-
                              ing problems and trends which help improve program implementation.

                              Monitoring and evaluating. After sending the list of action items to the relevant
                              authorities, it is important to follow up with them periodically to ensure that action is
                              being taken. Throughout the course of the CSC implementation process, it is critical
                              to monitor and evaluate the progress on the action plan.

                              Publicizing actions. It is crucial to publicize the progress (or lack thereof) of the
                              action plan so that service users will be able to determine whether or not their sug-
                              gestions are being implemented. On the demand side, it is important to collaborate
                              with civil society organizations and the media to maintain momentum for the reforms
                              by ensuring that the results from the CSC exercise are widely disseminated to the
                              public (see Box 6). This can be done in a number of ways, including grassroots media
                              (e.g., community radio and local television channels), public announcements, and
                              posters.



                   Figure 4                                                                                                   Reallocate Resources
                                                                                                                               Redesign Programs
    Aggregating Feedback to                                                                                                  Increase Accountability
                                                        Reallocate Resources
           Improve Services                              Redesign Programs
                                                       Increase Accountability


                                                                                                              Feedback to
                                                                                                          National Government

                                                                               Feedback to
                                                                             Local Government




                                             Feedback                                           Feedback                                                Feedback
                                               to PHC                                             to PHC                                                  to PHC



                                     PHC #1                                             PHC #1                                                  PHC #1



                                   Service Providers                                  Service Providers                                       Service Providers




                                                                   CSC                                                CSC                                                 CSC
                                    Service Users                                      Service Users                                           Service Users
                                   Feedback                                           Feedback                                                Feedback
                                    given on                                           given on                                                given on
                                     services                                           services                                                services
                                    received                Facilitator                received                Facilitator                     received            Facilitator


                              Notes: PMC = Primary Health Center; CSC = Community Scorecard
                            Rapid Feedback: The Role of Community Scorecards in Improving Service Delivery  13




                  Box 6
          Engaging with        With assistance from the World Bank, the city of Santa Rosa in Copan, Honduras,
     Civil Society in the      implemented a CSC initiative. Throughout the initiative, project managerment inter-
     Context of a CSC:         acted with local media to ensure that the results of the CSC would result in tangible
Lessons from Honduras          changes. In this case, local journalists were trained and consistently informed about
                               activities and the progress of the initiative. At the local level, especially on local com-
                               munity radio, coverage highlighted the role played by the Santa Rosa de Copan
                               Transparency Committee. The media were consistently helpful in reporting on the
                               initiative and its results.

                               At the end of the audit process, the media played a crucial role in promoting the
                               “contributions-for-improvement” initiative within the community. National coverage
                               highlighted the role played by the transparency committees as well as the specific
                               outcomes of the contributions-for-improvements scheme. At the conclusion of the
                               social accountability program, there was wide coverage of a national conference
                               held in Tegucilgalpa, the capital city of Honduras.

                               The results of the CSC, as well as the four contributions-for-improvements projects,
                               were publicly displayed and received enormous attention from the media.
                               Source: Cotlear (2010).




                             Repeating the CSC process. Subsequent rounds of the CSCs should be imple-
                             mented on a regular basis (annually or biannually) to determine if there has been any
                             progress on the recommendations in the action plan. This further empowers and
                             influences the perceptions of service users.

                             Scaling-up. Scaling-up the CSC to include more facilities is often challenging. The
                             project can help train civil society members to conduct CSC programs so that they
                             can take on the responsibility of facilitating the exercise on a sustained basis in the
                             future. In Sri Lanka, community professionals were trained to undertake CSC exer-
                             cises in a large number of project villages (Box 7).

                             Forming linkages with community-based organizations. Project managment
                             can establish linkages with existing community organizations, such as parent-teacher
                             associations and health committees, so that they play a role in facilitating and imple-
                             menting successive CSC initiatives. These linkages also reinforce the sustainability
                             and legitimacy of the process at the local level.
14  How-to Notes




                      Box 7
          Training a Cadre        In the World Bank-supported Gemi Diriya project, grassroots professionals have prov-
           of Facilitators to     en to be a driving force behind the establishment of sound village organizations and
        Scale-up Initiatives:     the facilitation of sustainable eforts to scale-up social accountability initiatives, in-
     Lessons from Sri Lanka       cluding CSCs. The project has created a Community Professional Learning and Train-
                                  ing Center (CPLTC) to train, mentor, and monitor community professionals in the field.

                                  For capacity-building needs, village-level communities can hire community profes-
                                  sionals through the CPLTC. Clear eligibility criteria for hiring community professionals
                                  have been defined, a selection process has been agreed upon, and a system of
                                  grading and promotion is in place (from entry-level to grade-A community profes-
                                  sionals with at least three years of field experience, including one year as a trainer). In
                                  addition, a formal salary structure, code of ethics, exit policy, and capacity-building
                                  strategy have been instituted. In 2005, the CPLTC in Polonnaruwa District alone gen-
                                  erated more than 1,000,000 Rupees worth of business for community professionals,
                                  benefitting the local economy.
                                  Source: Munshi et al. (2006).




           Conclusion           As the Bank’s Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC) agenda continues to move
                                forward, Community Scorecards are increasingly being used to improve service deliv-
                                ery in Bank-supported projects. While there are challenges associated with using
                                the tool, CSCs are unique in that they promote direct interactions and increase trust
                                between service users and providers and expedite local problem solving. Moreover,
                                since CSCs can be conducted in a matter of days, results can be generated quickly
                                and acted upon immediately by service providers. By empowering users to demand
                                accountability and transparency, promoting the collaborative development of ser-
                                vice-delivery solutions, and producing objective data that can be used to track per-
                                formance, CSCs can help task teams on Bank-supported projects become more
                                responsive, accountable, and ultimately more effective in achieving development
                                outcomes.
                  Rapid Feedback: The Role of Community Scorecards in Improving Service Delivery  15




References and     Agarwal, Sanjay and Petros Aklilu. 2010. Governance and Anti-Corruption Innovations in the Malawi Social
                     Action Fund Project. Social Development Notes, 131 (June): 1–8.
Other Resources    Cotlear, Blanche. 2010. Innovative financial partnership between city hall and citizens to build roads
                     and install water and sanitation connections in Santa Rosa de Copan, Honduras. Washington, DC:
                     World Bank.
                   Munshi, Meena, Natasha Hayward, and Barbara Verardo. 2006. A Story of Social and Economic Empow-
                     erment: The Evolution of ‘Community Professionals’ in Sri Lanka. Social Funds Innovations Notes,
                     4 (September), no. 2. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRURLIV/Resources/CP-Center-Innova-
                     tion-Note.pdf
                   Shah, Meera Kaul. 2003. Using Community Scorecards for Improving Transparency and Accountability in
                     the Delivery of Public Health Services: Experience from Local Initiatives for Health (LIFH) Project. Malawi:
                     CARE International.
                   Sundet, Geir. 2004. Public Expenditure and Service Delivery Monitoring in Tanzania: Some International
                     Best Practices and a Discussion of Present and Planned Tanzanian Initiatives. HakiElimu Working Paper
                     04.7, HakiElimu, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
                   Wagle, Swarnim, Janmejay Singh, and Parmesh Shah. 2004. Citizen Report Card Surveys—A Note on the
                     Concept and Methodology. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                   World Bank. 2009a. Improving Student Enrollment and Teacher Absenteeism Outcomes through Social
                     Accountability Interventions in Nalgonda and Adilabad Districts, Andhra Pradesh, India. South Asia
                     Sustainable Development Department. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                   World Bank. 2009b. Improving the Public Expenditure Outcomes of the National Rural Employment Guar-
                     antee Scheme (NREGS) through Social Accountability Interventions in Sirohi District, Rajasthan, India.
                     Social Accountability Series. South Asia Sustainable Development Department, Washington, DC.
                   World Bank. 2008. Are You Being Served: New Tools for Measuring Service Delivery. Edited by Samia
                     Amin, Jishnu Das, and Marcus Goldstein. Washington, DC.
                   World Bank. 2007. Maharashtra, India: Improving Panchayat Service Delivery through Community
                     Score Cards. Social Accountability Series. South Asia Sustainable Development Department, Wash-
                     ington, DC.
                   World Bank. 2004. Community Score Card Process: A Short Note on the General Methodology for Imple-
                     mentation. Social Development Department, Washington, DC.
16  How-to Notes




Annex 1. Differences between Community Scorecards and Citizen Report Cards

 Community Scorecard                                                      Citizen Report Cards

 Unit of analysis—community                                               Unit of analysis—household/individual

 Meant for local level (village cluster and/or facility level)            More relevant for macro level (city, state, or even national)

 Often used in rural settings                                             Often used in urban settings

 Participatory process—data collected through focus group                 Survey instrument—data collected through questionnaires
 discussions

 Emphasis on immediate feedback and accountability; less on               Emphasis on monitoring demand side data on performance
 actual data                                                              and actual scores

 Implementation time short (3–6 weeks)                                    Implementation time longer (3–6 months)

 Feedback to providers immediate; changes are decided upon                Feedback to providers and the government is provided at a
 through dialogue                                                         later stage often through media advocacy

 Requires strong facilitation skills                                      Requires strong technical skills

 Intermediary serves mostly as facilitator of the exercise                Intermediary conducts survey and data analysis

 Less emphasis on scores, more on immediate response; joint               Output is perception-assessment of services in the form of the
 decision-making                                                          report card

Source: Wagle, et al. (2004).



Annex 2. Sample CSC Action Plan, Devarapalle Mandal Primary Health Center,
Andhra Pradesh, India
                                                                                               Responsibility for
 S. No.   Indicator                            Action to be Taken                              Action and Timeframe

   1      Doctor’s hours/availability          Hours of operation to be announced              Auxiliary nurse midwives, health
                                               (doctor had additional charge)                  professionals, and community coordinators

   2      Staff behavior and working style     Talk to staff                                   Doctor; immediately

   3      Primary health center services       Gram Panchayat to be informed; primary          Auxiliary nurse midwives, primary health
                                               health center staff to attend the meetings      center staff; immediately
                                               of Gram Sangha (village organizations)

   4      Transportation services              Feasibility of constructing an access road      District Rural Development Agency and
                                               to be evaluated                                 Health Department

   5      Primary health center                Feasibility of improving waiting hall, beds,    District Rural Development Agency and
          infrastructure                       and basic amenities (drinking water, toilets,   Health Department
                                               etc.) to be evaluated

   6      Staff behavior                       Training to be conducted for staff              District Rural Development Agency and
                                                                                               Health Department


Source: World Bank (2009a).
18  How-to Notes
