                             88509




Guatemala Country Opinion
     Survey Report

   (July 2013 - June 2014)
The World Bank                                       Guatemala                                    Country Survey 2013




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. General Issues facing Guatemala ...............................................10
          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank .................................14
         VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................21
        VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments ..................................25
       VIII. How the World Bank Operates ..................................................36
         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala .....................39
          X. Communication and Openness..................................................44
         XI. Appendices ................................................................................52




                                                          2
The World Bank                              Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in
        Guatemala perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Guatemala regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Guatemala;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in Guatemala;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank ’s effectiveness and results, knowledge
               and research, and communication and information sharing in Guatemala; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in Guatemala.

       Use data to help inform the Guatemala country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In July 2012, 90 stakeholders of the World Bank in Guatemala were invited to provide their
opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country survey.
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime Minister,
the office of a Minister, the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial
department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World Bank
supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a
project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral agencies; private
sector organizations; private foundations; the financial sector/private banks; NGOs; community-
based organizations; the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-based
groups; academia, research institutes or think tanks; and the judiciary branch. A total of 62
stakeholders participated in the country survey (69%).

Respondents received the questionnaires via courier. Respondents were asked about: general
issues facing Guatemala, their overall attitudes toward the Bank; the World Bank’s effectiveness
and results; the Bank’s knowledge; working with the World Bank; the Bank’s future role in
Guatemala, and the Bank’s communication and information sharing in Guatemala:

A. General Issues facing Guatemala: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Guatemala is
   headed in the right direction, what they thought were the top three most important
   development priorities, and which areas would contribute most to reducing poverty and
   generating economic growth in Guatemala.




                                                3
The World Bank                              Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their familiarity
   with the World Bank, the Bank’s effectiveness in Guatemala, Bank staff preparedness, the
   extent to which the Bank should seek to influence the global development agenda, their
   agreement with various statements regarding the Bank’s work in Guatemala, and the extent
   to which the Bank is an effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to
   indicate the sectoral areas on which it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its
   resources, the Bank’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses in its work, the most and least
   effective instruments in helping to reduce poverty in Guatemala, with which groups the Bank
   should work more, and to what reasons respondents attributed failed or slow reform efforts.
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
   the Bank’s work helps achieve sustainable development results in Guatemala, the Bank’s
   level of effectiveness across thirty-six development areas, such as economic growth, and the
   extent to which the Bank meets Guatemala’s need for knowledge services, financial
   instruments, and mobilizing additional financial resources for development.
D. The World Bank’s Knowledge: Respondents were asked to indicate how frequently they
   consult Bank knowledge/research, the areas on which the Bank should focus its research
   efforts, and to rate the effectiveness and quality of the Bank’s knowledge/research, including
   how significant of a contribution the Bank’s knowledge/research make to development
   results, the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge/research, and the Bank’s effectiveness
   at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement with
   a series of statements regarding working with the Bank, such as the World Bank ’s
   “Safeguard Policy” requirements being reasonable, working with the World Bank increasing
   Guatemala’s institutional capacity, and the Bank disbursing funds promptly.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala: Respondents were asked to rate how
   significant a role the Bank should play in Guatemala’s development and to indicate what the
   Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Guatemala. Respondents were also asked to
   rate their familiarity with the IFC, how effectively the various parts of the Bank collaborate,
   and how significant a role the IFC should play in Guatemala’s development.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate where they
   get information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their access to the Internet, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s website and PICs. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s
   Access to Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of
   agreement that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data
   policy. Respondents were also asked their level of agreement that they know how to find
   information from the Bank and that the Bank is responsive to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank, their exposure
   to the Bank in Guatemala, and their geographic location.
In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s survey were
compared to responses from the 217 respondents (40% response rate) who completed the country
survey in FY 2004. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were possible.


                                                4
The World Bank                              Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position

       For further analyses, the small number of respondents from the office of a Minister was
        combined with those from the office of the President. In addition, the few consultants
        working on Bank-supported projects and respondents from the office of a
        Parliamentarian, PMUs, local government, private foundations, NGOs, and independent
        government institutions were included in the “Other” category. Note there were no
        respondents from bilateral agencies, multilateral agencies, the financial sector/private
        banks, CBOs, trade unions, faith-based groups, or the judiciary branch.




                                                5
The World Bank                   Guatemala    Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                    6
The World Bank                              Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they were located in Guatemala City. Because of
        there were too few respondents from the Eastern and Western parts of the country,
        analyses comparing geographic locations could not be conducted.




                                               7
The World Bank                           Guatemala   Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Professional Collaboration with the World Bank




Exposure to the World Bank




                                            8
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank

   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 6.4 on a
    10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar. This was
    statistically similar to the FY ’04 survey, in which familiarity with the Bank received a mean
    rating of 6.8 across all respondents.
         Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of the
          President/Minister indicated the highest levels of familiarity with the Bank whereas
          respondents from the media and private sector indicated the lowest familiarity levels.
         It should be noted that respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the Bank were
          significantly, strongly correlated with their impressions of the Bank’s overall
          effectiveness in Guatemala as well as significantly, strongly correlated with their
          perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results and
          the Bank’s relevance to Guatemala’s development.




                                                 9
The World Bank                              Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues facing Guatemala

Headed in the Right Direction

       When asked whether Guatemala was headed in the right or wrong direction, the vast
        majority of respondents indicated that Guatemala was headed in the right direction,
        significantly more than in the FY ’04 country survey.
             The vast majority of employees of ministries and respondents from the Office of
              the President/Minister, private sector, academia/research institutes, and other
              organizations indicated that Guatemala was headed in the right direction;
              however, respondents from the media were equally split between Guatemala
              being headed in the right direction and being headed in the wrong direction.




                                               10
The World Bank                                      Guatemala                                  Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues facing Guatemala (continued)
Development Priority
           Over half of all respondents indicated that poverty reduction was the most important
            development priority in Guatemala. Rural development and basic education were also
            considered top priorities. Respondents from academia/research institutes also indicated
            that basic infrastructure was a top priority.
                 In the FY ’04 country survey*, reducing poverty (42%), education (25%),
                    employment (24%), and investment/business climate (22%) were considered the
                    most important development priorities for Guatemala.




        *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’13 survey were provided in the FY ’04 survey.
                                                       11
The World Bank                             Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues facing Guatemala (continued)

Reducing Poverty

       Respondents indicated that rural development and basic education would contribute most
        to reducing poverty in Guatemala. Economic growth was also perceived as key to
        reducing poverty.




                                              12
The World Bank                             Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues facing Guatemala (continued)

Economic Growth

       Respondents indicated that foreign direct investment and labor markets/jobs
        creation/employment would contribute most to generating economic growth in
        Guatemala. Respondents from the media also indicated that equality of opportunity
        was key to economic growth.




                                              13
The World Bank                              Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Focusing World Bank Resources

       Respondents indicated that the Bank would have the most impact on development results
        in Guatemala by focusing most of its attention and resources on rural development and
        poverty reduction. Respondents from academia/research institutes indicated that the Bank
        should also focus on economic growth.




                                               14
The World Bank                               Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Overall Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Guatemala received a
        mean rating of 6.7 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10 being very
        effective. This was statistically similar to the FY ’04 country survey, in which the
        Bank’s overall effectiveness received a mean rating of 6.6 across all respondents.
             Although it was not a significant difference, employees of ministries gave the
              highest ratings for the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Guatemala whereas
              respondents from private sector and the media gave the lowest ratings.




                                                 15
The World Bank                              Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Achieving Sustainable Development Results

       Across all respondents, the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results
        in Guatemala received a mean rating of 6.4 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree
        at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Minister gave the highest ratings for
              the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results in Guatemala
              whereas respondents from the private sector, the media, and academia/research
              institutes gave significantly lower ratings.




                                                16
The World Bank                                Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Staff Preparedness

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s staff being well prepared to help Guatemala
        solve its most complicated development challenges received a mean rating of 7.9 on a
        10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, employees of ministries gave the
              highest ratings for the World Bank’s staff being well prepared whereas
              respondents from the media gave the lowest ratings.




                                                 17
The World Bank                                     Guatemala                                   Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest values to Guatemala were
        its financial resources and technical assistance.
             Respondents in the FY ’04 country survey* indicated that the Bank’s greatest
              values to Guatemala were providing loans to finance development projects (58%)
              and technical support (43%).




        *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’13 survey were provided in the FY ’04 survey.




                                                       18
The World Bank                                     Guatemala                                   Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Guatemala were
        imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities and not being willing
        to openly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country. Respondents from other
        organizations also indicated that there is not enough public disclosure of the Bank’s work
        in Guatemala.
             Respondents in the FY ’04 survey* indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses
              were imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities (32%)
              and being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures (24%).




        *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’13 survey were provided in the FY ’04 survey.


                                                       19
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       Over half of all respondents indicated that when World Bank assisted reform efforts fail
        or are slow to take place, they most often attribute this to the government working
        inefficiently.




                                                20
The World Bank                               Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Specific Areas of Effectiveness
    Respondents saw the Bank as most effective at public financial management, receiving a
        mean rating of 6.9, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not effective
        at all and 10 being very effective.




                                                21
The World Bank                                Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder differences in their ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness
        across three of these thirty-six areas.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/Minister
                gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at basic infrastructure
                whereas respondents from the private sector and the media gave significantly
                lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from other organizations gave the
                highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at food security and basic education
                whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister, the private sector,
                the media, and academia/research institutes gave significantly lower ratings for
                the Bank’s effectiveness in these areas.


       Responses across all stakeholder groups and both country surveys can be found in the
        Appendix.




                                                 22
The World Bank                                Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
        effectiveness at water and sanitation compared to respondents in the FY ’04 country
        survey. Respondents across both country surveys gave statistically similar ratings for the
        Bank’s effectiveness at the other areas that could be compared.




                                                 23
The World Bank                                Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness and
ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable development results in Guatemala, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-six specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help ach ieve sustainable
development results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of
effectiveness in one specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness or perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Guatemala. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at transport;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at law and justice;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at basic education; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at poverty reduction.


       Achieving Sustainable Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest
        Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results in
        Guatemala, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results. The
        areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at anti-corruption and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at basic education.




                                                 24
The World Bank                              Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments

Knowledge: Frequency of Use

       The majority of respondents indicated that they consult World Bank knowledge and
        research a few times a year.
             The majority of employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the
              President/Minister, the private sector, academia/research institutes, and other
              organizations indicated that they utilize Bank research a few times a year.
              Respondents from the media were equally split between indicating that they
              utilize Bank research monthly and indicating that they rarely utilize World Bank
              knowledge and research.




                                               25
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Meeting Guatemala’s Knowledge Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank meets Guatemala’s needs for
        knowledge services received a mean rating of 6.0 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of the
              President/Minister and employees of ministries gave the highest ratings for the
              Bank meeting Guatemala’s needs for knowledge services whereas respondents
              from academia/research institutes, the media, and the private sector gave the
              lowest ratings.




                                                26
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Focusing Bank Research

       Respondents indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
        and knowledge efforts on rural development and poverty reduction. Respondents from
        academia/research institutes indicated that the Bank should also focus its research on
        economic growth and private sector regulatory framework.




                                                27
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, the effectiveness of the World Bank’s knowledge and research to
        enhance knowledge and/or skills and the effectiveness of the World Bank’s knowledge
        and research to provide support for program implementation both received the highest
        mean rating, 7.2, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very
        effective.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Minister gave the highest ratings for
              the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research to raise awareness of a
              particular topic and stimulate public debate/dialogue whereas respondents from
              academia/research institutes gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Minister gave the highest ratings for
              the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research to provide support for
              program implementation whereas respondents from the private sector and
              academia/research institutes gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for the
              effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research in all other areas.




                                                28
The World Bank                               Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Qualities

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s knowledge and research being a source of
        relevant information on global good practices received the highest mean rating, 7.6, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Minister gave the highest ratings
               that the Bank’s research is timely whereas respondents from academia/research
               institutes gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Minister gave the highest ratings
               that the Bank’s research includes an appropriate level of stakeholder involvement
               during preparation whereas respondents from the media and academia/research
               institutes gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Minister and other organizations
               gave the highest ratings that the Bank’s research is adaptable to Guatemala’s
               specific development challenges and country circumstances whereas respondents
               from the private sector, the media, and academia/research institutes gave
               significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for the
               other qualities of the Bank’s research.




                                                29
The World Bank                                Guatemala                              Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Contribution

       Across all respondents, the significance of the contribution that the World Bank’s
        knowledge and research make to development results in Guatemala received a mean
        rating of 7.0 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not significant at all and 10 being very
        significant.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Minister and other organizations
              gave the highest ratings for the contribution that the Bank’s knowledge and
              research make to development results in Guatemala whereas respondents from the
              private sector and academia/research institutes gave significantly lower ratings.




                                                 30
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Technical Quality

       Across all respondents, the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge and
        research received a mean rating of 8.5 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being very low
        technical quality and 10 being very high technical quality.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of the
              President/Minister gave the highest ratings for the technical quality of the Bank’s
              knowledge and research whereas respondents from the media gave the lowest
              ratings.




                                                31
The World Bank                                Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Linkage to Non-Bank Expertise

       Across all respondents, the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank
        expertise received a mean rating of 7.3 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at
        all and 10 being very effective.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from other organizations
              gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-
              Bank expertise whereas respondents from academia/research institutes gave the
              lowest ratings.




                                                 32
The World Bank                              Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Most Effective

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank’s technical assistance, investment lending,
        and capacity development were its most effective instrument in helping Guatemala
        reduce poverty.




                                               33
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Least Effective

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s policy-based lending/ budget
        support to the Government was least effective in helping Guatemala reduce poverty.
        Over a third of all respondents indicated that the World Bank’s mobilization of other
        resources (Trust Funds) for development and analytical work were least effective.




                                                34
The World Bank                              Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Meeting Guatemala’s Needs

       Across all respondents, agreement that the Bank’s financial instruments meet
        Guatemala’s needs received a mean rating of 6.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being
        strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Employees of ministries, respondents from the office of the President/Minister
              and other organizations had significantly higher levels of agreement that the
              Bank’s financial instruments meet Guatemala’s needs compared to respondents
              from the private sector, the media, and academia/research institutes.




                                               35
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



VIII. How the World Bank Operates

The World Bank’s Work in Guatemala

       In terms of its work, the World Bank treating clients and stakeholders in Guatemala with
        respect received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.8, across all respondents, on a 10-
        point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar levels of
              agreement regarding these aspects of the Bank’s work in Guatemala compared to
              respondents from the FY ’04 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement regarding these aspects of the Bank’s work in Guatemala.




                                                36
The World Bank                              Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions
 Across all respondents, agreement that the World Bank’s approvals and reviews for
   procurement and financial management are well justified, that where country systems are
   adequate, the World Bank makes appropriate use of them, and that the World Bank’s teams
   and visits are well coordinated all received the highest mean rating, 7.5, on a 10-point scale
   with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
        Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement
           that the Bank disburses funds promptly compared to respondents in the FY ’04
           country survey (7.1).
        Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/Minister
           and other organizations had significantly higher levels of agreement that the Bank
           disburses funds promptly, effectively monitors and evaluates its projects, approvals
           are done in a timely fashion, working with the Bank increases institutional capacity,
           and that the Bank ensures consistency through staff changes compared to respondents
           from the private sector, the media, and academia/research institutes.




                                               37
The World Bank                               Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development
        partner in terms of its collaboration with the Government in Guatemala received the
        highest mean rating, 7.9, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being
        to a very significant degree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar ratings for
              these aspects of the Bank as an effective development partner.




                                                 38
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala

Role Significance

       Respondents indicated that the Bank should play a fairly significant role in Guatemala’s
        development in the near future, receiving a mean rating of 8.1 across all respondents on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not a significant role at all and 10 being a very significant
        role.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of the
              President/Minister gave the highest ratings for the role significance that the Bank
              should have in Guatemala’s near future whereas respondents from
              academia/research institutes gave the lowest ratings.




                                                39
The World Bank                              Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank should focus primarily on
        advocacy issues to make itself of greater value in Guatemala. Respondents also indicated
        that the Bank should reduce the complexity of obtaining Bank financing and improve the
        quality of its experts as related to Guatemala’s specific challenges.




                                               40
The World Bank                              Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala (continued)

Collaborating in Guatemala

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely
        with municipal and local government to ensure better development results in Guatemala.
        In addition, respondents from the private sector indicated that the Bank should work more
        with the private sector and respondents from academia/ research institutes indicated that
        the Bank should work more with academia/think tanks/research institutes.




                                               41
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala (continued)

Influencing the Global Development Agenda

       Across all respondents, the extent to which respondents believed the World Bank should
        influence the global development agenda received a mean rating of 7.4 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of the
              President/Minister gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the Bank
              should influence the global development agenda whereas respondents from the
              private sector, the media, and academia/research institutes gave the lowest ratings.




                                                42
The World Bank                                Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala (continued)

The International Finance Corporation (IFC)

       Across all respondents, familiarity with the IFC in Guatemala received a mean rating of
        4.4 on a 10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar.
        Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings of familiarity
        with the IFC in Guatemala.
       The effectiveness of the different parts of the World Bank at collaborating and
        coordinating efforts in Guatemala received a mean rating of 6.0 on a 10-point scale, with
        1 being not effectively at all and 10 being very effectively. Respondents across all
        stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness at
        collaborating and coordinating its efforts in Guatemala.
       Respondents indicated that the IFC should play a significant role in helping Guatemala
        achieve its economic and social development goals, receiving a mean rating of 7.4 across
        all respondents on a 10-point scale with 1 being not a significant role at all and 10 being a
        very significant role. Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar
        ratings for the significance of the role the IFC should play in Guatemala.




                                                 43
The World Bank                              Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Respondents indicated that they got most of their information about economic and social
        development issues in Guatemala from periodicals and the Internet. Local newspapers
        were also a popular information source.




                                               44
The World Bank                             Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank,
        respondents indicated that the World Bank website and e-Newsletters would be preferred.
        World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences, direct contact with World Bank staff, and
        World Bank publications and other written materials were also popular.




                                               45
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       Just over a quarter of all respondents indicated that they were aware of the Bank’s Access
        to Information policy.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              awareness for the Bank’s Access to Information policy.




       Few respondents indicated that they had requested information from the World Bank in
        the past year. However, all of the respondents who indicated that they had requested
        information from the World Bank indicated that they were able to obtain this information.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of
              requesting and obtaining information from the World Bank.




                                                46
The World Bank                               Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Agreement that respondents use more data from the World Bank as a result of its Open
        Data policy received a mean rating of 5.4, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s
              Open Data policy.




                                                47
The World Bank                               Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       All respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet (100%).



Website Usage

       The vast majority of respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website,
        significantly more than in the FY ’04 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of Bank
              website usage.




       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, nearly two-thirds indicated that they
        used the World Bank’s main website, statistically similar to the FY ’04 survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar usage for the
              Bank’s main and country websites.




                                                48
The World Bank                               Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Evaluation

       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, agreement that
        respondents find the information on the Bank’s websites useful received the highest mean
        rating, 7.8, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and
        10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement that Bank websites are easy to navigate and that they find the
              information on Bank websites useful.




                                                49
The World Bank                               Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

PIC Usage

       A quarter of all respondents in this year’s country survey indicated that they had used the
        Bank’s PICs in Guatemala, significantly more than in the FY ’04 country survey.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Minister were significantly more
              likely to have used the Bank’s PICs in Guatemala compared to respondents from
              other stakeholder groups. Respondents from the private sector were significantly
              more likely to be unaware of the Bank’s PICs in Guatemala compared to
              respondents from other stakeholder groups.




PIC Evaluation

       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s PICs, agreement that
        respondents find them to be a valuable source of information related to development in
        Guatemala received a mean rating of 6.7, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement regarding the value of the Bank’s PICs.




                                                 50
The World Bank                               Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       In terms of the Bank’s information sharing in Guatemala, respondents had the highest
        level of agreement that the Bank is responsive to their information requests and inquiries,
        receiving a mean rating of 7.4, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement that when they need information from the World Bank they know how
              to find it and that the Bank is responsive to their information requests and
              inquiries.




                                                 51
The World Bank                                 Guatemala                              Country Survey 2013



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 53


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 69


          C. Responses to All Questions by Year .............................................. 87


          D. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank .......... 89


          E. World Bank Client Survey 2013 – Guatemala Questionnaire ....... 90




                                             GUATEMALA




                                                  52
The World Bank                                     Guatemala                                  Country Survey 2013


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=62)
A. General Issues facing Guatemala

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
1. In general, would you say that Guatemala is headed in...?                              (N=54)
The right direction                                                                        81.5%
The wrong direction                                                                        14.8%
Not sure                                                                                   3.7%
2. When considering development priorities, which ONE                Percentage of Respondents (N=51)
   development priority below is the most important in
   Guatemala? Which ONE is the second most important
                                                                            nd           rd
   development priority? Which ONE is the third most             Most       2 Most      3 Most
   important priority?                                         Important   Important   Important    Combined
Poverty reduction                                                32.7%       13.5%       9.8%         56.0%
Rural development                                                9.6%        13.5%       7.8%         30.9%
Basic education                                                  15.4%       9.6%        0.0%         25.0%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                            7.7%        3.8%        7.8%         19.4%
Food security                                                    1.9%        9.6%        7.8%         19.4%
Law and justice                                                  1.9%        13.5%       3.9%         19.3%
Economic growth                                                  3.8%        7.7%        5.9%         17.4%
Basic infrastructure                                             3.8%        3.8%        5.9%         13.6%
Public sector reform                                             0.0%        5.8%        5.9%         11.7%
Public financial management                                      0.0%        0.0%        9.8%         9.8%
Crime and violence                                               9.6%        0.0%        0.0%         9.6%
Governance                                                       1.9%        0.0%        5.9%         7.8%
Health                                                           0.0%        3.8%        3.9%         7.8%
Anti-corruption                                                  1.9%        0.0%        3.9%         5.8%
Environmental sustainability                                     1.9%        1.9%        2.0%         5.8%
Equality of opportunity                                          1.9%        1.9%        2.0%         5.8%
Climate change                                                   0.0%        0.0%        3.9%         3.9%
Higher education                                                 0.0%        0.0%        3.9%         3.9%
Social protection                                                1.9%        0.0%        2.0%         3.9%
Transport                                                        3.8%        0.0%        0.0%         3.8%
Regional integration                                             0.0%        0.0%        2.0%         2.0%
Energy                                                           0.0%        0.0%        2.0%         2.0%
Urban development                                                0.0%        0.0%        2.0%         2.0%
Natural resource management                                      0.0%        0.0%        2.0%         2.0%
Domestic private sector development                              1.9%        0.0%        0.0%         1.9%
Foreign direct investment                                        0.0%        1.9%        0.0%         1.9%
Water and sanitation                                             0.0%        1.9%        0.0%         1.9%
Tourism                                                          0.0%        1.9%        0.0%         1.9%
Agricultural development                                         0.0%        1.9%        0.0%         1.9%
Private sector regulatory framework                              0.0%        1.9%        0.0%         1.9%
Gender                                                           0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Financial markets                                                0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Global integration                                               0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Trade and exports                                                0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Disaster management                                              0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Information and communications technology                        0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%




                                                      53
The World Bank                                   Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues facing Guatemala (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
    different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do
    you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Guatemala?    Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than THREE)                                           (Responses Combined; N=61)
Rural development                                                                    44.3%
Basic education                                                                      42.6%
Economic growth                                                                      31.1%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                23.0%
Health                                                                               21.3%
Basic infrastructure                                                                 19.7%
Food security                                                                        18.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                 11.5%
Equality of opportunity                                                              11.5%
Foreign direct investment                                                            9.8%
Social protection                                                                    6.6%
Law and justice                                                                      6.6%
Public financial management                                                          6.6%
Agricultural development                                                             6.6%
Crime and violence                                                                   4.9%
Higher education                                                                     4.9%
Governance                                                                           4.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                  3.3%
Trade and exports                                                                    3.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                      3.3%
Disaster management                                                                  1.6%
Gender                                                                               1.6%
Urban development                                                                    1.6%
Private sector regulatory framework                                                  1.6%
Tourism                                                                              1.6%
Information and communications technology                                            1.6%
Global integration                                                                   1.6%
Natural resource management                                                          1.6%
Financial markets                                                                    1.6%
Climate change                                                                       0.0%
Regional integration                                                                 0.0%
Transport                                                                            0.0%
Public sector reform                                                                 0.0%
Energy                                                                               0.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                         0.0%




                                                     54
The World Bank                                             Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues facing Guatemala (continued)
4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE
    areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating                 Percentage of Respondents
    economic growth in Guatemala? (Choose no more than THREE)                     (Responses Combined; N=61)
Foreign direct investment                                                                    37.7%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                        27.9%
Energy                                                                                       21.3%
Trade and exports                                                                            21.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                              18.0%
Rural development                                                                            18.0%
Basic education                                                                              18.0%
Basic infrastructure                                                                         16.4%
Tourism                                                                                      13.1%
Equality of opportunity                                                                      11.5%
Domestic private sector development                                                          9.8%
Agricultural development                                                                     8.2%
Crime and violence                                                                           8.2%
Public financial management                                                                  8.2%
Public sector reform                                                                         6.6%
Transport                                                                                    6.6%
Governance                                                                                   6.6%
Law and justice                                                                              6.6%
Private sector regulatory framework                                                          4.9%
Social protection                                                                            3.3%
Global integration                                                                           3.3%
Urban development                                                                            3.3%
Information and communications technology                                                    3.3%
Higher education                                                                             3.3%
Natural resource management                                                                  3.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                                 3.3%
Health                                                                                       3.3%
Water and sanitation                                                                         1.6%
Food security                                                                                1.6%
Climate change                                                                               0.0%
Disaster management                                                                          0.0%
Regional integration                                                                         0.0%
Gender                                                                                       0.0%
Financial markets                                                                            0.0%


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Familiarity, Overall Effectiveness, Preparedness                                       N      Mean         SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Guatemala, on a
                                                                                      62       6.40       2.07
   ten-point scale? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank's effectiveness in
                                                                                      57       6.74       1.91
   Guatemala, on a ten-point scale. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank’s staff is well prepared
   (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Guatemala solve its most complicated
                                                                                      52       7.88       1.89
   development challenges, on a ten-point scale, on a ten-point scale?
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



                                                               55
The World Bank                                    Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact
    on development results in Guatemala, in which sectoral areas do you
    believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and          Percentage of Respondents
    resources in Guatemala? (Choose no more than THREE)                   (Responses Combined; N=60)
Rural development                                                                    46.7%
Poverty reduction                                                                    33.3%
Basic education                                                                      25.0%
Basic infrastructure                                                                 23.3%
Economic growth                                                                      18.3%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                13.3%
Agricultural development                                                             13.3%
Transport                                                                            11.7%
Public sector reform                                                                 11.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                 11.7%
Governance                                                                           8.3%
Health                                                                               6.7%
Food security                                                                        6.7%
Climate change                                                                       6.7%
Information and communications technology                                            6.7%
Social protection                                                                    5.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                            5.0%
Energy                                                                               5.0%
Urban development                                                                    5.0%
Crime and violence                                                                   5.0%
Domestic private sector development                                                  3.3%
Public financial management                                                          3.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                         3.3%
Law and justice                                                                      3.3%
Natural resource management                                                          3.3%
Regional integration                                                                 1.7%
Tourism                                                                              1.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                              1.7%
Global integration                                                                   1.7%
Trade and exports                                                                    1.7%
Higher education                                                                     1.7%
Anti-corruption                                                                      1.7%
Disaster management                                                                  1.7%
Gender                                                                               0.0%
Financial markets                                                                    0.0%
Private sector regulatory framework                                                  0.0%




                                                      56
The World Bank                                        Guatemala                                     Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                             Percentage of Respondents (N=55)
5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do
                                                                                        nd
   you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second      Greatest      2 Greatest
   greatest value in Guatemala?                                           Value          Value           Combined
Financial resources                                                       41.8%          18.2%             60.0%
Technical assistance                                                      29.1%          25.5%             54.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                14.5%          14.5%             29.1%
Training/capacity building                                                 5.5%          16.4%             21.8%
Donor coordination                                                         5.5%           7.3%             12.7%
Studies/analyses                                                           0.0%           9.1%              9.1%
Data for monitoring and evaluation                                         1.8%           3.6%              5.5%
Policy advice                                                              0.0%           3.6%              3.6%
Convening and facilitating policy dialogue                                 0.0%           1.8%              1.8%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge
                                                                             1.8%            0.0%           1.8%
sharing)
Other                                                                        0.0%            0.0%           0.0%

6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest               Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)                   (Responses Combined; N=59)
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                          32.2%
Not willing to openly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                     25.4%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                          22.0%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                    18.6%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                       15.3%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                      15.3%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                       13.6%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                            13.6%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                 6.8%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Guatemala                            6.8%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                            5.1%
Other                                                                                          5.1%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                         3.4%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                       1.7%
Not client focused                                                                             0.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                          0.0%

7. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in             Percentage of Respondents
   reducing poverty in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)                         (Responses Combined; N=60)
Investment lending                                                                             52.5%
Capacity development                                                                           38.2%
Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                                         33.2%
Technical assistance                                                                           32.9%
Knowledge products/services                                                                    9.6%
Don’t know                                                                                     8.6%
Trust Fund management                                                                          8.0%
Other                                                                                          1.7%




                                                         57
The World Bank                                      Guatemala                                 Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the LEAST effective in         Percentage of Respondents
   reducing poverty in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)                      (Responses Combined; N=55)
Trust Fund management                                                                       32.1%
Knowledge products/services                                                                 26.6%
Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                                      24.8%
Technical assistance                                                                        22.8%
Capacity development                                                                        22.1%
Don’t know                                                                                  20.3%
Investment lending                                                                          16.2%
Other                                                                                       0.3%

Global Development Agenda                                                                 N     Mean       SD
9. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the
    global development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate
                                                                                         57      7.39     2.29
    change, communicable diseases, international financial systems, trade, etc.), on a
    ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

10. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
   main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
   Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better                    Percentage of Respondents
   development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=61)
Municipal and Local Government                                                              57.4%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                    27.9%
Private sector                                                                              26.2%
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                        21.3%
Beneficiaries                                                                               18.0%
Parliament                                                                                  8.2%
Media                                                                                       8.2%
Indigenous people authorities                                                               6.6%
Donor community                                                                             4.9%
Private foundations                                                                         4.9%
Autonomous regional authorities                                                             3.3%
NGOs                                                                                        1.6%
Faith based organizations                                                                   1.6%
Other                                                                                       0.0%

                                                                                          Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s
work in Guatemala, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)        N     Mean        SD
11. Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in
                                                                                         59     6.47      2.19
    Guatemala
12. The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                         59     5.97      2.40
    for Guatemala
13. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Guatemala     58     6.10      2.11
14. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Guatemala with respect             51     7.82      2.12




                                                        58
The World Bank                                         Guatemala                                   Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                                                      Degree
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Guatemala in
terms of …, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)    N       Mean      SD
 15. Sustainability of the results after implementation of projects                           51      5.27     2.27
 16. Responsiveness                                                                           50      6.08     1.91
 17. Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)                        49      6.20     2.02
 18. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                 51      6.02     2.12
 19. Being inclusive                                                                          47      6.47     2.17
 20. Openness (sharing data and other information)                                            50      6.66     2.18
 21. Staff accessibility                                                                      48      7.08     2.06
 22. Straightforwardness and honesty                                                          47      7.43     1.80
 23. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                                      47      6.55     2.25
 24. Collaboration with the Government                                                        54      7.89     1.55
 25. Collaboration with other donors                                                          44      6.93     2.00

26. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
   place, which of the following would you attribute this to?                         Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than TWO)                                                         (Responses Combined; N=51)
The Government works inefficiently                                                              51.0%
The impact of World Bank projects is non-sustainable after closing                              29.4%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                               25.5%
There is not an adequate level of citizen participation                                         23.5%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                 17.6%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                             13.7%
The World Bank works too slowly                                                                 9.8%
There is not an adequate level of civil society participation                                   9.8%
Poor donor coordination                                                                         5.9%
The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                               5.9%
ground
Other                                                                                          0.0%




                                                           59
The World Bank                                     Guatemala                              Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the        Effectiveness
following areas of development in Guatemala, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                          N       Mean      SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                                44      5.39     2.33
2.    Information and communications technology                                      45      6.38     2.15
3.    Transport                                                                      43      6.23     2.18
4.    Law and justice                                                                42      5.83     2.06
5.    Urban development                                                              39      5.56     1.87
6.    Environmental sustainability                                                   46      5.87     1.98
7.    Private sector regulatory framework                                            39      5.13     2.20
8.    Basic infrastructure                                                           43      6.53     2.11
9.    Tourism                                                                        34      5.06     2.31
10.   Poverty reduction                                                              48      6.19     2.25
11.   Gender                                                                         43      5.60     2.26
12.   Domestic private sector development                                            41      5.39     2.32
13.   Foreign direct investment                                                      39      5.21     2.25
14.   Water and sanitation                                                           44      6.50     1.93
15.   Trade and exports                                                              40      5.50     2.10
16.   Economic growth                                                                44      5.93     2.29
17.   Energy                                                                         40      5.73     2.34
18.   Disaster management                                                            36      6.08     2.14
19.   Higher education                                                               33      5.06     2.49
20.   Public financial management                                                    45      6.87     2.14
21.   Labor markets/job creation/employment                                          42      5.10     2.41
22.   Financial markets                                                              37      5.38     2.43
23.   Equality of opportunity                                                        43      5.60     2.22
24.   Health                                                                         45      6.07     2.38
25.   Rural development                                                              45      6.00     2.39
26.   Global integration                                                             34      5.21     2.37
27.   Food security                                                                  46      5.65     2.33
28.   Basic education                                                                42      6.21     2.39
29.   Social protection                                                              38      5.05     2.17
30.   Governance                                                                     42      5.64     2.29
31.   Climate change                                                                 41      5.51     2.23
32.   Public sector reform                                                           43      5.81     2.22
33.   Regional integration                                                           38      5.16     2.18
34.   Agricultural development                                                       40      5.63     2.32
35.   Crime and violence                                                             36      4.83     2.27
36.   Natural resource management                                                    38      5.39     2.24




                                                       60
The World Bank                                             Guatemala                      Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

Achieving Sustainable Results                                                         N     Mean       SD
37. To what degree does the World Bank’s work help achieve sustainable development
    results in Guatemala, on a ten point scale?                                      59      6.37     2.15
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank
    in Guatemala, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)      N     Mean       SD
38. The World Bank’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending, Development
                                                                                     60      6.12     1.82
    Policy Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.) meet the needs of Guatemala
39. The World Bank meets Guatemala’s needs for knowledge services (e.g., research
                                                                                     58      6.02     2.07
    analysis, data, technical assistance)
40. The World Bank Group (including IFC and MIGA) meets the needs of Guatemala in
                                                                                     54      6.39     1.85
    mobilizing additional financial resources for development



D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research           Percentage of Respondents
   (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?                                (N=59)
Weekly                                                                                 3.4%
Monthly                                                                                22.0%
A few times a year                                                                     50.8%
Rarely                                                                                 23.7%
Never                                                                                  0.0%




                                                               61
The World Bank                                    Guatemala                             Country Survey 2013


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

2. When thinking about the development challenges in Guatemala,
    where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to
    focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?         Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than THREE)                                            (Responses Combined; N=60)
Poverty reduction                                                                     41.7%
Economic growth                                                                       23.3%
Rural development                                                                     23.3%
Public sector reform                                                                  21.7%
Basic education                                                                       20.0%
Climate change                                                                        20.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                       16.7%
Energy                                                                                10.0%
Social protection                                                                     10.0%
Health                                                                                10.0%
Agricultural development                                                              8.3%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                 8.3%
Crime and violence                                                                    8.3%
Public financial management                                                           6.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                          6.7%
Private sector regulatory framework                                                   6.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                  5.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                               5.0%
Natural resource management                                                           5.0%
Governance                                                                            5.0%
Basic infrastructure                                                                  5.0%
Domestic private sector development                                                   3.3%
Disaster management                                                                   3.3%
Tourism                                                                               3.3%
Financial markets                                                                     3.3%
Transport                                                                             3.3%
Food security                                                                         3.3%
Foreign direct investment                                                             1.7%
Law and justice                                                                       1.7%
Urban development                                                                     1.7%
Information and communications technology                                             1.7%
Gender                                                                                0.0%
Trade and exports                                                                     0.0%
Regional integration                                                                  0.0%
Global integration                                                                    0.0%
Higher education                                                                      0.0%




                                                      62
The World Bank                                              Guatemala                                    Country Survey 2013


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at…                   Level of Effectiveness
in Guatemala? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                       N      Mean        SD
3. Raising your awareness of the particular topic                                              59       6.93      2.04
4.   Stimulating public debate/dialogue                                                        59         6.56      2.32
5.   Helping to build public consensus around reforms                                          54         6.43      2.02
6.   Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                                                    59         7.22      2.03
7.   Contributing to good policy making                                                        55         7.11      2.13
8.   Providing support for program implementation                                              58         7.17      2.17


To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research…                              Degree
in Guatemala? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                         N         Mean       SD
9.   Are timely                                                                                58         6.84     2.10
10. Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                    53         6.40     2.21
11. Are relevant to Guatemala's development priorities                                         59         6.69     2.05
12. Provide feasible recommendations                                                           58         6.74     2.11
13. Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                       58         7.34     2.12
14. A source of relevant information on global good practices                                  59         7.56     2.06
15. Are adequately disseminated                                                                60         5.92     2.27
16. Are adaptable to Guatemala's specific development challenges and country
                                                                                               60         6.58     2.17
    circumstances


Overall Evaluations                                                                                 N      Mean       SD
17. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge
    and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?                 60      7.02     1.77
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
18. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge/
    research, on a ten point scale?                                                                 60      8.45     1.28
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
19. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise
                                                                                                    53      7.32     1.98
    (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing, etc.)? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                63
The World Bank                                                Guatemala                       Country Survey 2013


E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten            Level of Agreement
point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                  N       Mean     SD
1. The World Bank disburses funds promptly                                             50       6.06   2.39
2. The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                       57      6.91      2.10
    supports
3. The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                 49      6.78      1.99
4.   The World Bank’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonable                   38      7.13      2.12
5.   The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                       51      6.55      2.19
6.   Working with the World Bank increases Guatemala’s institutional capacity          58      6.74      2.27
7.   The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes           45      6.93      2.27
8.  The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated                             51      7.47      1.83
9.  Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank makes appropriate use of
                                                                                       44      7.48      2.18
    them
10. The World Bank provides effective implementation support                           52      7.25      1.86
11. The World Bank’s approvals and reviews for procurement and financial
                                                                                       43      7.51      1.94
    management are well justified


F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala

The Bank’s Role                                                                        N       Mean      SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank SHOULD play in Guatemala’s
development in the near future, on a ten point scale?                                  59      8.05     2.28
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of             Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)                       (Responses Combined; N=55)
Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                         49.1%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                    32.7%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Guatemala’s specific
                                                                                            23.6%
challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                    20.0%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                    18.2%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/ statistics/figures on Guatemala’s
                                                                                            12.7%
economy
Other                                                                                       9.1%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                            7.3%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                      7.3%
Increase availability of fee-based services                                                 3.6%
Work faster                                                                                 3.6%
Greater collaboration and synergy within the World Bank Group (IDA, IFC,
                                                                                            0.0%
and MIGA)




                                                                 64
The World Bank                                                 Guatemala                           Country Survey 2013


F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala (continued)

The IFC                                                                                      N     Mean       SD
3. How familiar are you with the work of the International Finance Corporation
                                                                                             60     4.35     2.50
    (IFC) in Guatemala? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
4. How effectively do you believe the different parts of the World Bank Group
    (IBRD/IDA and IFC) collaborate and coordinate efforts in Guatemala?                      38     6.00     2.25
     (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
5.   How significant a role do you believe IFC, through its support for the private
     sector, SHOULD play in helping Guatemala achieve its economic and social
                                                                                             53     7.38     2.32
     development goals in the future?
     (1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)



G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social                   Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=60)
Periodicals                                                                                      61.7%
Internet                                                                                         56.7%
Local newspapers                                                                                 38.3%
Other                                                                                            11.7%
International newspapers                                                                         6.7%
International television                                                                         6.7%
Local television                                                                                 5.0%
Local radio                                                                                      3.3%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                                        3.3%
International radio                                                                              0.0%
Blogs                                                                                            0.0%
Mobile phones                                                                                    0.0%
Instant messaging                                                                                0.0%

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?                    Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                           (Responses Combined; N=60)
World Bank website                                                                               50.0%
e-Newsletters                                                                                    50.0%
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                                        33.3%
Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)                         30.0%
World Bank publications and other written materials                                              20.0%
Instant messaging                                                                                5.0%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                                        3.3%
World Bank Public Information Center                                                             1.7%
Mobile phones                                                                                    1.7%
Other                                                                                            1.7%
Blogs                                                                                            0.0%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under
    which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession                Percentage of Respondents
    that is not a list of exceptions?                                                          (N=58)
Yes                                                                                             25.9%
No                                                                                              74.1%




                                                                   65
The World Bank                                     Guatemala                                 Country Survey 2013


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities          Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                                     (N=57)
Yes                                                                                        10.5%
No                                                                                         89.5%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                               (N=6)
Yes                                                                                       100.0%
No                                                                                           -

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                    (N=56)
Yes                                                                                       100.0%
No                                                                                           -

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank website?                                           (N=56)
Yes                                                                                        83.9%
No                                                                                         16.1%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                            (N=51)
The World Bank’s country website (www. worldbank.org.gt)                                   35.3%
The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                          64.7%

9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information                  Percentage of Respondents
    Centers (PICs) in Guatemala?                                                          (N=60)
Yes                                                                                        25.0%
No                                                                                         55.0%
I don’t know what a PIC is                                                                 20.0%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point           Level of Agreement
scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                       N       Mean      SD
10. I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the organization’s Open
                                                                                      39      5.36      2.82
    Data policy
11. The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of information related to
                                                                                      24      6.71      2.66
    development in Guatemala
12. I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate                                   51      7.69      1.59
13. I find the information on the World Bank’s websites useful                        49      7.84      1.81
14. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it                 51      6.92      2.11
15. The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries             31      7.35      1.98




                                                      66
The World Bank                                      Guatemala                      Country Survey 2013


H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?       Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                           (N=57)
Employee of a Ministry/Ministerial Dept./Implementation Agency                  15.8%
Private Sector Organization                                                     14.0%
Media                                                                           14.0%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                          14.0%
Office of a Minister                                                            8.8%
Consultant/Contractor on World Bank-Supported Project/Program                   7.0%
Office of the President                                                         5.3%
Other                                                                           5.3%
Private Foundation                                                              3.5%
NGO                                                                             3.5%
Independent Government Institution                                              3.5%
Office of a Parliamentarian                                                     1.8%
PMU                                                                             1.8%
Local Government                                                                1.8%

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.           Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                           (N=59)
Other                                                                           25.4%
Public financial management                                                     15.3%
Economic growth                                                                 8.5%
Information and communications technology                                       5.1%
Trade and exports                                                               5.1%
Domestic private sector development                                             3.4%
Basic education                                                                 3.4%
Financial markets                                                               3.4%
Governance                                                                      3.4%
Higher education                                                                3.4%
Urban development                                                               3.4%
Agricultural development                                                        1.7%
Anti-corruption                                                                 1.7%
Basic infrastructure                                                            1.7%
Crime and violence                                                              1.7%
Tourism                                                                         1.7%
Disaster management                                                             1.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                    1.7%
Food security                                                                   1.7%
Health                                                                          1.7%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                           1.7%
Poverty reduction                                                               1.7%
Rural development                                                               1.7%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World   Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in your country?                                                        (N=55)
Yes                                                                             41.8%
No                                                                              58.2%




                                                        67
The World Bank                                      Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013


H. Background Information (continued)

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World      Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)                                       (N=57)
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                              43.9%
Use World Bank reports/data                                                           42.1%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                         33.3%
Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                          28.1%
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)             15.8%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
5. Which best represents your geographic location?                                   (N=58)
Guatemala City – Metropolitan Area                                                    93.1%
Eastern part of the country                                                           1.7%
Western part of the country                                                           5.2%




                                                        68
The World Bank                                                                                                 Guatemala                                                                                           Country Survey 2013


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

A. General Issues facing Guatemala
In general, would you say that Guatemala is headed in...?
 Percentage of Respondents                                    Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry           Private Sector                Media            Academia/Research Institute              Other
 The right direction                                                     100.0%                       88.9%                        100.0%                    50.0%                     83.3%                           84.6%
 The wrong direction                                                      0.0%                        11.1%                         0.0%                     50.0%                      0.0%                           15.4%
 Not sure                                                                 0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     16.7%                            0.0%


When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Guatemala? Which ONE is the second most important development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   st
 1 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                    Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry           Private Sector                Media            Academia/Research Institute              Other
 Rural development                                                        14.3%                       25.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Basic education                                                          14.3%                       12.5%                        16.7%                     16.7%                     25.0%                            6.7%
 Social protection                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                     16.7%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Transport                                                                14.3%                       12.5%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                                        14.3%                       37.5%                        33.3%                     33.3%                     37.5%                           40.0%
 Public sector reform                                                     0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Regional integration                                                     0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Gender                                                                   0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                      0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                                0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Energy                                                                   0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Tourism                                                                  0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Public financial management                                              0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                    0.0%                         0.0%                        16.7%                     16.7%                     12.5%                            6.7%
 Financial markets                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Urban development                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                             14.3%                        0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                  0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     12.5%                            0.0%
 Health                                                                   0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Global integration                                                       0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Food security                                                            0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Climate change                                                           0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                 0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Economic growth                                                          0.0%                         0.0%                        16.7%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Law and justice                                                          0.0%                         0.0%                        16.7%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Private sector regulatory framework                                      0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Higher education                                                         0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                     0.0%                        25.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                       28.6%                        0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     12.5%                           13.3%
 Natural resource management                                              0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                          0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                     16.7%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Disaster management                                                      0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Governance                                                               0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Information and communications technology                                0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%




                                                                                                                  69
The World Bank                                                                                                 Guatemala                                                                                           Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Guatemala (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Guatemala? Which ONE is the second most important development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   nd
 2 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                    Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry           Private Sector                Media            Academia/Research Institute              Other
 Rural development                                                        28.6%                       37.5%                         0.0%                     16.7%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Basic education                                                          14.3%                        0.0%                        16.7%                     50.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Social protection                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Transport                                                                0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                                        14.3%                       25.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                           26.7%
 Public sector reform                                                     14.3%                        0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     12.5%                            6.7%
 Regional integration                                                     0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Gender                                                                   0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                      0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                                0.0%                         0.0%                        16.7%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%                        12.5%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Energy                                                                   0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Tourism                                                                  0.0%                         0.0%                        16.7%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Public financial management                                              0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                    0.0%                         0.0%                        16.7%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Financial markets                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Urban development                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                             0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Equality of opportunity                                                  0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     12.5%                            0.0%
 Health                                                                   0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Global integration                                                       0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Food security                                                            28.6%                        0.0%                        16.7%                      0.0%                      0.0%                           13.3%
 Climate change                                                           0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                 0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Economic growth                                                          0.0%                        12.5%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     12.5%                           13.3%
 Law and justice                                                          0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                     33.3%                     37.5%                           13.3%
 Private sector regulatory framework                                      0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     12.5%                            0.0%
 Higher education                                                         0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                     0.0%                         0.0%                        16.7%                      0.0%                     12.5%                            0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                       0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Natural resource management                                              0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                          0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Disaster management                                                      0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Governance                                                               0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Information and communications technology                                0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%




                                                                                                                  70
The World Bank                                                                                                 Guatemala                                                                                           Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Guatemala (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Guatemala? Which ONE is the second most important development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   rd
 3 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                    Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry           Private Sector                Media            Academia/Research Institute              Other
 Rural development                                                        0.0%                        12.5%                        16.7%                      0.0%                      0.0%                           13.3%
 Basic education                                                          0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Social protection                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     14.3%                            0.0%
 Transport                                                                0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                                        28.6%                       12.5%                         0.0%                     16.7%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Public sector reform                                                     14.3%                        0.0%                        16.7%                     16.7%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Regional integration                                                     0.0%                         0.0%                        16.7%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Gender                                                                   0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                      0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                                0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Energy                                                                   0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     14.3%                            0.0%
 Tourism                                                                  0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Public financial management                                              14.3%                       12.5%                         0.0%                     16.7%                      0.0%                           13.3%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                    0.0%                        12.5%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                           13.3%
 Financial markets                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Urban development                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Environmental sustainability                                             0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Equality of opportunity                                                  0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                     16.7%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Health                                                                   14.3%                        0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Global integration                                                       0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Food security                                                            0.0%                        12.5%                         0.0%                     16.7%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Climate change                                                           14.3%                       12.5%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                 0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                        0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Economic growth                                                          0.0%                        12.5%                        16.7%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Law and justice                                                          0.0%                         0.0%                        16.7%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Private sector regulatory framework                                      0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Higher education                                                         0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     14.3%                            6.7%
 Basic infrastructure                                                     14.3%                        0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                     28.6%                            0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                       0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Natural resource management                                              0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                     16.7%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                          0.0%                        12.5%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            6.7%
 Disaster management                                                      0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%
 Governance                                                               0.0%                         0.0%                        16.7%                      0.0%                     28.6%                            0.0%
 Information and communications technology                                0.0%                         0.0%                         0.0%                      0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%




                                                                                                                  71
The World Bank                                                                                                   Guatemala                                                                                      Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Guatemala (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Guatemala?
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                          Office of President/Minister       Employee of Ministry            Private Sector                Media             Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Water and sanitation                                                      14.3%                          22.2%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                 18.8%
 Equality of opportunity                                                    0.0%                          11.1%                        0.0%                     25.0%                        37.5%                  6.3%
 Economic growth                                                           28.6%                          33.3%                       37.5%                     37.5%                        25.0%                 37.5%
 Climate change                                                             0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Disaster management                                                        0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Regional integration                                                       0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Gender                                                                     0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                     12.5%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Rural development                                                         71.4%                          55.6%                       37.5%                     37.5%                        25.0%                 50.0%
 Urban development                                                          0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                     12.5%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Basic education                                                           57.1%                          55.6%                       37.5%                     50.0%                        50.0%                 31.3%
 Private sector regulatory framework                                        0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                     12.5%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                      57.1%                          11.1%                       12.5%                     12.5%                        25.0%                 18.8%
 Social protection                                                         14.3%                          11.1%                        0.0%                     12.5%                        12.5%                  0.0%
 Law and justice                                                           14.3%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                        12.5%                  6.3%
 Transport                                                                  0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Tourism                                                                    0.0%                           0.0%                       12.5%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                         0.0%                          11.1%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  6.3%
 Information and communications technology                                  0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  6.3%
 Public sector reform                                                       0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                        0.0%                          11.1%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  6.3%
 Foreign direct investment                                                 14.3%                           0.0%                       37.5%                     12.5%                         0.0%                  6.3%
 Global integration                                                         0.0%                          11.1%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Energy                                                                     0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Food security                                                              0.0%                           0.0%                       12.5%                     12.5%                        12.5%                 43.8%
 Higher education                                                           0.0%                          11.1%                        0.0%                      0.0%                        12.5%                  6.3%
 Natural resource management                                                0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  6.3%
 Environmental sustainability                                               0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Health                                                                     0.0%                          22.2%                       25.0%                      0.0%                        37.5%                 25.0%
 Public financial management                                               14.3%                           0.0%                        0.0%                     12.5%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Governance                                                                 0.0%                          11.1%                       12.5%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                  14.3%                           0.0%                        0.0%                     12.5%                         0.0%                  6.3%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                      0.0%                          11.1%                       62.5%                     25.0%                        25.0%                 18.8%
 Financial markets                                                          0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                  0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                          0.0%                          11.1%                        0.0%                      0.0%                        12.5%                  0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                            0.0%                           0.0%                       12.5%                     12.5%                         0.0%                  0.0%




                                                                                                                   72
The World Bank                                                                                                 Guatemala                                                                                    Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Guatemala (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Guatemala? (Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                         Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry            Private Sector              Media            Academia/Research Institute      Other
  Energy                                                                   37.5%                         22.2%                       37.5%                   37.5%                       0.0%                   6.3%
  Equality of opportunity                                                  0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                   50.0%                       12.5%                 12.5%
  Social protection                                                        12.5%                          0.0%                        0.0%                   12.5%                       0.0%                   0.0%
  Global integration                                                       0.0%                          11.1%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       12.5%                  0.0%
  Climate change                                                           0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   0.0%
  Anti-corruption                                                          12.5%                          0.0%                        0.0%                   12.5%                       37.5%                 25.0%
  Disaster management                                                      0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   0.0%
  Rural development                                                        12.5%                         22.2%                        0.0%                   25.0%                       25.0%                 25.0%
  Foreign direct investment                                                50.0%                         44.4%                       62.5%                   12.5%                       12.5%                 43.8%
  Urban development                                                        0.0%                          11.1%                        0.0%                   12.5%                       0.0%                   0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%                          11.1%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   0.0%
  Basic education                                                          0.0%                          33.3%                        0.0%                   25.0%                       12.5%                 25.0%
  Information and communications technology                                0.0%                           0.0%                       12.5%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   6.3%
  Private sector regulatory framework                                      0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       12.5%                  6.3%
  Tourism                                                                  25.0%                         22.2%                       37.5%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   0.0%
  Trade and exports                                                        25.0%                         33.3%                       37.5%                    0.0%                       12.5%                 25.0%
  Public sector reform                                                     0.0%                           0.0%                       37.5%                    0.0%                       12.5%                  0.0%
  Regional integration                                                     0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   0.0%
  Domestic private sector development                                      12.5%                          0.0%                        0.0%                   25.0%                       0.0%                  18.8%
  Labor markets/job creation/employment                                    25.0%                         55.6%                       12.5%                    0.0%                       37.5%                 37.5%
  Agricultural development                                                 12.5%                          0.0%                        0.0%                   25.0%                       0.0%                   6.3%
  Food security                                                            0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   6.3%
  Transport                                                                0.0%                           0.0%                       12.5%                    0.0%                       12.5%                  6.3%
  Crime and violence                                                       0.0%                           0.0%                       12.5%                    0.0%                       12.5%                 18.8%
  Higher education                                                         0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       12.5%                  6.3%
  Gender                                                                   0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   0.0%
  Natural resource management                                              0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                   12.5%                       0.0%                   6.3%
  Environmental sustainability                                             12.5%                          0.0%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   6.3%
  Health                                                                   0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   6.3%
  Basic infrastructure                                                     25.0%                         11.1%                       12.5%                   37.5%                       37.5%                  0.0%
  Governance                                                               0.0%                          22.2%                       12.5%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   6.3%
  Law and justice                                                          12.5%                          0.0%                       12.5%                    0.0%                       12.5%                  0.0%
  Public financial management                                              25.0%                          0.0%                        0.0%                   12.5%                       25.0%                  0.0%
  Financial markets                                                        0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                    0.0%                       0.0%                   0.0%




                                                                                                                 73
The World Bank                                                                                                                  Guatemala                                                                              Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective; 1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Guatemala, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in Guatemala?
   (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)              Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry              Private Sector               Media               Academia/Research Institute               Other
 Rural development                                                       50.0%                         44.4%                         37.5%                    62.5%                           37.5%                         46.7%
 Basic education                                                         0.0%                          33.3%                         25.0%                    25.0%                           37.5%                         33.3%
 Social protection                                                       12.5%                          0.0%                          0.0%                    12.5%                           12.5%                          0.0%
 Transport                                                               25.0%                         33.3%                         12.5%                    12.5%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                                       62.5%                         22.2%                         12.5%                    75.0%                           0.0%                          40.0%
 Public sector reform                                                    12.5%                          0.0%                         25.0%                    12.5%                           12.5%                          0.0%
 Regional integration                                                    0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           12.5%                          0.0%
 Gender                                                                  0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                     0.0%                           0.0%                         12.5%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           6.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                               0.0%                          11.1%                         25.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                    12.5%                         33.3%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           12.5%                          6.7%
 Energy                                                                  0.0%                          22.2%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Tourism                                                                 0.0%                           0.0%                         12.5%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Public financial management                                             0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                          13.3%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                   12.5%                         11.1%                         25.0%                    12.5%                           12.5%                         13.3%
 Financial markets                                                       0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Urban development                                                       12.5%                          0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                          13.3%
 Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                          13.3%
 Equality of opportunity                                                 0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           12.5%                          0.0%
 Health                                                                  0.0%                          11.1%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                          20.0%
 Global integration                                                      0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%                    12.5%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Food security                                                           0.0%                          11.1%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                          20.0%
 Climate change                                                          12.5%                         11.1%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                          13.3%
 Agricultural development                                                0.0%                           0.0%                         37.5%                    25.0%                           12.5%                          0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                       0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           12.5%                          0.0%
 Economic growth                                                         12.5%                          0.0%                         25.0%                    12.5%                           50.0%                         13.3%
 Law and justice                                                         0.0%                          11.1%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           6.7%
 Private sector regulatory framework                                     0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Crime and violence                                                      12.5%                          0.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           12.5%                          6.7%
 Higher education                                                        0.0%                           0.0%                         12.5%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                    50.0%                         22.2%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           62.5%                         13.3%
 Natural resource management                                             12.5%                          0.0%                         12.5%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                         0.0%                          11.1%                          0.0%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Disaster management                                                     0.0%                           0.0%                         12.5%                     0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%
 Governance                                                              0.0%                          11.1%                         12.5%                    12.5%                           0.0%                          13.3%
 Information and communications technology                               0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%                    25.0%                           0.0%                           6.7%
                                                                                                                                  74
The World Bank                                                                                                       Guatemala                                                                     Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Guatemala?
 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Office of President/Minister        Employee of Ministry             Private Sector         Media   Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Financial resources                                                         16.7%                         55.6%                          50.0%              16.7%            37.5%                   57.1%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                  50.0%                         11.1%                           0.0%              16.7%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Technical assistance                                                        33.3%                         33.3%                          37.5%              33.3%            37.5%                   21.4%
 Policy advice                                                               0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Donor coordination                                                          0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%               0.0%            25.0%                    7.1%
 Data for monitoring and evaluation                                          0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%              16.7%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Training/capacity building                                                  0.0%                           0.0%                          12.5%              16.7%             0.0%                    7.1%
 Studies/analyses                                                            0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Convening and facilitating policy dialogue                                  0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge
                                                                             0.0%                            0.0%                         0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                  7.1%
 sharing)
 Other                                                                       0.0%                            0.0%                         0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Guatemala?
 2nd Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Office of President/Minister        Employee of Ministry             Private Sector         Media   Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Financial resources                                                         50.0%                          0.0%                          12.5%              16.7%            25.0%                   21.4%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                  16.7%                         22.2%                          37.5%               0.0%             0.0%                   14.3%
 Technical assistance                                                        0.0%                          22.2%                          25.0%              50.0%            25.0%                   21.4%
 Policy advice                                                               16.7%                          0.0%                           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                    7.1%
 Donor coordination                                                          0.0%                          11.1%                           0.0%               0.0%            12.5%                    7.1%
 Data for monitoring and evaluation                                          16.7%                         11.1%                           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Training/capacity building                                                  0.0%                          11.1%                          25.0%              33.3%            25.0%                   14.3%
 Studies/analyses                                                            0.0%                          22.2%                           0.0%               0.0%            12.5%                   14.3%
 Convening and facilitating policy dialogue                                  0.0%                           0.0%                           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge
                                                                             0.0%                            0.0%                         0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%
 sharing)
 Other                                                                       0.0%                            0.0%                         0.0%               0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                   Office of President/Minister     Employee of Ministry          Private Sector              Media   Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
                                                                              62.5%                        44.4%                     66.7%                   37.5%             12.5%                  6.7%
 realities
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                     37.5%                         0.0%                      0.0%                   12.5%             12.5%                  20.0%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                  12.5%                        33.3%                     16.7%                   12.5%             12.5%                  26.7%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                       0.0%                         11.1%                      0.0%                   12.5%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                     0.0%                         11.1%                      0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Not client focused                                                           0.0%                          0.0%                      0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%                    0.0%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                        0.0%                          0.0%                      0.0%                    0.0%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Not willing to openly criticize policies and reform efforts in
                                                                              0.0%                         33.3%                      0.0%                   50.0%             50.0%                  20.0%
 the country
 Too influenced by developed countries                                        25.0%                         0.0%                     50.0%                   12.5%             37.5%                  20.0%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                     0.0%                         11.1%                      0.0%                   12.5%             0.0%                   33.3%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                    0.0%                          0.0%                      0.0%                    0.0%             37.5%                  26.7%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                          0.0%                          0.0%                     33.3%                   12.5%             0.0%                   20.0%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                                          12.5%                        11.1%                      0.0%                    0.0%             12.5%                   0.0%
 Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                               0.0%                          0.0%                      0.0%                   25.0%             12.5%                   6.7%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                              12.5%                        11.1%                      0.0%                   0.0%              12.5%                  6.7%
 Guatemala
 Other                                                                        12.5%                        11.1%                     16.7%                   0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%
                                                                                                                        75
The World Bank                                                                                                      Guatemala                                                                                               Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)               Office of President/Minister       Employee of Ministry          Private Sector                      Media              Academia/Research Institute               Other
 Investment lending                                                       71.4%                          77.8%                      0.0%                           37.5%                       50.0%                            62.5%
 Capacity development                                                     28.6%                          44.4%                     75.0%                           25.0%                       50.0%                            37.5%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                   42.9%                          22.2%                      0.0%                           37.5%                       12.5%                             6.3%
 Analytical work                                                          14.3%                          11.1%                      0.0%                            0.0%                       12.5%                             6.3%
 Technical assistance                                                     42.9%                          44.4%                     87.5%                           87.5%                       75.0%                            62.5%
 Mobilization of other resources (Trust Funds) for
                                                                          0.0%                            0.0%                     12.5%                            0.0%                          0.0%                          25.0%
 development
 Other                                                                    0.0%                            0.0%                      0.0%                           12.5%                          0.0%                          0.0%
 Don’t know                                                               0.0%                            0.0%                      0.0%                            0.0%                          0.0%                          0.0%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the LEAST effective in reducing poverty in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                Office of President/Minister       Employee of Ministry          Private Sector                     Media              Academia/Research Institute               Other
 Investment lending                                                        16.7%                           0.0%                     20.0%                          37.5%                       12.5%                            13.3%
 Capacity development                                                      33.3%                          11.1%                      0.0%                           0.0%                       12.5%                             6.7%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                    33.3%                          66.7%                     60.0%                          25.0%                       87.5%                            73.3%
 Analytical work                                                           66.7%                          11.1%                     80.0%                          37.5%                       25.0%                            26.7%
 Technical assistance                                                      0.0%                           33.3%                      0.0%                           0.0%                        0.0%                             6.7%
 Mobilization of other resources (Trust Funds) for
                                                                           0.0%                           44.4%                     20.0%                          62.5%                         37.5%                          33.3%
 development
 Other                                                                     0.0%                           11.1%                     20.0%                           0.0%                         12.5%                          0.0%
 Don’t know                                                                0.0%                           11.1%                      0.0%                          12.5%                         0.0%                           6.7%




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)
  Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                   Office of President/Minister       Employee of Ministry             Private Sector                Media             Academia/Research Institute               Other
  NGOs                                                                          0.0%                            0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                           0.0%
  Municipal and Local Government                                               57.1%                           88.9%                       50.0%                     62.5%                         37.5%                         50.0%
  Beneficiaries                                                                 0.0%                           11.1%                       25.0%                     12.5%                         12.5%                         37.5%
  Private sector                                                               14.3%                           11.1%                       75.0%                     12.5%                         12.5%                         25.0%
  Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                         14.3%                           55.6%                        0.0%                     25.0%                         12.5%                         12.5%
  Donor community                                                               0.0%                            0.0%                       12.5%                     12.5%                         12.5%                          0.0%
  Private foundations                                                           0.0%                            0.0%                       12.5%                      0.0%                         0.0%                          12.5%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                     28.6%                           22.2%                        0.0%                     37.5%                        100.0%                         12.5%
  Parliament                                                                   28.6%                            0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                          12.5%
  Media                                                                         0.0%                            0.0%                        0.0%                     37.5%                         12.5%                          6.3%
  Faith based organizations                                                     0.0%                            0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                           6.3%
  Autonomous regional authorities                                              14.3%                           11.1%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                           0.0%
  Indigenous people authorities                                                28.6%                            0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                           6.3%
  Other                                                                         0.0%                            0.0%                        0.0%                      0.0%                         0.0%                           0.0%


                                                                                                                       76
The World Bank                                                                                                        Guatemala                                               Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Guatemala, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Guatemala in terms of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                         77
The World Bank                                                                                                     Guatemala                                                                      Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                             Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry              Private Sector        Media   Academia/Research Institute      Other
 The World Bank works too slowly                                              0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%             14.3%            25.0%                   15.4%
 The Government works inefficiently                                           50.0%                         42.9%                         50.0%             42.9%            50.0%                   53.8%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen participation                      25.0%                         42.9%                         25.0%             28.6%            25.0%                    7.7%
 There is not an adequate level of civil society participation                0.0%                          42.9%                         12.5%             14.3%             0.0%                    0.0%
 Poor donor coordination                                                      0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%              0.0%            25.0%                    0.0%
 The impact of World Bank projects is non-sustainable after
                                                                              50.0%                          0.0%                         25.0%             42.9%             37.5%                  38.5%
 closing
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                          0.0%                           0.0%                         12.5%             28.6%             0.0%                   23.1%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                            25.0%                         28.6%                         12.5%             14.3%             12.5%                  46.2%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                                              0.0%                           0.0%                         50.0%             14.3%             25.0%                  7.7%
 challenges
 The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social
                                                                              25.0%                          0.0%                         12.5%             0.0%               0.0%                  7.7%
 realities on the ground
 Other                                                                        0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%                    0.0%
 The World Bank works too slowly                                              0.0%                           0.0%                          0.0%             14.3%             25.0%                  15.4%
 The Government works inefficiently                                           50.0%                         42.9%                         50.0%             42.9%             50.0%                  53.8%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen participation                      25.0%                         42.9%                         25.0%             28.6%             25.0%                   7.7%




                                                                                                                      78
The World Bank                                                                                                          Guatemala                                                                   Country Survey 2013

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Guatemala, on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                                                          79
The World Bank                                                                                                      Guatemala                                                                       Country Survey 2013

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Guatemala, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge
How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?
 Percentage of Respondents                                    Office of President/Minister           Employee of Ministry            Private Sector           Media   Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Weekly                                                                   14.3%                              0.0%                         0.0%                 0.0%             0.0%                    6.3%
 Monthly                                                                  28.6%                             22.2%                        12.5%                37.5%            25.0%                   18.8%
 A few times a year                                                       57.1%                             55.6%                        62.5%                25.0%            50.0%                   62.5%
 Rarely                                                                   0.0%                              22.2%                        25.0%                37.5%            25.0%                   12.5%
 Never                                                                    0.0%                               0.0%                         0.0%                 0.0%             0.0%                    0.0%




                                                                                                                      80
The World Bank                                                                                                       Guatemala                                                                                         Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)
When thinking about the development challenges in Guatemala, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)               Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry             Private Sector                 Media               Academia/Research Institute            Other
 Public sector reform                                                     25.0%                         22.2%                        12.5%                      37.5%                          14.3%                       25.0%
 Gender                                                                   0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                      0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                      12.5%                          0.0%                         6.3%
 Foreign direct investment                                                0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                      12.5%                          0.0%                         0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                     12.5%                         11.1%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          14.3%                        0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                        0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         0.0%
 Economic growth                                                          12.5%                         11.1%                        62.5%                      12.5%                          28.6%                       25.0%
 Energy                                                                   25.0%                         22.2%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          14.3%                        0.0%
 Disaster management                                                      0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         6.3%
 Tourism                                                                  0.0%                           0.0%                        12.5%                       0.0%                          14.3%                        0.0%
 Basic education                                                          0.0%                          11.1%                        25.0%                      37.5%                          14.3%                       31.3%
 Social protection                                                        12.5%                         11.1%                         0.0%                      12.5%                          14.3%                        6.3%
 Climate change                                                           12.5%                         33.3%                        25.0%                      12.5%                          14.3%                       18.8%
 Poverty reduction                                                        37.5%                         33.3%                        75.0%                      62.5%                          14.3%                       43.8%
 Law and justice                                                          0.0%                          11.1%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                          0.0%                          22.2%                         0.0%                      25.0%                          28.6%                       18.8%
 Financial markets                                                        12.5%                         11.1%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                  0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                      12.5%                          14.3%                        6.3%
 Urban development                                                        0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         6.3%
 Regional integration                                                     0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         0.0%
 Information and communications technology                                0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         6.3%
 Transport                                                                25.0%                          0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                 0.0%                           0.0%                        37.5%                      12.5%                          0.0%                         0.0%
 Natural resource management                                              12.5%                          0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         6.3%
 Public financial management                                              12.5%                         11.1%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          14.3%                        6.3%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                    0.0%                          22.2%                        12.5%                       0.0%                          14.3%                        6.3%
 Crime and violence                                                       12.5%                         11.1%                        12.5%                       0.0%                          14.3%                        6.3%
 Health                                                                   12.5%                         11.1%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                        18.8%
 Rural development                                                        37.5%                         33.3%                        12.5%                      25.0%                          0.0%                        18.8%
 Global integration                                                       0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         0.0%
 Food security                                                            0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          14.3%                        6.3%
 Environmental sustainability                                             25.0%                          0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                        12.5%
 Private sector regulatory framework                                      0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                      25.0%                          28.6%                        0.0%
 Governance                                                               0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          14.3%                       12.5%
 Basic infrastructure                                                     12.5%                         11.1%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          14.3%                        0.0%
 Higher education                                                         0.0%                           0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%                          0.0%                         0.0%

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at… in Guatemala? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                        81
The World Bank                                                                                                                   Guatemala                 Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)
To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research... in Guatemala? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                   82
The World Bank                                                                                                        Guatemala      Country Survey 2013

E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)




                                                                                                                        83
The World Bank                                                                                                                    Guatemala                                                                  Country Survey 2013

F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Guatemala (continued)
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                 Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry                               Private Sector    Media   Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Guatemala’s
                                                                            37.5%                        16.7%                                           12.5%         33.3%             12.5%                  26.7%
 specific challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                    75.0%                        50.0%                                           12.5%         33.3%             25.0%                  26.7%
 Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                         37.5%                        33.3%                                           87.5%         16.7%             50.0%                  53.3%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to
                                                                            12.5%                         0.0%                                            0.0%         16.7%             12.5%                  6.7%
 markets
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                     12.5%                         0.0%                                            0.0%         0.0%              37.5%                  0.0%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures
                                                                            0.0%                          0.0%                                           25.0%         0.0%               0.0%                  26.7%
 on Guatemala’s economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                                   0.0%                         33.3%                                           12.5%         33.3%             0.0%                   20.0%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                   0.0%                         16.7%                                           37.5%         33.3%             25.0%                   6.7%
 Increase availability of fee-based services                                0.0%                          0.0%                                            0.0%          0.0%             12.5%                   6.7%
 Work faster                                                                12.5%                         0.0%                                            0.0%          0.0%             12.5%                   0.0%
 Greater collaboration and synergy within the World Bank
                                                                            0.0%                          0.0%                                            0.0%         0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%
 Group (IDA, IFC, and MIGA)
 Other                                                                      0.0%                         16.7%                                            0.0%         16.7%             25.0%                  6.7%




(1-"Not familiar at all", 10-"Extremely familiar"; 1-"Not effectively at all", 10-"Very effectively"; 1-"Not a significant role at all", 10-"Very significant role")
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                     84
The World Bank                                                                                                        Guatemala                                                                              Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)               Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry         Private Sector                          Media     Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Local newspapers                                                         75.0%                          0.0%                    37.5%                               28.6%              37.5%                   43.8%
 International newspapers                                                 25.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                               14.3%               0.0%                    6.3%
 Local radio                                                              0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%                               14.3%               0.0%                    0.0%
 International radio                                                      0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%                                0.0%               0.0%                    0.0%
 Local television                                                         0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%                               14.3%               0.0%                    6.3%
 International television                                                 25.0%                          0.0%                     0.0%                               14.3%               0.0%                    6.3%
 Periodicals                                                              50.0%                        100.0%                    62.5%                               57.1%              87.5%                   50.0%
 Internet                                                                 12.5%                         88.9%                    62.5%                               42.9%              50.0%                   75.0%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%                                0.0%               0.0%                    0.0%
 Blogs                                                                    0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%                                0.0%               0.0%                    0.0%
 Mobile phones                                                            0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%                                0.0%               0.0%                    0.0%
 Instant messaging                                                        0.0%                           0.0%                     0.0%                                0.0%               0.0%                    0.0%
 Other                                                                    12.5%                          0.0%                    12.5%                               14.3%              12.5%                   18.8%

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                Office of President/Minister          Employee of Ministry             Private Sector                 Media     Academia/Research Institute      Other
 World Bank website                                                        14.3%                           77.8%                          62.5%                      62.5%              50.0%                   37.5%
 Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face
                                                                           28.6%                              0.0%                        37.5%                      62.5%               25.0%                  31.3%
 meetings/discussions)
 e-Newsletters                                                             85.7%                             77.8%                        37.5%                      12.5%               37.5%                  56.3%
 Instant messaging                                                         14.3%                              0.0%                         0.0%                      12.5%               0.0%                    6.3%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                 42.9%                             11.1%                        12.5%                      12.5%               62.5%                  50.0%
 World Bank Public Information Center                                      0.0%                               0.0%                        12.5%                       0.0%               0.0%                    0.0%
 World Bank publications and other written materials                       14.3%                             22.2%                        25.0%                      25.0%               25.0%                  12.5%
 Mobile phones                                                             0.0%                               0.0%                         0.0%                      12.5%               0.0%                    0.0%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                 0.0%                               0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%               0.0%                    6.3%
 Blogs                                                                     0.0%                               0.0%                         0.0%                       0.0%               0.0%                    0.0%
 Other                                                                     0.0%                              11.1%                         0.0%                       0.0%               0.0%                    0.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Office of President/Minister       Employee of Ministry              Private Sector                   Media   Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Yes                                                                         57.1%                          33.3%                          0.0%                        37.5%            14.3%                   26.7%
 No                                                                          42.9%                          66.7%                         100.0%                       62.5%            85.7%                   73.3%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 Percentage of Respondents                                      Office of President/Minister         Employee of Ministry             Private Sector                 Media     Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Yes                                                                         0.0%                          11.1%                          25.0%                      25.0%               0.0%                    6.7%
 No                                                                         100.0%                         88.9%                          75.0%                      75.0%              100.0%                  93.3%

Were you able to obtain this information?
 Percentage of Respondents                                        Office of President/Minister       Employee of Ministry             Private Sector                 Media     Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Yes                                                                            -                          100.0%                         100.0%                     100.0%                -                   100.0%
 No                                                                             -                           0.0%                           0.0%                       0.0%                 -                    0.0%

Do you have access to the Internet?
 Percentage of Respondents                                        Office of President/Minister       Employee of Ministry             Private Sector                 Media     Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Yes                                                                         100.0%                        100.0%                         100.0%                     100.0%             100.0%                 100.0%
 No                                                                           0.0%                          0.0%                           0.0%                       0.0%               0.0%                   0.0%




                                                                                                                        85
The World Bank                                                                                                        Guatemala                                                           Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Do you use/have used the World Bank website?
 Percentage of Respondents                                        Office of President/Minister        Employee of Ministry        Private Sector   Media    Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Yes                                                                          75.0%                         77.8%                     87.5%        75.0%             87.5%                  100.0%
 No                                                                           25.0%                         22.2%                     12.5%        25.0%             12.5%                   0.0%

Which do you primarily use?
 Percentage of Respondents                                        Office of President/Minister        Employee of Ministry        Private Sector   Media    Academia/Research Institute      Other
 The World Bank's country website                                             66.7%                         14.3%                     28.6%        66.7%             57.1%                   18.8%
 The World Bank's main website                                                33.3%                         85.7%                     71.4%        33.3%             42.9%                   81.3%

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Guatemala?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                    Office of President/Minister           Employee of Ministry        Private Sector   Media    Academia/Research Institute      Other
  Yes                                                                      71.4%                            22.2%                      0.0%        25.0%             25.0%                   25.0%
  No                                                                       28.6%                            55.6%                     37.5%        75.0%             50.0%                   56.3%
  I don’t know what a PIC is                                               0.0%                             22.2%                     62.5%         0.0%             25.0%                   18.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Office of President/Minister         Employee of Ministry        Private Sector   Media    Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Yes                                                                         80.0%                          77.8%                     37.5%         0.0%             12.5%                   50.0%
 No                                                                          20.0%                          22.2%                     62.5%        100.0%            87.5%                   50.0%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                      Office of President/Minister      Employee of Ministry            Private Sector   Media    Academia/Research Institute      Other
 Observer                                                                   33.3%                         0.0%                        12.5%        25.0%             25.0%                   12.5%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                                16.7%                        11.1%                        50.0%        75.0%             75.0%                   37.5%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                   33.3%                        88.9%                        50.0%         0.0%             25.0%                   50.0%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                              66.7%                        44.4%                        12.5%        25.0%             12.5%                   43.8%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.               0.0%                         11.1%                        62.5%        12.5%             62.5%                   18.8%




                                                                                                                         86
The World Bank                                                                    Guatemala                                                Country Survey 2013




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Year 1
                              FY ’04 Response Number = 217  FY ’13 Response Number = 62
A. General Issues facing Guatemala

In general, would you say that Guatemala is headed in...?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                          FY 2004        FY 2013
  The right direction                                                                 59.9%          81.5%
  The wrong direction                                                                 30.4%          14.8%
  Not sure                                                                            9.7%           3.7%
*Significantly different between country surveys.


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Guatemala, on a ten point scale?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Guatemala, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between country surveys.


1
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’04 and FY ’13 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.



                                                                                      87
The World Bank                                                             Guatemala                                                 Country Survey 2013




E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.



G. Communication and Information Sharing

Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY 2004               FY 2013
  Yes                                                                          54.2%                 56.2%
  No                                                                           45.8%                 43.8%
*Significantly different between country surveys.

Which do you primarily use?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    FY 2004               FY 2013
 The World Bank's country website (www. worldbank.org.gt)                      30.6%                 35.3%
 The World Bank's main website (www.worldbank.org)                             69.4%                 64.7%

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Guatemala?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                 FY 2004                 FY 2013
  Yes                                                                        13.2%                   25.0%
  No                                                                         86.8%                   55.0%
  I don’t know what a PIC is                                                    -                    20.0%
*Significantly different between country surveys.




                                                                              88
The World Bank                                                                                        Guatemala                                                                     Country Survey 2013




Appendix D: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank
                                                 H3. Currently, do you
                                                                            H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              professionally collaborate/
                                              work with the World Bank?             Observer              Use WB reports/data   Engage in WB activities       Collaborate         Use WB website

Indicator Question                             No Mean         Yes Mean     No Mean       Yes Mean       No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                 6.19            7.57        6.95              5.75        7.17         6.26      6.48          7.13       6.45         7.32     6.78         6.75
World Bank’s effectiveness in Guatemala.
The World Bank’s financial instruments
                                                 5.42            6.96        6.13              5.38        6.50         5.38      5.44          6.79       5.73         6.58     6.35         5.19
meet the needs of Guatemala
The World Bank meets Guatemala’s needs
                                                 5.16            7.00        6.11              4.75        6.35         5.30      5.52          6.43       5.60         6.47     5.97         5.73
for knowledge services
Overall the World Bank currently plays a
                                                 6.00            7.27        6.50              6.56        6.81         6.13      6.19          6.92       6.24         7.06     6.68         6.07
relevant role in development in Guatemala
The World Bank’s work is aligned with
what I consider the development priorities       5.26            7.05        6.11              5.11        6.47         5.22      5.71          6.25       5.41         7.06     6.15         5.44
for Guatemala
Responsiveness                                   5.31            7.21        6.08              5.83        6.46         5.50      5.85          6.30       5.74         6.67     6.00         6.14
Openness (sharing data and other
                                                 6.12            7.37        6.53              6.83        6.96         6.05      6.31          6.90       6.60         6.50     6.50         6.71
information)
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                 5.88            7.47        6.47              6.67        6.61         6.38      6.20          6.89       6.52         6.47     6.74         5.92
Government
Collaboration with the Government                7.56            8.45        7.98              7.67        8.14         7.68      7.64          8.32       7.79         8.24     7.94         7.93
Collaboration with other donors                  6.61            7.65        6.94              7.17        7.38         6.55      6.83          7.17       6.93         7.07     7.00         6.90
To what extent does the World Bank’s work
help to achieve development results in           5.50            7.22        6.34              5.50        6.77         5.50      5.77          6.79       6.08         6.47     6.40         5.73
Guatemala?
Are adaptable to Guatemala's specific
development challenges and                       6.06            7.36        6.55              6.63        6.81         6.22      6.19          7.04       6.32         7.06     6.72         6.19
circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do
you believe the World Bank’s knowledge
and research make to development results         6.33            7.65        6.94              7.00        7.19         6.61      6.83          7.08       6.69         7.42     7.20         6.27
in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank’s                      8.10            8.87        8.45              8.33        8.59         8.21      8.39          8.48       8.08         9.11     8.49         8.27
knowledge/research?
Where country systems are adequate, the
World Bank makes appropriate use of              6.89            7.95        7.46              6.20        7.48         7.00      6.95          7.68       7.57         6.94     7.20         7.60
them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.




                                                                                                         89
The World Bank                                       Guatemala                                     Country Survey 2013



Appendix E: Guatemala FY 2013 Questionnaire




                              World Bank Client Survey FY13 – Guatemala


The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Guatemala or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey is meant to give the World Bank’s team that works in Guatemala, greater insight into how the Bank’s
work is perceived. This is one tool the World Bank uses to assess the views of its critical stakeholders. With this
understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies, outreach and programs that support
development in Guatemala. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm to oversee the logistics of this
effort in Guatemala. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the
survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion. If you prefer not to answer
a question, please leave it blank.




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING GUATEMALA

 A1. In general would you say that Guatemala is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                        90
     The World Bank                                             Guatemala                                             Country Survey 2013



     SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
A2. When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in
Guatemala? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
                                                                             FIRST priority     SECOND priority      THIRD priority
Choose only ONE for each column                                            (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)
1    Rural development                                                                                                
2    Basic education                                                                                                  
3    Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                                   
4    Transport (e.g., roads, ports, airports)                                                                         
5    Poverty reduction                                                                                                
6    Public sector reform                                                                                             
7    Regional integration                                                                                             
8    Gender                                                                                                           
9    Domestic private sector development                                                                              
10   Foreign direct investment                                                                                        
11   Water and sanitation                                                                                             
12   Energy                                                                                                           
13   Tourism                                                                                                          
     Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal
14                                                                                                                    
     system reform)
15   Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                                            
16   Financial markets                                                                                                
17   Urban development                                                                                                
18   Environmental sustainability                                                                                     
19   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                                           
20   Health                                                                                                           
21   Global integration                                                                                               
22   Food security                                                                                                    
23   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                                    
24   Agricultural development                                                                                         
25   Trade and exports                                                                                                
26   Economic growth                                                                                                  
27   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                                          
28   Private sector regulatory framework                                                                              
29   Higher education                                                                                                 
30   Basic infrastructure                                                                                             
31   Crime and violence                                                                                               
32   Natural resource management                                                                                      
33   Anti corruption                                                                                                  
34   Disaster management                                                                                              
35   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)                                                                      
36   Information and communications technology                                                                        




                                                                      91
The World Bank                                             Guatemala                     Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to
 reducing poverty in Guatemala? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Water and sanitation
 2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 3    Economic growth
 4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5    Disaster management
 6    Regional integration
 7    Gender
 8    Rural development
 9    Urban development
 10   Basic education
 11   Private sector regulatory framework
 12   Basic infrastructure
 13   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 14   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 15   Transport (e.g., roads, ports, airports)
 16   Tourism
 17   Crime and violence
 18   Information and communications technology
 19   Public sector reform
 20   Domestic private sector development
 21   Foreign direct investment
 22   Global integration
 23   Energy
 24   Food security
 25   Higher education
 26   Natural resource management
 27   Environmental sustainability
 28   Health
 29   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 30   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)
 31   Agricultural development
 32   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 33   Financial markets
 34   Trade and exports
 35   Anti corruption




                                                              92
The World Bank                                             Guatemala                   Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic
 growth in Guatemala? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy
 2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 3    Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 4    Global integration
 5    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Anti corruption
 7    Disaster management
 8    Rural development
 9    Foreign direct investment
 10   Urban development
 11   Water and sanitation
 12   Basic education
 13   Information and communications technology
 14   Private sector regulatory framework
 15   Tourism
 16   Trade and exports
 17   Public sector reform
 18   Regional integration
 19   Domestic private sector development
 20   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 21   Agricultural development
 22   Food security
 23   Transport (e.g., roads, ports, airports)
 24   Crime and violence
 25   Higher education
 26   Gender
 27   Natural resource management
 28   Environmental sustainability
 29   Health
 30   Basic infrastructure
 31   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)
 32   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 33   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 34   Financial markets




                                                              93
The World Bank                                              Guatemala                                                Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Guatemala, on a ten point
 scale?
         1              2       3       4       5       6           7       8           9               10

 Not familiar at all                                                                            Extremely familiar




 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in Guatemala, on
 a ten point scale?
          1             2   3       4       5       6   7        8      9                10                  

 Not effective at all                                                                 Very effective    Don't know




 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank's staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Guatemala solve its most complicated development challenges, on a ten
 point scale?
          1             2   3       4       5       6   7        8      9                10                  
                                                                                To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                    Don't know
                                                                                             degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                               94
The World Bank                                             Guatemala                        Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK
 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development
 results in Guatemala, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus
 most of its attention and resources in Guatemala? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Rural development
 2    Basic education
 3    Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 4    Transport (e.g., roads, ports, airports)
 5    Poverty reduction
 6    Public sector reform
 7    Regional integration
 8    Gender
 9    Domestic private sector development
 10   Foreign direct investment
 11   Water and sanitation
 12   Energy
 13   Tourism
 14   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 15   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 16   Financial markets
 17   Urban development
 18   Environmental sustainability
 19   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 20   Health
 21   Global integration
 22   Food security
 23   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 24   Agricultural development
 25   Trade and exports
 26   Economic growth
 27   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 28   Private sector regulatory framework
 29   Crime and violence
 30   Higher education
 31   Basic infrastructure
 32   Natural resource management
 33   Anti corruption
 34   Disaster management
 35   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)
 36   Information and communications technology




                                                              95
The World Bank                                              Guatemala                                    Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and
 which activity is of second greatest value in Guatemala?
                                                                              Greatest Value   Second Greatest Value
                                                                        (Choose only ONE)      (Choose only ONE)
 1    Financial resources                                                                             
 2    Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                      
 3    Technical assistance                                                                            
 4    Policy advice                                                                                   
 5    Donor coordination                                                                              
 6    Data for monitoring and evaluation                                                              
 7    Training/capacity building                                                                      
 8    Studies/analyses                                                                                
 9    Convening and facilitating policy dialogue                                                      
      Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge
 10                                                                                                   
      sharing)
 11   Other (please specify):______________________________                                           



 B6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 4    Staff too inaccessible
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not client focused
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not willing to openly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12   Not aligned with country priorities
 13   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 14   Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 15   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Guatemala
 16   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________




                                                               96
The World Bank                                             Guatemala                                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B7. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 6    Mobilization of other resources (Trust Funds) for development
 7    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8    Don’t know



 B8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce
 poverty in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 6    Mobilization of other resources (Trust Funds) for development
 7    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8    Don’t know



 B9. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the global
 development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate change, communicable
 diseases, international financial systems, trade, etc.), on a ten point scale?
        1             2      3       4       5      6      7        8      9          10                
 To no degree at                                                                        To a very
                                                                                                    Don't know
 all                                                                           significant degree




                                                               97
The World Bank                                          Guatemala                                           Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B10. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor,
 which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your
 country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     NGOs
 2     Municipal and Local Government
 3     Beneficiaries
 4     Private sector
 5     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 6     Donor community
 7     Private foundations
 8     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 9     Parliament
 10    Media
 11    Faith based organizations
 12    Autonomous regional authorities
 13    Indigenous people authorities
 14    Other (please specify): __________________________



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Guatemala,
 on a ten point scale?
                                                                 Strongly                               Strongly   Don't
                                                                 disagree                                  agree   know
        Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
 B11                                                              1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        role in development in Guatemala
        The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
 B12                                                              1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        consider the development priorities for Guatemala
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies
 B13                                                              1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        that are realistic for Guatemala
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
 B14                                                              1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Guatemala with respect




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                            98
The World Bank                                               Guatemala                                            Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Guatemala in terms of ..., on a
 ten point scale?
                                                                        To no                                To a very
                                                                                                                          Don't
                                                                        degree at                           significant
                                                                                                                          know
                                                                        all                                    degree
         Sustainability of the results after implementation of
 B15                                                                     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         projects
 B16     Responsiveness                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B17                                                                     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B18                                                                     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         circumstances)
 B19     Being inclusive                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B20     Openness (sharing data and other information)                   1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B21     Staff accessibility                                             1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B22     Straightforwardness and honesty                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B23                                                                     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
         Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B24     Collaboration with the Government                               1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       
 B25     Collaboration with other donors                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9     10       



 B26. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank works too slowly
 2     The Government works inefficiently
 3     There is not an adequate level of citizen participation
 4     There is not an adequate level of civil society participation
 5     Poor donor coordination
 6     The impact of World Bank projects is non-sustainable after closing
 7     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 8     Political pressures and obstacles
 9     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 10    The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 11    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                   99
 The World Bank                                            Guatemala                                            Country Survey 2013



 SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Guatemala, on a ten point scale?
                                                                   Not
                                                                                                               Very    Don't
                                                                   effective
                                                                                                           effective   know
                                                                   at all
C1    Anti corruption                                                  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C2    Information and communications technology                        1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C3    Transport (e.g., roads, ports, airports)                         1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C4    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                          1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C5    Urban development                                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C6    Environmental sustainability                                     1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C7    Private sector regulatory framework                              1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C8    Basic infrastructure                                             1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C9    Tourism                                                          1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C10   Poverty reduction                                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C11   Gender                                                           1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C12   Domestic private sector development                              1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C13   Foreign direct investment                                        1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C14   Water and sanitation                                             1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C15   Trade and exports                                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C16   Economic growth                                                  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C17   Energy                                                           1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C18   Disaster management                                              1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C19   Higher education                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure,
C20                                                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
      fiscal system reform)
C21   Labor markets/job creation/employment                            1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C22   Financial markets                                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C23   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                           1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C24   Health                                                           1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C25   Rural development                                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C26   Global integration                                               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C27   Food security                                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C28   Basic education                                                  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C29   Social protection (pensions, targeted social assistance)         1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C30   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)                      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C31   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C32   Public sector reform                                             1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C33   Regional integration                                             1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C34   Agricultural development                                         1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C35   Crime and violence                                               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
C36   Natural resource management                                      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                                 100
The World Bank                                               Guatemala                                                  Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C37. To what degree does the World Bank’s work help achieve development results in
 Guatemala, on a ten point scale?
        1            2      3      4       5       6         7         8       9               10               
 To no degree at                                                                                To a very
                                                                                                            Don't know
 all                                                                                   significant degree




 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Guatemala, on
 a ten point scale?
                                                        Strongly                                             Strongly      Don't
                                                        disagree                                                agree      know
        The World Bank’s financial instruments (i.e.,
        investment lending, Development Policy
 C38                                                     1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10        
        Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.)
        meet the needs of Guatemala
        The World Bank meets Guatemala’s needs
 C39    for knowledge services (e.g., research,          1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10        
        analysis, data, technical assistance)
        The World Bank Group (including IFC and
        MIGA) meets the needs of Guatemala in
 C40                                                     1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10        
        mobilizing additional financial resources for
        development




                                                                 101
The World Bank                                   Guatemala                                    Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research (e.g., data, analysis,
 reports) in the work you do?
 1    Weekly
 2    Monthly
 3    A few times a year
 4    Rarely
 5    Never




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                   102
The World Bank                                             Guatemala                            Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE
 D2. When thinking about the development challenges in Guatemala, where do you believe it
 would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the
 next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Public sector reform
 2    Gender
 3    Domestic private sector development
 4    Foreign direct investment
 5    Water and sanitation
 6    Trade and exports
 7    Economic growth
 8    Energy
 9    Disaster management
 10   Tourism
 11   Basic education
 12   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 13   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 14   Poverty reduction
 15   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 16   Anti corruption
 17   Financial markets
 18   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 19   Urban development
 20   Regional integration
 21   Information and communications technology
 22   Transport (e.g., roads, ports, airports)
 23   Agricultural development
 24   Natural resource management
 25   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 26   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 27   Crime and violence
 28   Health
 29   Rural development
 30   Global integration
 31   Food security
 32   Environmental sustainability
 33   Private sector regulatory framework
 34   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)
 35   Basic infrastructure
 36   Higher education




                                                              103
The World Bank                                                 Guatemala                                                  Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at … in Guatemala?
                                                          Not
                                                                                                                        Very    Don't
                                                          effective
                                                                                                                    effective   know
                                                          at all
 D3    Raising your awareness of the particular topic      1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D4    Stimulating public debate/dialogue                  1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       Helping to build public consensus around
 D5                                                        1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       reforms
 D6    Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills              1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      

 D7    Contributing to good policy making                  1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       Providing support for program
 D8                                                        1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       implementation



 To what extent do you believe that the World Bank's knowledge and research … in Guatemala?
                                                          To no                                                   To a very
                                                                                                                                Don't
                                                          degree at                                              significant
                                                                                                                                know
                                                          all                                                       degree
  D9     Are timely                                        1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
 D10                                                       1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Guatemala's development
 D11                                                       1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         priorities
 D12     Provide feasible recommendations                  1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D13                                                       1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         understand)
         A source of relevant information on global
 D14                                                       1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         good practices
 D15     Are adequately disseminated                       1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Are adaptable to Guatemala's specific
 D16     development challenges and country                1         2        3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         circumstances



 D17. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge and
 research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?
           1              2    3     4      5         6         7         8       9         10                   

 Not significant at all                                                               Very significant       Don't know




                                                                    104
The World Bank                                          Guatemala                                           Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 D18. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's knowledge/
 research, on a ten point scale?
         1              2       3   4       5       6    7         8   9         10                
 Very low                                                                         Very high
                                                                                               Don't know
 technical quality                                                         technical quality




 D19. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e.,
 South-South knowledge sharing, etc.), on a ten point scale?
           1                2   3   4   5       6        7         8   9          10               

 Not effective at all                                                        Very effective    Don't know




                                                             105
The World Bank                                          Guatemala                                   Country Survey 2013



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale?
                                                       Strongly                                 Strongly   Don't
                                                       disagree                                    agree   know
 E1     The World Bank disburses funds promptly         1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        The World Bank effectively monitors and
 E2     evaluates the projects and programs it          1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        supports
        The World Bank's approvals and reviews are
 E3                                                     1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        done in a timely fashion
        The World Bank's “Safeguard policy”
 E4                                                     1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        requirements are reasonable
        The World Bank imposes reasonable
 E5                                                     1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        conditions on its lending
        Working with the World Bank increases
 E6                                                     1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Guatemala’s institutional capacity
        The World Bank ensures consistency and
 E7                                                     1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        continuity through staff changes
        The World Bank’s teams and visits are well
 E8                                                     1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        coordinated
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
        financial management, etc.) are adequate,
 E9                                                     1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        the World Bank makes appropriate use of
        them
        The World Bank provides effective
 E10    implementation support (i.e., supervision of    1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        projects)
        The World Bank’s approvals and reviews for
 E11    procurement and financial management are        1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        well justified




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                            106
The World Bank                                            Guatemala                                              Country Survey 2013



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN GUATEMALA

 F1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play in Guatemala’s
 development in the near future, on a ten point scale?
        1            2       3       4         5    6     7         8     9              10             
 Not a significant                                                               Very significant
                                                                                                    Don't Know
 role at all                                                                                 role



 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in
 Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Guatemala’s specific challenges
 2    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3    Focus primarily on advocacy issues
      Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, and other
 4
      terms)
 5    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 6    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Guatemala’s economy
 7    Offer more innovative financial products
 8    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9    Increase availability of fee-based services
 10   Work faster
 11   Greater collaboration and synergy within the World Bank Group (IDA, IFC, and MIGA)
 12   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                              107
The World Bank                                                     Guatemala                                                 Country Survey 2013



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN GUATEMALA

 F3. How familiar are you with the work of the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in
 Guatemala, on a ten point scale?
         1             2           3       4       5           6            7           8       9               10

 Not familiar at all                                                                                    Extremely familiar




 F4. How effectively do you believe the different parts of the World Bank Group (IBRD/IDA and IFC)
 collaborate and coordinate efforts in Guatemala, on a ten point scale?
          1                2       3       4       5       6            7           8       9            10                  
 Not effectively at
                                                                                                    Very effectively    Don't know
 all



 F5. How significant a role do you believe IFC, through its support for the private sector, SHOULD play
 in helping Guatemala achieve its economic and social development goals in the future, on a ten point
 scale?
          1            2       3       4       5       6            7           8       9              10                     
 Not a significant
                                                                                                Very significant role   Don't know
 role at all




                                                                     108
The World Bank                                            Guatemala                                     Country Survey 2013



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues
 in Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?             (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2     Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-Newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Public Information Center
 7    World Bank publications and other written materials
 8    Mobile phones
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________



       Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will
 G3                                                                                               Yes        No
       now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 G4                                                                                               Yes        No
       (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                  Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                        Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?                                           Yes        No




                                                             109
The World Bank                                             Guatemala                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use?
 1     The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org.gt)
 2     The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 G9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in
 Guatemala?
 1     Yes
 2     No
 3     I don’t know what PIC is

 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                                       Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                       disagree                              agree   know
         I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the
 G10                                                                    1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         organization's Open Data policy
         The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of
 G11     information related to development in Guatemala.               1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         (Only answer if you have used the PIC)
         I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only
 G12                                                                    1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used a World Bank website)
         I find the information on the World Bank’s websites
 G13     useful. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank             1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         website)
         When I need information from the World Bank I know
 G14     how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them,       1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         etc.)
         The World Bank is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                    1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries



PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                              110
The World Bank                                           Guatemala                                       Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?         (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   Other (please specify): ________________________




                                                           111
The World Bank                                             Guatemala                  Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)
 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Agricultural development
 2    Anti corruption
 3    Basic infrastructure
 4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5    Crime and violence
 6    Tourism
 7    Disaster management
 8    Domestic private sector development
 9    Economic growth
 10   Basic education
 11   Energy
 12   Environmental sustainability
 13   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 14   Financial markets
 15   Food security
 16   Foreign direct investment
 17   Gender
 18   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)
 19   Information and communications technology
 20   Global integration
 21   Health
 22   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 23   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 24   Higher education
 25   Natural resource management
 26   Poverty reduction
 27   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 28   Public sector reform
 29   Private sector regulatory framework
 30   Regional integration
 31   Rural development
 32   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 33   Trade and exports
 34   Transport (e.g., roads, ports, airports)
 35   Urban development
 36   Water and sanitation
 37   Other (please specify): _____________________________________________




                                                              112
The World Bank                                              Guatemala                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No



 H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in
 Guatemala? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.



 H5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Guatemala City – Metropolitan Area
 2    Northern part of the country
 3    Southern part of the country
 4    Eastern part of the country
 5    Western part of the country




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               113
