                             88507




Monitoring progress towards
   universal health coverage
 at country and global levels


  Framework, measures and targets
                           May 2014
WHO/HIS/HIA/14.1




Contributors
World Health Organization
  Ties Boerma, Director, Health Statistics and Information Systems; David Evans, Director, Health Systems Governance and Financing; and
  Marie-Paule Kieny, Assistant Director-General, Health Systems and Innovation.


The World Bank
  Patrick Eozenou,  Economist,  Health, Nutrition and Population; Tim Evans, Director, Health, Nutrition and Population; and Adam Wagstaff,
  Research Manager, Human Development and Public Services.


Acknowledgements
  The World Health Organization and The World Bank wish to thank the Government of Japan and the Rockefeller Foundation for their
  generous financial support for the development and publication of this paper.




© World Health Organization and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank 2014

All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia,
1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or
translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for non-commercial distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO website
(http://www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).
The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the
part of the World Health Organization or The World Bank concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet
be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the World
Health Organization or The World Bank in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names
of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization and The World Bank to verify the information contained in this
publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility
for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization or The World Bank be liable for
damages arising from its use.


Printed by the WHO Document Production Services, Geneva, Switzerland.
Introduction
          A movement towards universal health coverage (UHC) – ensuring that everyone
          who needs health services is able to get them, without undue financial hardship – has
          been growing across the globe (1). This has led to a sharp increase in the demand for
          expertise, evidence and measures of progress and a push to make UHC one of the
          goals of the post-2015 development agenda (2). This paper proposes a framework for
          tracking country and global progress towards UHC; its aim is to inform and guide
          these discussions and assessment of both aggregate and equitable coverage of essen-
          tial health services as well as financial protection. Monitoring progress towards these
          two components of UHC will be complementary and critical to achieving desirable
          health outcome goals, such as ending preventable deaths and promoting healthy life
          expectancy and also reducing poverty and protecting household incomes.
              This paper was written jointly by the World Health Organization (WHO) and
          The World Bank Group on the basis of consultations and discussions with coun-
          try representatives, technical experts and global health and development partners
          (3). A draft of this paper was posted online and circulated widely for consultation
          between December 2013 and February 2014. Nearly 70 submissions were received
          from countries, development partners, civil society, academics and other interested
          stakeholders. The feedback was synthesized and reviewed at a meeting of country
          and global experts in Bellagio, Italy, in March 2014 (4). The paper was modified to
          reflect the views emerging from these consultations.


UHC: towards a common framework for monitoring progress
          UHC has been defined as the desired outcome of health system performance whereby
          all people who need health services (promotion, prevention, treatment, rehabilitation
          and palliation) receive them, without undue financial hardship (5). UHC has two
          interrelated components: the full spectrum of good-quality essentiala health services
          according to need, and protection from financial hardship, including possible impov-
          erishment, due to out-of-pocket payments for health services. Both components
          should benefit the entire population.
              This paper proposes a framework for monitoring UHC as part of a comprehen-
          sive framework for monitoring national health system performance (6). Monitoring
          UHC should be integral to tracking overall progress in health and performance, which
          requires regular assessment of inputs (finances, health workforce and medicines),
          outputs (service provision), coverage of interventions, health impacts and the social
          determinants of health. Within this overall context and in line with its definition,
          monitoring of UHC concerns two discrete components of health system performance:
          levels of coverage with health services and financial protection, with a focus on equity.
          While progress in achieving UHC through these components is an important goal of
          health systems, it is not a substitute for other health goals, such as improved survival
          or healthy life expectancy.




                                                                                                 1
Monitoring progress towards UHC at country and global levels



Country monitoring
                  The aim of monitoring of UHC by countries is to ensure that progress towards UHC
                  reflects the country’s unique epidemiological and demographic profile, health system
                  and level of economic development and the population’s demands and expectations.
                  These country-specific dimensions are critical for deciding what should be moni-
                  tored; for example, emerging economies might focus on how best to expand essential
                  services to remote areas, whereas high-income countries might focus on modifying
                  the range of available health services to allow for a growing elderly population. While
                  the country context determines the measures used, the domains to be monitored –
                  coverage with good-quality essential services and with financial protection – are
                  relevant to all countries, regardless of their level of income, their demographic profile
                  or their health needs.

Global monitoring
                  Given the widespread interest in accelerating progress towards UHC, there is
                  value in standardizing measures so that they are comparable across borders and
                  over time. The aim of the global framework outlined in this paper is to encour-
                  age countries to adopt a common approach to monitoring UHC and measuring
                  progress with internationally standardized indicators. Periodic global monitoring
                  permits comparison of progress towards UHC, so that countries can learn from
                  one another. Global monitoring is not, however, a substitute for country monitor-
                  ing, and countries are encouraged to tailor their measures of UHC by drawing on
                  this framework to best reflect their context. Furthermore, because of the dynamic
                  nature and progressive realization of UHC, the priorities for monitoring will differ
                  among countries.

Guiding principles
                  The following guiding principles underlie this framework for monitoring progress
                  towards UHC.
                  ■■ The framework should comprise two interrelated but separate measures: cover-
                     age of the population with essential health services and coverage of the popula-
                     tion with financial protection. Progress on both measures should be measured
                     simultaneously.
                  ■■ Measures of coverage should comprise the full spectrum of essential health
                     interventions – promotion, prevention, treatment, rehabilitation and palliation
                     – and their associated costs.
                  ■■ Measures of coverage with health services and financial protection should
                     benefit the entire population throughout the life-course, including all ages and
                     both genders.
                  ■■ The measures should capture all levels of the health system. Some interven-
                     tions, such as tobacco taxes, are society-wide, while others, such as emergency
                     obstetric care, are provided in health facilities. Similarly, financial protection
                     measures should cover all levels of the health system, as costs incurred for
                     services may vary widely.
                  ■■ The global measures should be relevant to all countries, irrespective of their
                     national income. In contrast to the health-related Millennium Development
                     Goals, which focus primarily on low- and lower-middle-income countries,
                     the development goals and targets of the post-2015 agenda are relevant to all



2
                                           UHC: towards a common framework for monitoring progress



                countries. Even countries that have a broader set of indicators to measure their
                progress should follow common standards of measurement and include global
                measures.
             ■■ Measures should be disaggregated by socioeconomic and demographic strata in
                order to allow assessment of the equitable distribution of service and financial
                protection coverage. In all health systems, there is significant stratification of
                risks for ill health and access to and payments for services according to house-
                hold income, place of residence, gender and other factors.


Methodological considerations
             A number of assumptions and methodological considerations must be made in applying
             these principles to the two measures of UHC: coverage of essential health services and
             financial protection.

Coverage of essential health services
             Measures for monitoring specific health interventions and reductions in risk factors
             can be classified differently, depending on the condition, the type of intervention,
             the characteristics of the target population and the level of delivery of the interven-
             tion. In this UHC monitoring framework, the measures are grouped into two broad
             categories to cover the spectrum of interventions: prevention (which includes ser-
             vices for health promotion and prevention) and treatment (which includes services
             such as treatment, rehabilitation and palliation). There are many service coverage
             indicators. The goal is to be parsimonious and use a small set to track progress. We
             propose adoption of a set of “tracer” indicators to monitor the progress of UHC that
             are based on the following criteria.
             ■■ Relevance: Do the indicators measure health conditions that are priorities? Is
                 the intervention cost–effective? Is the service or condition addressed (e.g. health
                 promotion) a potentially major health care expenditure?
             ■■ Quality: Do the indicators represent effective or quality-adjusted coverage? Or
                 could complementary indicators be used to capture information on the quality
                 of service?
             ■■ Availability: Are the indicators measured regularly, reliably and comparably
                 (i.e. numerators, denominators, equity stratification) with existing instruments
                 (e.g. household surveys or health facility information systems)?

                 Very few indicators meet all three criteria. Application of these criteria reveals
             many relevant, good-quality, available indicators of service coverage with preven-
             tion interventions (7). There are already a number of well established indicators of
             service coverage with interventions for either promoting health or preventing illness.
             These include Millennium Development Goal-related coverage indicators (such as
             vaccination coverage) and agreed indicators that can be used to monitor coverage
             of interventions to prevent noncommunicable diseases (such as non-use of tobacco).
                 The relative paucity of good indicators of treatment coverage reflects the difficulty
             in determining needs for conditions that affect only a fraction of the population and
             often require facility-based care, such as cancer treatment or appendectomy. This is
             an important concern, as illnesses that require hospitalization or long-term treat-
             ment are often associated with higher financial risks, and many people may forego
             these services because they cannot afford them. Even in high-income countries for



                                                                                                    3
Monitoring progress towards UHC at country and global levels



                  which there are extensive data, very few treatment coverage indicators are in routine
                  use (8). Nevertheless, for conditions such as hypertension or diabetes in which clini-
                  cal tests are used, household surveys can help determine the size of the population
                  in need and also the number treated.
                      Thus, drawing on indicators agreed by WHO for monitoring coverage of
                  Millennium Development Goals and noncommunicable diseases, the framework
                  proposes measurement of coverage for a set of prevention and treatment tracer inter-
                  ventions (see illustrative examples below). This core set of interventions can be built
                  upon over time as and when comparable, reliable measures of coverage for other
                  intervention areas, such as rehabilitation and palliation, become available.
                      Several of these indicators include a quality component, often referred to as “effec-
                  tive coverage”, rather than simply measuring “contact” coverage. For other services,
                  indicators additional to service coverage are required to capture quality.

Coverage of financial protection
                  Two commonly used indicators to track the level of financial protection in health
                  are the incidence of “catastrophic” health expenditures and the incidence of impov-
                  erishment due to out-of-pocket health payments.b The former indicates the number
                  of households of all income levels that incur health payments that are higher than
                  their resources, while the latter captures the degree to which health spending causes
                  extreme hardship by pushing families below the poverty line.c
                      The impoverishment indicator does not capture families that are pushed even
                  further into poverty by out-of-pocket health spending; a simple way to capture this
                  value is to add to the number of non-poor families impoverished by health spend-
                  ing to the number of already poor families who incur out-of-pocket payments. The
                  total is simply the number of households that are pushed into poverty, or deeper into
                  poverty, because of health spending.
                      The two financial protection measures actually measure lack of financial pro-
                  tection in health, and both can be re-scaled so that 100% coverage represents full
                  financial protection (9). Thus, the catastrophic spending indicator would capture
                  “protection from catastrophic spending” and would measure the percentage of the
                  population that does not experience catastrophic payments. The impoverishment
                  indicator would capture “protection from impoverishment” and would measure
                  the percentage of the population that is not impoverished through out-of-pocket
                  spending. The additional impoverishment measure suggested would measure the
                  percentage of already poor families that are not driven even further into poverty by
                  out-of-pocket payments.

Equity in coverage
                  At the heart of UHC is a commitment to equity. Yet, in countries on the path to UHC,
                  there is a risk that poorer, less advantaged segments of the population could be left
                  behind (10). So, in addition to measuring levels of coverage of essential health services
                  and financial protection, it is critical to have measures disaggregated by a range of
                  socioeconomic and demographic “stratifiers”. For country monitoring of equity in
                  coverage, the choice of stratifiers should be informed by an assessment of both those
                  that are salient and those that are measureable, given the data available.
                      The global framework proposes three primary elements for disaggregation that
                  can be measured comparably in all settings: household income, expenditure or
                  wealth (coverage of the poorest segment of the population as compared with richer
                  segments),d place of residence (rural or urban) and gender.


4
                                                                       Methodological considerations



Targets for assessing country progress towards UHC
             Setting specific, time-bound targets will be critical for progress towards UHC. This
             will involve identifying from the available data sufficiently ambitious, yet achiev-
             able, improvements in equitable coverage of essential health services and financial
             protection.
                The ultimate goal of UHC with respect to service coverage is that everyone can
             obtain the essential health services they need, that is, 100% coverage. While main-
             taining this as the goal, it is practical to set targets based on empirical baseline data
             and past trends in the whole population and among the poorest, taking into account
             issues in measuring need and effective coverage. For some preventive services, such
             as vaccination coverage for specific antigens, higher targets are feasible for fully vac-
             cinated children when based on current levels and past trends, but a target short of
             the ideal may correspond better to the “sufficiently ambitious but nonetheless achiev-
             able” criterion. Targets must also include consideration of measurement issues. For
             some services, such as treatment of hypertension, effective coverage can reach 100%
             only if the treatment is 100% effective, which is rarely the case. Likewise, treatment
             indicators (such as for HIV infection) are often based on estimated need, which is
             rarely sufficiently accurate to set a target of 100%. Thus, this monitoring framework
             specifies a target of at least 80% coverage of essential health services, regardless of
             the level of wealth, place of residence or gender.e
                For financial protection, the available evidence suggests that a target that is both
             ambitious and achievable is 100% protection from both catastrophic and impov-
             erishing health payments for the population as a whole as well as for the proposed
             equity strata of the population.
                The rates of improvement necessary to achieve these targets in coverage over the
             next 15 years (to 2030) can be determined from the levels of coverage in 2015, with
             intermediate targets set for 2020 and 2025.


Illustrative global measures of monitoring UHC
             This section identifies UHC targets and illustrative indicators for coverage of essential
             health services and financial protection, based on the framework and methodological
             approaches to measurement described above, and by regional grouping.f

Measures of essential services coverage
             Below are illustrations of essential service coverage indicators for the monitoring
             framework. In the first example, data for four countries are used to compare coverage
             with prevention and treatment services (Fig. 1). For prevention services, six indica-
             tors are identified: satisfaction of family planning needs, at least four antenatal care
             visits, measles vaccination in children, improved water source, adequate sanitation
             and non-use of tobacco. For treatment services, another six indicators are identi-
             fied for five areas of intervention: skilled birth attendance, antiretroviral therapy,
             tuberculosis case detection and treatment success (combined into a single indicator),
             hypertension treatment and diabetes treatment. The dots in Fig. 1 show coverage with
             each intervention; the bar is the unweighted mean of the coverage rates for prevention
             and treatment interventions (7).




                                                                                                    5
Monitoring progress towards UHC at country and global levels



Fig. 1.	          Service coverage rates for six illustrative prevention interventions and six illustrative
                  treatment interventions for four countriesa


 100
  90
  80
  70
  60
  50
  40
  30
  20
  10
   0
          Prevention     Treatment          Prevention    Treatment Prevention       Treatment       Prevention   Treatment
                    Chile                            Egypt          United Republic of Tanzania            Bangladesh


              Mean                                               Adequate sanitation              Tuberculosis case detection
              Family planning needs satisﬁed                     Non-use of tobacco               Tuberculosis treatment success
              At least four antenatal care visits                Skilled birth attendance         Hypertension treatment
              Measles vaccination                                Antiretroviral therapy           Diabetes treatment
              Improved water source

a	
     Dots, single intervention coverage values; bars, unweighted means. For computation of means, the water and sanitation
     indicators and the tuberculosis case detection and treatment success indicators are each combined into a single indicator for
     an intervention area.
Source: household surveys and facility data for 2010 or later.



                            A second illustration shows calculated aggregate and equity measures of service
                         coverage for prevention and treatment interventions by region, with data from the
                         World Health Survey in 2002–2003g (Fig. 2). The shortfalls in coverage relative to
                         the 80% coverage target (the red dotted line) can be seen for both prevention and
                         treatment coverage. For both prevention and treatment measures, coverage is lower
                         among the poorest 20% and 40% of the population than the richest 80% and 60%
                         in all regions. Furthermore, as overall coverage moves closer to the 80% threshold,
                         the gaps in coverage for the poorest 20% and 40% of the population relative to the
                         overall population diminish markedly. While these data suggest that coverage with
                         the treatment interventions is higher than that with prevention interventions in most
                         regions, this is likely to reflect a bias in the way the data were collected rather than
                         actual coverage rates.h




6
                                                                                   Illustrative global measures of monitoring UHC




Fig. 2.	           Coverage of prevention and treatment services, by region



                East Asia and Paciﬁc

             Europe and Central Asia

    Latin America and the Caribbean

        Middle East and North Africa

                         South Asia

                 Sub-Saharan Africa


                                       0     20      40     60      80       100           0    20      40     60      80       100
                                       Coverage of prevention servicesa (%)                Coverage of treatment servicesb (%)

                                            Poorest 20%        Poorest 40%          Mean       Richest 40%        Richest 20%
a
    	 Prevention services: mammogram; Pap smear; antenatal care (more than four visits); measles vaccination; improved water
      source; adequate sanitation; and non-use of tobacco.
b
    	 Treatment services: skilled birth attendance; antiretroviral treatment; tuberculosis treatment; diabetes treatment; dental care;
      and eye surgery.

Source: World Health Survey (2002–2003).



     Financial protection measures
                           The same data from the World Health Survey were used to generate two measures of
                           financial protection coverage: the fraction of households not incurring catastrophic
                           payments and the fraction neither impoverished by out-of-pocket payments nor
                           pushed further into poverty by them. In each case, we present results for the entire
                           population as well as for the poorest 20% and 40%.i
                               Fig.  3 shows that the rates of financial protection against catastrophic spend-
                           ing are much lower than those of financial protection against impoverishment.
                           Therefore, the shortfalls in coverage relative to the target of 100% coverage in finan-
                           cial protection are much lower for protection against impoverishment expenditure
                           than for protection against catastrophic expenditure. The comparison of the equity
                           dimension of catastrophic and impoverishing expenditures shows that the poorest
                           20% and 40% have less protection against impoverishing expenditure, whereas for
                           catastrophic expenditure the poor appear to be worse off only in South Asia.




                                                                                                                                         7
Monitoring progress towards UHC at country and global levels




Fig. 3.	          Financial protection measures against catastrophic and impoverishing health
                  payments, by region




                East Asia and Paciﬁc

             Europe and Central Asia

    Latin America and the Caribbean

        Middle East and North Africa

                         South Asia

                 Sub-Saharan Africa


                                       40        60         80            100          40        60          80            100
                                                Protection against                             Protection against
                                        catastrophic health paymentsa (%)              impoverishing health paymentsb (%)

                                            Poorest 20%     Poorest 40%         Mean        Richest 40%      Richest 20%

a
    	 Percentage of the population not spending more than 25% of non-food expenditure on health care.
b
    	 Percentage of the population neither impoverished by out-of-pocket payments nor pushed further into poverty by them.

Source: World Health Surveys (2002–2003).




Recommendations
                         The monitoring framework outlined in this paper can be used to translate the goal
                         of UHC into measures of progress that are valid and comparable among countries.
                         Together, these measures can provide a snapshot of health system performance with
                         respect to coverage with some essential health services and financial protection, for
                         the population as a whole and for critical equity groups based on household income,
                         expenditure or wealth, place of residence and gender. Using the targets and illus-
                         trative indicators provided in this paper, countries can identify their coverage gaps
                         and ascertain how far and fast they should improve the performance of their health
                         systems to achieve progress towards UHC.
                             This common framework for monitoring UHC is designed to facilitate compari-
                         son of progress towards UHC among countries. Each country is expected to add
                         further measures of service coverage and further equity stratifiers in order to tailor
                         UHC monitoring to its context.




8
                                                                           Recommendations



    UHC monitoring is not a substitute for other measures of health systems perfor-
mance, such as improved health status or health worker density and distribution.
Rather, it should be seen as a core part of a comprehensive monitoring framework
in which inputs are linked to outputs and health outcomes. The measures proposed
in this paper can thus make a valuable contribution to assessment of health systems
performance and to the achievement of desired health outcomes.
    The monitoring framework proposes the following goal, targets and illustrative
indicators for UHC (see Box 1).



  Box 1.	 Goal, targets and illustrative indicators of UHC
  Goal
                  Achieve UHC. All people obtain the good-quality essential health services
                  that they need without enduring financial hardship.
  Targets
                  ■■ By 2030, all populations, independent of household income,
                       expenditure or wealth, place of residence or gender, have at least
                       80% essential health services coverage.
                  ■■   By 2030, everyone has 100% financial protection from out-of-pocket
                       payments for health services.
  Indicators
                  1.	 Health services coverage
                      1.1 Prevention
                          1.1.1 Aggregate: coverage with a set of tracer interventions for
                                  prevention services.
                          1.1.2 	 Equity: a measure of prevention service coverage as
                                  described above, stratified by wealth quintile, place of
                                  residence and gender.
                      1.2 Treatment
                          1.2.1 	 Aggregate: coverage with a set of tracer interventions for
                                  treatment services.
                          1.2.2 	 Equity: a measure of treatment service coverage as described
                                  above, stratified by wealth quintile, place of residence and
                                  gender.
                  2.	 Financial protection coverage
                      2.1 Impoverishing expenditure
                          2.1.1 Aggregate: fraction of the population protected against
                                  impoverishment by out-of-pocket health expenditures,
                                  comprising two types of household: families already below
                                  the poverty line on the basis of their consumption and who
                                  incur out-of-pocket health expenditures that push them
                                  deeper into poverty; and families for which out-of-pocket
                                  spending pushes them below the poverty line.
                          2.1.2	Equity: fraction of households protected against
                                  impoverishment or further impoverishment by out-of-
                                  pocket health expenditures, stratified by wealth quintile,
                                  place of residence and gender.
                      2.2 Catastrophic expenditure
                          2.2.1 	 Aggregate: fraction of households protected from incurring
                                  catastrophic out-of-pocket health expenditure.
                          2.2.2 	Equity: fraction of households protected from incurring
                                  catastrophic out-of-pocket health expenditure stratified by
                                  wealth quintile, place of residence and gender.




                                                                                                 9
Monitoring progress towards UHC at country and global levels



Investing in better UHC monitoring
                  The UHC monitoring framework outlined in this paper is designed as a starting
                  point. Global and national UHC monitoring is currently constrained by the lim-
                  ited number of indicators of service coverage that are relevant, of reasonable qual-
                  ity and feasible to measure with existing instruments, especially for the coverage
                  of treatment services. Tracking of progress in financial protection measures is also
                  hampered by lack of data. Investment is required to develop methods for devising
                  a more comprehensive set of UHC indicators. Moreover, investing in data collec-
                  tion through household surveys with standardized questions and from facilities
                  on services provided for assessing coverage of services and financial protection is
                  an important global public good and good value for money in the pursuit of the
                  goal of UHC.

UHC and the post-2015 development framework
                  Monitoring progress towards UHC is central to achieving the global goals of The
                  World Bank Group and WHO, the Millennium Development Goals and the emerging
                  post-2015 global development framework (2). The World Bank Group has set a global
                  goal of ending extreme poverty by 2030. UHC is critical to achieving this goal, as it
                  will prevent impoverishment of hundreds of millions of families due to out-of-pocket
                  payments for health services. WHO places the highest priority on securing the right
                  to health and attaining the highest levels of health for all. UHC secures universal
                  entitlement to health services, which are important contributors to improving the
                  health status of the population in all countries. Similarly, The World Bank Group’s
                  global goal to promote shared prosperity for the poorest 40% of the population in
                  every developing country is closely aligned with WHO’s focus on equity and the
                  High-level Panel’s recommendation to “hardwire” equity into all post-2015 measures.
                     There is emerging consensus that the post-2015 agenda should address the
                  unfinished agenda of the health-related Millennium Development Goals as well as
                  the emerging burden of noncommunicable diseases, including mental health, and
                  injuries. There is already a strong foundation of health indicators to build upon,
                  including the intervention coverage indicators (11) of the health-related Millennium
                  Development Goals, such as vaccination and antiretroviral therapy coverage, the
                  recommended priority interventions related to noncommunicable diseases (12 , 13)
                  and indicators of financial protection (14). Further work will be done in consultation
                  with countries and partners to identify and define specific prevention and treat-
                  ment indicators. The importance of multisectoral influences on health should also be
                  acknowledged, although it is not explicitly addressed in this paper. Further work is
                  needed to firmly link monitoring of progress towards UHC with monitoring of key
                  social and environmental determinants of health and sustainable development. ■




10
References
1.	     The world health report – health systems financing: the path to universal coverage. Geneva: World
        Health Organization; 2010 (http://www.who.int/whr/2010/en/, accessed 29 April 2014).
2.	     A new global partnership: eradicate poverty and transform economies through sustainable develop-
        ment. Report of the High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
        New York: United Nations; 2013 (http://www.post2015hlp.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/
        UN-Report.pdf, accessed 29 April 2014).
3.	     Technical meeting on measurement and monitoring of universal health coverage, Singapore, 17–18
        September 2103. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013 (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/coun-
        try_monitoring_evaluation/universal_health_coverage_meeting_sept2013/en, accessed 29 April
        2014).
4.	     Meeting on measurement of trends and equity in coverage of health interventions in the context of
        universal health coverage, Rockefeller Foundation Center, Bellagio, 17–21 September 2012. Geneva: World
        Health Organization; 2012 (http://www.who.int/entity/healthinfo/country_monitoring_evaluation/
        UHC_Meeting_Bellagio_Sep2012_Report.pdf?ua=1, accessed 29 April 2014).
5.	     Monitoring progress towards universal health coverage: a conversation with civil society partners, 21
        January 2014. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 (http://www.who.int/entity/healthinfo/uni-
        versal_health_coverage/UHC_Meeting_CivilSociety_Jan2014_Report.pdf?ua=1, accessed 29 March
        2014).
6.	     World Health Organization, International Health Partnership. Monitoring, evaluation and review of
        national health strategies: a country-led platform for information and accountability. Geneva: World
        Health Organization; 2011 (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/country_monitoring_evaluation/docu-
        mentation/en, accessed 29 April 2014).
7.	     Boerma T, Abouzahr C, Evans D, Evans T. Monitoring the coverage of services in the context of univer-
        sal health coverage. PLoS Med. Forthcoming
8.	     Health at a glance: Europe 2012. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development;
        2012 (http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/healthataglanceeurope.htm, accessed 7 May 2014).
9.	     Saksena P, Hsu J, Evans DB. Financial risk protection and universal health coverage: evidence and
        measurement challenges. PLoS Med. Forthcoming
10.	    Gwatkin DR, Ergo A. Universal health coverage: friend or foe of health equity? Lancet.
        2011;377(9784):2160–1. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10)62058-2 PMID: 21084113
11.	    Monitoring maternal, newborn and child health; understanding key progress indicators. A report
        prepared by Countdown for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health, Health Metrics Network and WHO.
        Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011.
12.	    Resolution A/RES/66/2. Political declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly of
        the General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases. New York:
        United Nations General Assembly; 2012 (http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol= A/
        RES/66/2, accessed 29 April 2014).
13.	    Resolution EB130.R7. Follow-up to the High-level Meeting of the United Nations General Assembly
        on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases. In: Executive Board 130th ses-
        sion, Geneva, 16–23 January 2012. Resolutions and decisions, annexes. Geneva: World Health
        Organization; 2012 (EB130/2012/REC/1; http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/EB130-REC1/
        B130_REC1-en.pdf, accessed 29 April 2014).
14.	    Xu K, Evans DB, Carrin G, Aguilar-Rivera AM, Musgrove P, Evans T. Protecting households from
        catastrophic health spending. Health Aff (Millwood). 2007;26(4):972–83. http://dx.doi.org/10.1377/
        hlthaff.26.4.972 PMID: 17630440

End notes
a
    	   In the context of this framework, “essential” is used to describe the services that a country decides
        should be available immediately to all people who need them. This varies by setting. Global monitoring
        will focus on a core subset that all countries would expect to cover.
b
    	   Although measurement of the indicators differs, there is broad acceptance of the concepts.
c
    	   Two other indicators that are sometimes used, although they are less understandable and accessible
        to policy-makers, are “depth of poverty”, the extent to which out-of-pocket health payments worsen a
        household’s pre-existing level of poverty, and the “mean catastrophic positive overshoot,” the average
        amount by which households affected by catastrophic expenditures pay more than the threshold used
        to define catastrophic health spending.
d
    	   The poorest segment of the population is often identified from household wealth index measures that
        allow analysis of coverage by wealth quintile, the poorest 40% or 20% of households.




                                                                                                            11
Monitoring progress towards UHC at country and global levels


                  e
                      	   Further analyses of time trends in coverage with prevention and treatment interventions and estimates
                          of 2015 baseline and coverage improvement rates through to 2030 are required to further specify the
                          treatment coverage target.
                  f
                      	   The World Bank Group regions are broadly but not exactly comparable to the WHO regions: East Asia
                          and Pacific (WHO Western Pacific Region), Europe and Central Asia (WHO European Region), Latin
                          America and the Caribbean (WHO Region of the Americas), Middle East and North Africa (WHO Eastern
                          Mediterranean Region), South Asia (WHO South-East Asia Region) and sub-Saharan Africa (WHO
                          African Region).
                  g
                      	   The World Health Survey, conducted in 70 countries in 2002–2003, was based on a household question-
                          naire covering the need for and receipt of a large number of interventions for meeting the Millennium
                          Development Goals and reducing the burden of chronic conditions and injuries, as well as health and
                          non-health (including food) expenditure at household level. The poorest 40% of households were
                          identified from the household “wealth index”, which provides the necessary stratification for equity
                          measures of both service and financial protection coverage.
                  h
                      	   Most of the coverage rates derived from the World Health Survey for treatment services probably result
                          in overestimates of coverage, because the information is self-reported and thereby does not capture
                          people with a condition that has not been diagnosed.
                  i
                      	   In computing catastrophic spending, ability to pay was measured from non-food consumption. The
                          threshold for catastrophic spending was set at 25%. The international poverty line of US$ 1.25 per day
                          was used to compute impoverishment.




12
