                             88514




Indonesia Country Opinion
     Survey Report

   (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                        Indonesia                                   Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. General Issues facing Indonesia.................................................10
          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank .................................14
         VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................20
        VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments ..................................24
       VIII. How the World Bank Operates ..................................................34
         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Indonesia .......................37
          X. Communication and Openness..................................................41
         XI. Appendices ................................................................................48




                                                          2
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in Indonesia
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Indonesia regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Indonesia;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in Indonesia;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank’s effectiveness and results, knowledge
               and research, and communication and information sharing in Indonesia; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in Indonesia.

       Use data to help inform the Indonesia country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In March and April 2012, 866 stakeholders of the World Bank in Indonesia were invited to
provide their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country
survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President; the office
of a Minister/Coordinating Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry,
ministerial department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World
Bank supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing
implementation of project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral
agencies; private sector organizations; private foundations; financial sector/private banks; NGOs;
community based organizations; the media; independent government institutions; trade unions;
faith-based groups; academia, research institutes or think tanks; and the judiciary branch. A total
of 265 stakeholders participated in the country survey (31%).

Respondents received the questionnaire either in the post, from a courier, or via email, and
returned the completed questionnaire similarly. Respondents were asked about: general issues
facing Indonesia, their overall attitudes toward the Bank; the World Bank’s effectiveness and
results; the Bank’s knowledge; working with the World Bank; the Bank’s future role in
Indonesia, and the Bank’s communication and information sharing in Indonesia:

A. General Issues facing Indonesia: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Indonesia is
   headed in the right direction, what they thought were the top three most important
   development priorities, and which areas would contribute most to poverty reduction and
   economic growth in Indonesia.




                                                 3
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their familiarity
   with the World Bank, the Bank’s effectiveness in Indonesia, the extent to which the Bank
   meets Indonesia’s need for knowledge services and financial instruments, the extent to which
   the Bank should and does seek to influence the global development agenda, their agreement
   with various statements regarding the Bank’s work in Indonesia, and the extent to which the
   Bank is an effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the
   sectoral areas on which it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its resources, the
   Bank’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses in its work, the Bank instruments that are
   most and least effective in reducing poverty, with which groups the Bank should work more,
   and to what reasons respondents attributed failed or slow reform efforts.
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
   the Bank’s work helps achieve sustainable development results in Indonesia and the Bank’s
   level of effectiveness across thirty-four development areas, such as poverty reduction, anti-
   corruption, and economic growth.
D. The World Bank’s Knowledge: Respondents were asked to indicate the areas on which the
   Bank should focus its research efforts and to rate the effectiveness and quality of the Bank’s
   knowledge/research, including how significant of a contribution the Bank’s knowledge and
   research make to development results, the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge/
   research, and the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement with
   a series of statements regarding working with the Bank, such as the Bank disbursing funds
   promptly, the World Bank safeguard policies requirements being reasonable, and working
   with the World Bank increasing Indonesia’s institutional capacity.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Indonesia: Respondents were asked to rate how
   significant a role the Bank should play in Indonesia’s development over the medium term
   and to indicate what the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Indonesia.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate where they
   get information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, and their access to the Internet. Respondents were asked about
   their awareness of the Bank’s Access to Information policy, past information requests from
   the Bank, and their level of agreement that they use more data from the World Bank as a
   result of the Bank’s Open Data policy. Respondents were asked to indicate their usage and
   evaluation of the Bank’s website and PICs. Respondents were also asked their level of
   agreement that they know how to find information from the Bank and that the Bank is
   responsive to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank, their exposure
   to the Bank in Indonesia, and their geographic location.

In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 238 respondents who completed the country survey in
FY 2002. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were possible.


                                                4
The World Bank                              Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position

       For further analyses: the small number of consultants/contractors working on World
        Bank supported projects/programs and Project Management Units (PMUs) were
        combined into one group; the small number of respondents from community-based
        organizations were combined with those from NGOs; respondents from bilateral agencies
        were combined with those from multilateral agencies; and the small number of
        respondents from private foundations, faith-based groups, and trade unions were included
        in the “Other” category. Note there were no respondents from the office of a
        Parliamentarian or from the judiciary branch.




                                                5
The World Bank                   Indonesia    Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                    6
The World Bank                              Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The vast majority of respondents indicated that they were located in Jabodetabek.
        Because of the small number of respondents from outside of Jabodetabek, but still in
        Java, and those from outside of Java, respondents from these locations were combined
        into one category, “Outside of Jabodetabek”, for all further analyses.




                                               7
The World Bank                           Indonesia   Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Professional Collaboration with the World Bank




Exposure to the World Bank




                                            8
The World Bank                                Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank

   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 6.5 on a
    10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar. This was
    significantly lower than the FY ’02 survey, in which familiarity with the Bank received a
    mean rating of 6.9 across all respondents.
         Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Jabodetabek and
          outside of Jabodetabek, had statistically similar ratings of familiarity with the Bank.
         It should be noted that respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the Bank were
          significantly, moderately correlated with their impressions of the Bank’s overall
          effectiveness in Indonesia as well as significantly correlated with their perceptions of
          the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results and the Bank’s
          relevance to Indonesia’s development.




                                                 9
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Indonesia

Headed in the Right Direction

       When asked whether Indonesia was headed in the right or wrong direction, the majority
        of respondents indicated that Indonesia was headed in the right direction. Over a third of
        respondents, however, indicated that they were not sure if Indonesia was headed in the
        right or wrong direction.
             The majority of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that
              Indonesia was headed in the right direction, except respondents from NGOs,
              academia, and the media who were more likely to say that they were not sure if
              Indonesia was headed in the right or wrong direction.
             The majority of respondents from Jabodetabek indicated that Indonesia was
              headed in the right direction whereas the majority of respondents from outside of
              Jabodetabek indicated that they were not sure if Indonesia was headed in the right
              or wrong direction.




                                                10
The World Bank                                Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Indonesia (continued)
Development Priority
       Respondents indicated that bureaucratic reform and governance was the most important
        development priority in Indonesia. Education, infrastructure, poverty alleviation, and
        politics, law, and security were also considered top priorities.
                Respondents across all stakeholder groups indicated that bureaucratic reform and
                 governance, education, and infrastructure were the most important development
                 priorities in Indonesia.
                Respondents from Jabodetabek and outside of Jabodetabek indicated that
                 bureaucratic reform and governance was the most important development priority
                 in Indonesia.




                                                 11
The World Bank                              Indonesia                          Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Indonesia (continued)

Poverty Reduction

       Respondents indicated that education and rural development would contribute most to
        poverty reduction in Indonesia. Economic growth, labor markets/job creation/
        employment, basic infrastructure, and anti-corruption were also considered key
        contributors to poverty reduction.




                                               12
The World Bank                              Indonesia                          Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Indonesia (continued)

Economic Growth

       Respondents indicated that anti-corruption, basic infrastructure, and labor markets/job
        creation/employment would contribute most to generating economic growth in Indonesia.
        Rural development, domestic private sector development, trade and exports, and
        education were also identified as key to economic growth.




                                               13
The World Bank                             Indonesia                          Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Focusing World Bank Resources

       Respondents indicated that the Bank would have the most impact on development results
        in Indonesia by focusing most of its attention and resources on poverty alleviation,
        bureaucratic reform and governance, education, and infrastructure. Health care, the
        economy, and the investment and business climate were also seen as key.




                                              14
The World Bank                                Indonesia                             Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Overall Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, ratings of the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Indonesia
        received a mean rating of 6.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10
        being very effective. This was statistically similar to the FY ’02 survey, in which the
        Bank’s overall effectiveness received a mean rating of 5.8 across all respondents.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Jabodetabek and
              outside of Jabodetabek, gave statistically similar ratings for the World Bank’s
              overall effectiveness in Indonesia.




                                                 15
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Achieving Sustainable Development Results

       Across all respondents, the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results
        in Indonesia received a mean rating of 6.2 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree
        at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings for
              the Bank helping achieve sustainable development results in Indonesia whereas
              respondents from local government, NGOs, and the office of the President gave
              significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Jabodetabek and outside of Jabodetabek gave statistically
              similar ratings for the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development
              results in Indonesia.




                                                16
The World Bank                                Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest value to Indonesia was
        its financial resources. The Bank’s technical assistance, training/capacity building, and
        studies/analyses were also considered of great value.




                                                 17
The World Bank                              Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Indonesia were
        imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities and being too
        influenced by developed countries. The Bank being too bureaucratic in its operational
        policies and procedures, not exploring alternative policy options, and not providing
        enough public disclosure of its work were also considered weaknesses.




                                               18
The World Bank                                Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, respondents
        indicated that they most often attribute this to the government working inefficiently or
        too slowly or to political pressures and obstacles. Respondents also indicated that reforms
        not being well thought out in light of country challenges, an inadequate level of citizen/
        civil society participation, inadequate follow through/follow-up by the Bank, and
        inadequate government capacity can also lead to Bank assisted reform efforts failing or
        taking place slowly.




                                                 19
The World Bank                                Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Specific Areas of Effectiveness

       Respondents saw the Bank as most effective at economic growth and education, both
        receiving a mean rating of 6.6, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being
        not effective at all and 10 being very effective.




                                                 20
The World Bank                                Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder differences in their ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness
        across two of these thirty-four areas.
             Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies, the office of a Minister, and
              other organizations gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at
              “Environmental sustainability” whereas respondents from the office of the
              President and NGOs gave significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness.
             Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies and the office of a Minister
              gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at “Water and sanitation”
              whereas respondents from the office of the President and NGOs gave significantly
              lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness.

       Respondents from outside of Jabodetabek gave higher ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness
        compared to respondents from Jabodetabek across most of these thirty-four areas,
        significantly so for:
                “Water and sanitation”;
                “Labor markets/job creation/employment”;
                “Health”;
                “Rural development”;
                “Food security”;
                “Education”; and
                “Agricultural development”.




                                                 21
The World Bank                                Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
        effectiveness at “Economic growth”, “Education”, “Health”, and “Poverty reduction”
        compared to respondents in the FY ’02 country survey (note these were the only areas
        that could be compared).




                                                 22
The World Bank                                Indonesia                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness and
ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable development results in Indonesia, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-four specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of
effectiveness in one specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness or perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Indonesia. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at public financial management;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at trade and exports;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at foreign investment.

       Achieving Sustainable Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest
        Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results in
        Indonesia, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results. The
        areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at poverty reduction;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at trade and exports;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at food security.




                                                 23
The World Bank                               Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments

Knowledge: Meeting Indonesia’s Knowledge Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank meets Indonesia’s needs for
        knowledge services received a mean rating of 6.4 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Jabodetabek and
              outside of Jabodetabek, gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank meeting
              Indonesia’s needs for knowledge services.




                                                24
The World Bank                             Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Knowledge: Focusing Bank Research
    Respondents indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
      and knowledge efforts on public sector governance, poverty reduction, and education.
      Respondents also indicated that economic growth and anti-corruption would be valuable
      research endeavors.
           Respondents across most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
             indicated that the Bank should focus its research efforts on these areas, except
             respondents from the financial sector/private banks who indicated that the Bank
             should focus its research efforts on basic infrastructure.




                                              25
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, the effectiveness of the World Bank’s knowledge and research to
        enhance respondents’ knowledge and/or skills received the highest mean rating, 6.9, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents from outside of Jabodetabek had higher ratings compared to
              respondents from Jabodetabek for the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge
              and research in all of these areas, significantly so for “Stimulating public
              debate/dialogue” and “Providing support for program implementation”.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for the
              effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research in these areas.




                                                26
The World Bank                                Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Qualities

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s knowledge and research being a source of
        relevant information on global good practices received the highest mean rating, 6.9, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies had the highest ratings for the
              extent to which the Bank’s knowledge and research “Are timely”, “Include an
              appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation”, and “Are
              relevant to Indonesia’s development priorities” whereas respondents from the
              office of the President, local government, and NGOs had significantly lower
              ratings for these qualities. Respondents across all stakeholder groups had
              statistically similar ratings for the other qualities of the World Bank’s knowledge
              and research.
             Respondents from Jabodetabek and outside of Jabodetabek had statistically
              similar ratings for these qualities of the Bank’s knowledge and research.




                                                 27
The World Bank                              Indonesia                          Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Contribution

       Across all respondents, the significance of the contribution that the World Bank’s
        knowledge and research make to development results in Indonesia received a mean rating
        of 6.6 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not significant at all and 10 being very
        significant.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Jabodetabek and
              outside of Jabodetabek, gave statistically similar significance ratings for the
              contribution that the World Bank’s knowledge and research make to development
              results in Indonesia.




                                               28
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Technical Quality

       Across all respondents, the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge and
        research received a mean rating of 7.2 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being very low
        technical quality and 10 being very high technical quality.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Jabodetabek and
              outside of Jabodetabek, gave statistically similar ratings for the technical quality
              of the World Bank’s knowledge and research.




                                                29
The World Bank                                Indonesia                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Linkage to Non-Bank Expertise

       Across all respondents, the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank
        expertise received a mean rating of 6.4 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at
        all and 10 being very effective.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Jabodetabek and
              outside of Jabodetabek, gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s
              effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise.




                                                 30
The World Bank                               Indonesia                          Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Most Effective

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank’s capacity development was
        most effective in reducing poverty in Indonesia. The World Bank’s investment lending
        and technical assistant were also considered effective.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated that the World Bank’s capacity development was most effective in
              reducing poverty in Indonesia, except respondents from the office of the President
              and the office of a Minister who indicated that the Bank’s technical assistance
              was most effective and consultants on Bank projects/respondents from PMUs and
              those from the financial sector/private banks who indicated that the Bank’s
              investment lending was most effective.




                                                31
The World Bank                               Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Least Effective

       Over a third of all respondents indicated that the World Bank’s policy-based lending/
        budget support to the Government was least effective in reducing poverty in Indonesia.
             Employees of ministries, consultants on Bank projects/respondents from PMUs,
              and respondents from private sector, academia, and the media indicated that the
              World Bank’s policy-based lending was least effective in reducing poverty in
              Indonesia. In contrast, respondents from the office of a Minister and NGOs
              indicated that the Bank’s investment lending was least effective. Respondents
              from local government indicated that the Bank’s technical assistance was least
              effective. Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies and the financial
              sector/private banks indicated that the Bank’s Trust Fund management was least
              effective.
             Respondents from Jabodetabek indicated that the World Bank’s policy-based
              lending was least effective in reducing poverty in Indonesia. In contrast,
              respondents from outside of Jabodetabek indicated that the Bank’s technical
              assistance was least effective.




                                                32
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Meeting Indonesia’s Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank’s financial instruments meet
        Indonesia’s needs received a mean rating of 5.9 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from the office of the President had the highest ratings for the
              Bank’s financial instruments meeting Indonesia’s needs whereas consultants on
              Bank projects/ PMUs and respondents from NGOs, private sector, and local
              government had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Jabodetabek and outside of Jabodetabek gave statistically
              similar ratings for the Bank’s financial instruments meeting Indonesia’s needs.




                                                33
The World Bank                                Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates

The World Bank’s Work in Indonesia

       In terms of the Bank’s work in Indonesia, the World Bank treating clients and
        stakeholders in Indonesia with respect received the highest mean level of agreement, 6.3,
        across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being
        strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and locations had statistically similar
              levels of agreement across these statements.
             The two statements that could be compared to respondents from the FY ’02
              country survey revealed statistically similar levels of agreement in this year’s
              country survey.




                                                 34
The World Bank                             Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions
 Across all respondents, the World Bank effectively monitoring and evaluating the projects
   and programs it supports received the highest mean rating, 6.9, on a 10-point scale with 1
   being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
        Respondents from other organizations had the highest ratings for “The World Bank
           effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it supports” whereas
           respondents from NGOs had significantly lower ratings. Respondents from other
           organizations had the highest ratings for “The World Bank’s approvals and reviews
           are done in a timely fashion” whereas respondents from NGOs and the office of a
           Minister had significantly lower ratings. Respondents from other organizations had
           the highest ratings for “The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its
           lending” whereas respondents from local government had significantly lower ratings.
           Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for the
           other aspects of working with the World Bank.
        Respondents from outside of Jabodetabek had higher ratings compared to respondents
           from Jabodetabek for all of these aspects of working with the Bank, significantly so
           for “The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
           supports”, “The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion”,
           and “The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated”.
        Ratings for “The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
           programs it supports” in this year’s country survey were significantly higher
           compared to the FY ’02 country survey (6.3). Ratings for the only other statement
           that could be compared, “The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its
           lending”, were statistically similar in the FY ’12 and FY ’02 country surveys (6.1).




                                              35
The World Bank                              Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)
The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner
    Across all respondents, the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development
      partner in terms of its collaboration with the Government in Indonesia received the
      highest rating, 7.0, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a
      very significant degree.
           Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies had the highest ratings
              regarding the Bank’s follow up and follow through whereas respondents from the
              office of the President and NGOs had significantly lower ratings. Respondents
              from the media had the highest ratings that the Bank displays flexibility in terms
              of its products/services whereas respondents from the office of the President and
              NGOs had significantly lower ratings. Respondents from bilateral or multilateral
              agencies, the financial sector/private banks, and the media had the highest ratings
              that the Bank displays flexibility in terms of the country’s changing circumstances
              whereas respondents from the office of the President, local government, private
              sector, and NGOs had significantly lower ratings. Respondents across all
              stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings across the other areas.
           Respondents across both geographic locations had statistically similar ratings
              across these areas.
           The extent to which the Bank displayed flexibility in terms of the country’s
              changing circumstances and in terms of its products/services was statistically
              similar in this country survey compared to the FY ’02 country survey (both 5.7).




                                               36
The World Bank                               Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Indonesia

Role Significance

       The Bank was expected to play a somewhat significant role in Indonesia’s development
        over the medium term, receiving a mean rating of 6.8 across all respondents on a 10-point
        scale with 1 being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Jabodetabek and
              outside of Jabodetabek, gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s role
              significance.




                                                37
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Indonesia (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should improve the quality of its experts as
        related to Indonesia’s specific challenges to make itself of greater value in Indonesia.
        Respondents also indicated that the Bank should provide more adequate data/
        knowledge/statistics/figures on Indonesia’s economy and reduce the complexity of
        obtaining Bank financing to make itself of greater value.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank should
              improve the quality of its experts, provide more adequate data/knowledge, and
              reduce the complexity of obtaining financing except respondents from
              independent government institutions who indicated that the Bank should improve
              the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets and respondents from
              bilateral or multilateral agencies who indicated that the Bank should offer more
              innovative knowledge services.
             Respondents from Jabodetabek and outside of Jabodetabek indicated that the
              World Bank should improve the quality of its experts as related to Indonesia’s
              specific challenges to make itself of greater value in Indonesia.




                                                38
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Indonesia (continued)

Collaborating in Indonesia

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely with local
        government and academia/think tanks/research institutes to ensure better development
        results in Indonesia. Respondents also indicated that it would be beneficial for the World
        Bank to work more closely with CBOs, beneficiaries, private sector, and NGOs.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated that the Bank should work more closely with these groups except
              respondents from the media who were more likely to indicate that the Bank
              should work more closely with the media.




                                                39
The World Bank                               Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Indonesia (continued)

Influencing the Global Development Agenda

       Across all respondents, the extent to which respondents believed the World Bank should
        influence the global development agenda received a mean rating of 6.6 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree. The
        extent to which respondents believed the World Bank does influence the global
        development agenda received a mean rating of 6.5 across all respondents.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups, as well as those from Jabodetabek and
              outside of Jabodetabek, gave statistically similar ratings for the extent to which
              the Bank should and does influence the global development agenda.




                                                40
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       More than three-quarters of all respondents indicated that they got most of their
        information about economic and social development issues in Indonesia from local
        newspapers, and nearly two-thirds indicated that they got this information from the
        Internet.




                                                41
The World Bank                               Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank, over
        half of all respondents indicated that they preferred the World Bank website. World Bank
        publications and other written materials, direct contact with World Bank staff, and World
        Bank seminars/workshops/conferences were also popular preferred information sources.




                                                42
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       Just over a third of all respondents indicated that they were aware of the Bank’s new
        Access to Information policy.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of awareness for the Bank’s new Access to Information
              policy.




       A third of all respondents indicated that they had requested information from the World
        Bank in the past year.
             Respondents from the office of the President, independent government
              institutions, bilateral or multilateral agencies, NGOs, and academia had
              significantly higher rates of requesting information from the World Bank than
              respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from Jabodetabek and outside of Jabodetabek had statistically
              similar rates of requesting information from the World Bank.




                                                43
The World Bank                                Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Nearly all of the respondents who indicated that they had requested information from the
        World Bank indicated that they were able to obtain this information.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of obtaining their requested information.




       Agreement that respondents use more data from the World Bank as a result of its Open
        Data policy received a mean rating of 5.7, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement that they use more data from the World
              Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data policy.




                                                 44
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       All respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet (100%).

Website Usage

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website.
             Respondents from Jabodetabek had significantly higher rates of usage for the
              World Bank’s website compared to those from outside of Jabodetabek.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of usage
              for the World Bank’s website.




       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, a slight majority indicated that they
        used the World Bank’s country website.
             Respondents from outside of Jabodetabek had significantly higher rates of usage
              for the World Bank’s country website compared to those from Jabodetabek.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of usage
              for the World Bank’s main and country websites.




                                                45
The World Bank                                Indonesia                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Evaluation
       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, agreement that
        respondents find the information on the Bank’s websites useful received the highest mean
        rating, 7.2, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and
        10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement that they find the information on the
              Bank’s websites useful and that the Bank websites are easy to navigate.




Information Sharing
       In terms of the Bank’s information sharing in Indonesia, respondents had the highest
        level of agreement that “The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and
        inquiries”, receiving a mean rating of 6.3, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement that “The Bank is appropriately
              responsive to my information requests and inquiries” and that “When I need
              information from the World Bank I know how to find it”.




                                                 46
The World Bank                               Indonesia                            Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Public Information Centers (PICs)

       Over half of all respondents indicated that they had not used the Bank’s PICs in
        Indonesia, and nearly a quarter of all respondents were unaware of the Bank’s PICs.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of usage for the Bank’s PICs.




       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s PICs, it being a valuable source of
        information related to development in Indonesia received a mean level of agreement of
        6.7 on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement regarding the value of the Bank’s PICs.




                                                47
The World Bank                                 Indonesia                              Country Survey 2012



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 49


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 64


          C. Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location .................... 78


          D. Responses to All Questions by Year.............................................. 89


          E. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank.......... 91


          F. Indonesia FY 2012 Questionnaire ................................................. 92




                                             INDONESIA




                                                  48
The World Bank                                      Indonesia                               Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents

                                        Number of Respondents = 265

A. General Issues facing Indonesia
1. In general, would you say that Indonesia is headed in...?               Percentage of Respondents (N=263)
The right direction                                                                      57.8%
The wrong direction                                                                       3.4%
Not sure                                                                                 38.8%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in             Percentage of Respondents (N=259)
                                                                              nd          rd
Indonesia. Please identify which of these you consider the        Most      2 Most       3 Most
 st   nd       rd
1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.              Important Important Important Combined
Bureaucratic reform and governance                                37.1%       13.1%       11.1%      61.3%
Education                                                         17.8%       16.2%        8.4%      42.3%
Infrastructure                                                    9.7%        15.8%       14.2%      39.6%
Poverty alleviation                                               10.0%       12.7%        7.7%      30.4%
Politics, law, and security                                       8.1%         7.3%        9.6%      25.0%
Health care                                                       1.5%         8.1%       10.3%      20.0%
Economy                                                           5.0%         6.2%        8.0%      19.2%
People’s welfare                                                  4.2%         5.4%        6.9%      16.5%
Investment and business climate                                   1.9%         4.2%        5.7%      11.9%
Food security                                                     3.5%         3.1%        3.4%      10.0%
Disadvantaged, borders, and post conflict areas                   0.4%         2.7%        5.0%       8.1%
Energy sector                                                     0.4%         1.9%        3.1%       5.4%
Environment and disaster risk management                          0.0%         1.9%        3.4%       5.4%
Culture, creativity, and technology innovation                    0.4%         1.5%        3.1%       5.0%




                                                        49
The World Bank                                    Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing Indonesia (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
   different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do
   you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Indonesia?     Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                           (Responses Combined; N=265)
Education                                                                            37.0%
Rural development                                                                    36.2%
Economic growth                                                                      28.7%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                26.8%
Basic infrastructure                                                                 26.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                      20.8%
Public sector governance                                                             13.6%
Health                                                                               12.8%
Agricultural development                                                             11.7%
Law and justice                                                                      10.9%
Social protection                                                                     9.4%
Food security                                                                         8.7%
Natural resource management                                                           7.9%
Transport                                                                             7.2%
Equality of opportunity                                                               6.0%
Public financial management                                                           6.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                  5.7%
Domestic private sector development                                                   4.9%
Energy                                                                                4.2%
Environmental sustainability                                                          2.6%
Financial markets                                                                     1.5%
Regional integration                                                                  1.1%
Gender                                                                                1.1%
Regulatory framework                                                                  1.1%
Foreign investment                                                                    1.1%
Trade and exports                                                                     1.1%
Climate change                                                                        0.8%
Urban development                                                                     0.8%
Global information and communications technology                                      0.8%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                             0.8%
Disaster management                                                                   0.4%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                 0.4%
Global integration                                                                    0.4%




                                                     50
The World Bank                                     Indonesia                               Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing Indonesia (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE
   areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating               Percentage of Respondents
   economic growth in Indonesia? (Choose no more than THREE)                  (Responses Combined; N=265)
Anti-corruption                                                                           28.7%
Basic infrastructure                                                                      26.8%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                     25.3%
Rural development                                                                         20.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                       20.4%
Trade and exports                                                                         18.5%
Education                                                                                 17.0%
Transport                                                                                 15.1%
Foreign investment                                                                        13.6%
Poverty reduction                                                                         13.2%
Natural resource management                                                               13.2%
Agricultural development                                                                  11.7%
Public sector governance                                                                  10.6%
Public financial management                                                               10.6%
Law and justice                                                                            7.5%
Energy                                                                                     6.8%
Global information and communications technology                                           6.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                                    4.9%
Social protection                                                                          4.2%
Regulatory framework                                                                       3.8%
Urban development                                                                          3.0%
Food security                                                                              2.6%
Global integration                                                                         2.3%
Regional integration                                                                       2.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                               2.3%
Health                                                                                     2.3%
Financial markets                                                                          2.3%
Gender                                                                                     1.1%
Water and sanitation                                                                       0.8%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                  0.8%
Climate change                                                                             0.0%
Disaster management                                                                        0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                      0.0%


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Familiarity and Overall Effectiveness                                              N       Mean        SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Indonesia, on a ten-
                                                                                  265       6.50      1.75
   point scale? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank's effectiveness in
                                                                                  250       6.06      1.72
   Indonesia, on a ten-point scale. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                      51
The World Bank                                             Indonesia                          Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent do you believe…
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                              N       Mean         SD
3.   The World Bank's financial instruments meet the needs of Indonesia, on a
                                                                                     236       5.93       1.72
     ten-point scale?
4.   The World Bank meets Indonesia's needs for knowledge services, on a ten-
                                                                                     244       6.43       1.91
     point scale?
5.   The World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the global development agenda,
                                                                                     256       6.65       2.02
     on a ten point scale?
6.   The World Bank DOES seek to influence the global development agenda, on
                                                                                     247       6.53       1.82
     a ten point scale?

7. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact
    on development results in Indonesia, in which sectoral areas do you
    believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and                 Percentage of Respondents
    resources in Indonesia? (Choose no more than THREE)                         (Responses Combined; N=264)
Poverty alleviation                                                                         46.2%
Bureaucratic reform and governance                                                          42.8%
Education                                                                                   40.2%
Infrastructure                                                                              38.6%
Health care                                                                                 21.6%
Economy                                                                                     21.2%
Investment and business climate                                                             18.2%
People’s welfare                                                                            14.8%
Environment and disaster risk management                                                    10.6%
Food security                                                                               10.2%
Disadvantaged, borders, and post conflict areas                                              9.5%
Politics, law, and security                                                                  8.0%
Energy sector                                                                                6.1%
Culture, creativity, and technology innovation                                               5.3%

                                                                          Percentage of Respondents (N=260)
8. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do
                                                                                      nd
   you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second    Greatest     2 Greatest
   greatest value in Indonesia?                                         Value         Value           Combined
Financial resources                                                     32.3%         11.9%             44.2%
Technical assistance                                                    12.3%         18.8%             31.1%
Training/capacity building                                              13.5%         15.7%             29.2%
Studies/analyses                                                        13.5%         15.3%             28.8%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                              9.2%          11.1%             20.3%
Policy advice                                                           9.2%          8.0%              17.3%
Data                                                                    4.2%          6.9%              11.1%
Donor coordination                                                      2.7%          5.0%              7.7%
Convening/facilitating                                                  1.9%          3.8%              5.8%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                           0.4%          2.7%              3.1%
Other                                                                   0.8%          0.8%              1.5%




                                                              52
The World Bank                                          Indonesia                           Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

9. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest           Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)              (Responses Combined; N=263)
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                      29.7%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                      28.9%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                25.1%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                   22.4%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                   19.8%
Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country               16.3%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                  16.0%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                    7.2%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                         6.5%
Other                                                                                       5.7%
Not client focused                                                                          4.2%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                       4.2%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                      3.4%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                         0.4%

10. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective           Percentage of Respondents
  in reducing poverty in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)                  (Responses Combined; N=264)
Capacity development                                                                       56.1%
Investment lending                                                                         37.5%
Technical assistance                                                                       36.7%
Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government                                    22.0%
Analytical work                                                                            22.0%
Trust Fund management                                                                       8.3%
Don’t know                                                                                  4.2%

11. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in           Percentage of Respondents
  helping to reduce poverty in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)            (Responses Combined; N=263)
Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government                                    39.2%
Trust Fund management                                                                      27.8%
Investment lending                                                                         26.2%
Technical assistance                                                                       26.2%
Analytical work                                                                            20.9%
Don’t know                                                                                 16.7%
Capacity development                                                                        7.6%




                                                           53
The World Bank                                          Indonesia                                  Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

12. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
  main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
  Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better                         Percentage of Respondents
  development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                              (Responses Combined; N=265)
Local Government                                                                                37.7%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                        33.6%
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                            26.4%
Beneficiaries                                                                                   23.4%
Private sector                                                                                  20.0%
NGOs                                                                                            18.5%
Parliament                                                                                       9.1%
Media                                                                                            8.7%
Other                                                                                            4.9%
Donor community                                                                                  4.5%
Foundations                                                                                      3.0%
Faith based organizations                                                                        1.5%

                                                                                             Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s
work in Indonesia, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)            N      Mean        SD
13. Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Indonesia      260      6.13      1.87
14. The World Bank's work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                            252      5.93      1.87
    for this country
15. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Indonesia        257      6.15      1.78
16. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Indonesia with respect                241      6.33      1.85

                                                                                                     Degree
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Indonesia in
terms of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)     N      Mean       SD
17. Follow up and follow through                                                             232      6.16     1.67
18. Responsiveness                                                                           245      6.19     1.72
19. Flexibility (in terms of the institution's products and services)                        237      5.75     1.77
20. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                 235      5.94     1.74
21. Being inclusive                                                                          238      6.03     1.80
22. Openness (sharing data and other information)                                            248      6.44     1.85
23. Staff accessibility                                                                      236      6.27     1.91
24. Straightforwardness and honesty                                                          233      6.42     1.76
25. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                                      225      6.37     1.84
26. Collaboration with the Government                                                        247      7.02     1.72
27. Collaboration with other donors                                                          223      6.90     1.67




                                                           54
The World Bank                                                 Indonesia                  Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

28. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
  place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to?             Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                (Responses Combined; N=263)
The Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                          32.3%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                      31.6%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                        26.6%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                  25.9%
The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                           25.1%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                    25.1%
The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                                          11.8%
Poor donor coordination                                                                 6.8%
Other                                                                                   6.5%




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

                                                                                            Degree
Achieving Sustainable Results                                                        N      Mean       SD
1. To what degree does the World Bank's work help achieve sustainable development
    results in Indonesia, on a ten point scale?                                     252      6.18     1.62
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                  55
The World Bank                                      Indonesia                              Country Survey 2012


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the         Effectiveness
following areas of development in Indonesia, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                           N       Mean      SD
2.    Anti-corruption                                                                225      5.27     2.16
3.    Global information and communications technology                               216      6.32     1.69
4.    Transport                                                                      225      6.16     1.65
5.    Law and justice                                                                212      5.14     1.83
6.    Urban development                                                              226      6.04     1.64
7.    Environmental sustainability                                                   226      6.16     1.71
8.    Regulatory framework                                                           218      5.92     1.68
9.    Basic infrastructure                                                           236      6.31     1.71
10.   Communicable/non-communicable disease                                          205      6.05     1.71
11.   Poverty reduction                                                              242      6.33     1.87
12.   Gender                                                                         218      6.30     1.73
13.   Domestic private sector development                                            222      6.00     1.87
14.   Foreign investment                                                             221      6.44     1.83
15.   Water and sanitation                                                           225      6.44     1.64
16.   Trade and exports                                                              205      6.20     1.69
17.   Economic growth                                                                234      6.60     1.65
18.   Energy                                                                         207      5.99     1.77
19.   Disaster management                                                            225      6.12     1.63
20.   Monitoring and evaluation                                                      230      6.43     1.64
21.   Public financial management                                                    221      6.49     1.61
22.   Labor markets/job creation/employment                                          219      5.67     1.74
23.   Financial markets                                                              212      6.27     1.65
24.   Equality of opportunity                                                        215      5.95     1.65
25.   Health                                                                         230      6.54     1.56
26.   Rural development                                                              236      6.38     1.70
27.   Global integration                                                             201      6.45     1.67
28.   Food security                                                                  211      5.87     1.72
29.   Education                                                                      233      6.55     1.73
30.   Social protection                                                              219      6.06     1.68
31.   Climate change                                                                 214      6.11     1.70
32.   Public sector governance                                                       231      6.08     1.62
33.   Regional integration                                                           200      5.98     1.55
34. Agricultural development                                                         211      6.00     1.71
35. Natural resource management                                                      205      5.77     1.68




                                                         56
The World Bank                                        Indonesia                          Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

1. When thinking about the development challenges in Indonesia, where
   do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus
   its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?                 Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                             (Responses Combined; N=265)
Public sector governance                                                               32.1%
Poverty reduction                                                                      26.4%
Education                                                                              24.5%
Economic growth                                                                        19.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                        18.9%
Rural development                                                                      15.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                    13.2%
Basic infrastructure                                                                   13.2%
Law and justice                                                                        12.5%
Agricultural development                                                                9.8%
Natural resource management                                                             8.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                            7.9%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                                   7.5%
Health                                                                                  7.2%
Social protection                                                                       6.4%
Transport                                                                               6.4%
Food security                                                                           6.4%
Public financial management                                                             6.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                    5.3%
Energy                                                                                  4.9%
Climate change                                                                          4.5%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                               4.2%
Foreign investment                                                                      3.8%
Urban development                                                                       3.4%
Trade and exports                                                                       3.0%
Financial markets                                                                       3.0%
Regulatory framework                                                                    3.0%
Gender                                                                                  2.6%
Regional integration                                                                    2.6%
Global information and communications technology                                        2.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                                 1.9%
Disaster management                                                                     1.5%
Global integration                                                                      1.1%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                                   0.4%

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at … ?   Level of Effectiveness
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                        N      Mean        SD
2.   Raising your awareness of the particular topic                               249      6.68      1.84
3.   Stimulating public debate/dialogue                                           251      6.41     1.74
4.   Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                                       257      6.89     1.83
5.   Contributing to good policy making                                           251      6.62     1.73
6.   Providing support for program implementation                                 248      6.61     1.68




                                                         57
The World Bank                                               Indonesia                             Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research … ?                     Degree
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                   N       Mean       SD
7.   Are timely                                                                            229      6.60     1.64
8.   Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation               239      6.38     1.71
9.   Are relevant to Indonesia’s development priorities                                    252      6.31     1.75
10. Provide feasible recommendations                                                       246      6.38     1.68
11. Are accessible                                                                         253      6.81     1.60
12. A source of relevant information on global good practices                              247      6.87     1.67
13. Are adequately disseminated                                                            252      6.34     1.69
14. Are appropriately translated                                                           234      6.68     1.70
15. Are adaptable to Indonesia’s development challenges                                    247      6.31     1.64


Overall Evaluations                                                                            N     Mean       SD
16. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge
    and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?          255      6.62     1.58
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
17. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's knowledge/
    research, on a ten point scale?                                                          254      7.24     1.51
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
18. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise,
                                                                                             209      6.42     1.48
    on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


E. Working with the World Bank

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point                Level of Agreement
scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                             N      Mean      SD
1. The World Bank disburses funds promptly                                                 201      5.49    2.00
2. The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs
                                                                                           236      6.93      1.59
    it supports
3. The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                     212      6.36      1.74
4.   The World Bank’s safeguard policy requirements are reasonable                         208      6.39      1.66
5.   The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                           207      6.14      1.79
6.   Working with the World Bank increases Indonesia’s institutional capacity              241      6.59      1.81
7.   The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes               180      6.52      1.54
8.   The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated                                209      6.69      1.64
9.   Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank makes appropriate use of
                                                                                           199      6.53      1.50
     them




                                                                58
The World Bank                                                Indonesia                      Country Survey 2012


F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Indonesia

The Bank’s Role                                                                         N      Mean       SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank SHOULD play in Indonesia’s
development over the medium term in the near future, on a ten point scale?             255       6.83    1.80
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of             Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)                      (Responses Combined; N=264)
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Indonesia's specific
                                                                                         42.0%
challenges
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Indonesia's
                                                                                         29.5%
economy
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                  27.7%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                 22.3%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                         20.1%
Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                       15.5%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                   14.0%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                 12.5%
Other                                                                                     6.8%

G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social           Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)                   (Responses Combined; N=265)
Local newspapers                                                                           76.6%
Internet                                                                                   62.6%
Local television                                                                           24.2%
Periodicals                                                                                12.8%
International newspapers                                                                    9.4%
Other                                                                                       5.3%
International television                                                                    4.5%
Local radio                                                                                 1.5%
Instant messaging                                                                           0.8%
International radio                                                                         0.0%
Blogs                                                                                       0.0%
Mobile phones                                                                               0.0%

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?              Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                    (Responses Combined; N=265)
World Bank website                                                                         52.1%
World Bank publications and other written materials                                        39.6%
Direct contact with World Bank                                                             35.5%
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                                  30.6%
e-Newsletters                                                                              17.4%
World Bank Public Information Center                                                        8.7%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                                   5.3%
Instant messaging                                                                           1.9%
Other                                                                                       1.5%
Mobile phones                                                                               0.0%
Blogs                                                                                       0.0%



                                                                 59
The World Bank                                     Indonesia                                 Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

3. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under
    which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession           Percentage of Respondents
    that is not a list of exceptions?                                                     (N=265)
Yes                                                                                        36.6%
No                                                                                         63.4%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities          Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                                     (N=265)
Yes                                                                                        32.8%
No                                                                                         67.2%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                              (N=86)
Yes                                                                                        90.7%
No                                                                                          9.3%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                    (N=265)
Yes                                                                                       100.0%
No                                                                                          0.0%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank website?                                           (N=263)
Yes                                                                                        83.7%
No                                                                                         16.3%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                            (N=224)
The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/indonesia)                             50.8%
The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                          49.2%

9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information                  Percentage of Respondents
    Centers (PICs) in Indonesia?                                                          (N=265)
Yes                                                                                        21.1%
No                                                                                         54.7%
I don't know what a PIC is                                                                 24.2%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point           Level of Agreement
scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                       N       Mean      SD
10. I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the organization’s Open
                                                                                     221      5.68      2.27
    Data policy
11. The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of information related to
                                                                                      66      6.73      1.91
    development in Indonesia
12. I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate                                  221      6.95      1.68
13. I find the information on the World Bank’s websites useful                       221      7.23      1.59
14. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it                231      6.19      2.01
15. The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries            190      6.33      1.78




                                                      60
The World Bank                                   Indonesia                        Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?      Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                          (N=265)
Media                                                                          16.2%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                         13.6%
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation
                                                                              11.7%
Agency
NGO                                                                           11.3%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                 9.8%
Other                                                                         8.7%
Bilateral Agency                                                              6.0%
Private Sector Organization                                                   6.0%
Office of Minister / Coordinating Minister                                    3.0%
Local Government Office or Staff                                              2.6%
Independent Government Institution                                            2.3%
Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported
                                                                               1.9%
Project/Program
Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project             1.5%
Multilateral Agency                                                            1.5%
Private Foundation                                                             1.1%
Office of the President                                                        0.8%
Community Based Organization                                                   0.8%
Faith-Based Group                                                              0.8%
Trade Union                                                                    0.4%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                      0.0%
Judiciary Brunch                                                               0.0%




                                                    61
The World Bank                                       Indonesia                Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.      Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                      (N=265)
Other                                                                      28.7%
Economic growth                                                             8.7%
Financial markets                                                           8.7%
Education                                                                   6.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                5.7%
Poverty reduction                                                           4.9%
Global information and communications technology                            4.5%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                   4.2%
Public financial management                                                 3.8%
Labor markets/job creation/employment                                       3.0%
Public sector governance                                                    2.6%
Anti-corruption                                                             1.5%
Domestic private sector development                                         1.5%
Energy                                                                      1.5%
Law and justice                                                             1.5%
Trade and exports                                                           1.5%
Agricultural development                                                    1.1%
Climate change                                                              1.1%
Gender                                                                      1.1%
Global integration                                                          1.1%
Health                                                                      1.1%
Natural resource management                                                 1.1%
Rural development                                                           1.1%
Foreign investment                                                          0.8%
Regulatory framework                                                        0.8%
Basic infrastructure                                                        0.4%
Disaster management                                                         0.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                     0.4%
Regional integration                                                        0.4%
Social protection                                                           0.4%
Urban development                                                           0.4%
Communicable/non-communicable disease                                       0.0%
Food security                                                               0.0%
Transport                                                                   0.0%
Water and sanitation                                                        0.0%




                                                        62
The World Bank                                         Indonesia                         Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the               Percentage of Respondents
  World Bank in your country?                                                        (N=265)
Yes                                                                                   40.4%
No                                                                                    59.6%

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the            Percentage of Respondents
  World Bank in INDONESIA? (Choose no more than TWO)                                 (N=265)
Use World Bank reports/data                                                           37.7%
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                              37.4%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                         35.5%
Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                          32.1%
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)             29.1%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
5. Which best represents your geographic location?                                   (N=265)
Jabodetabek                                                                           84.2%
Outside of Jabodetabek but still in Java                                               6.4%
Outside of Java                                                                        9.4%




                                                           63
The World Bank                                                                                                        Indonesia                                                                                           Country Survey 2012


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

A. General Issues facing Indonesia
In general, would you say that Indonesia is headed in...?
                                                                                               Employee     Consultant                       Independent    Bi- or Multi-                        Financial
                                                                       Office of   Office of      of a       on Bank               Local     Government        lateral              Private       Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                             President   Minister     Ministry   project/PMU          Government    Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector     Private Bank    Academia    Media     Other
 The right direction                                                    100.0%     100.0%        74.2%        55.6%               57.1%         100.0%          60.0%       46.9%    56.3%         65.4%        44.4%      41.5%     62.1%
 The wrong direction                                                     0.0%       0.0%         3.2%          0.0%                0.0%          0.0%            5.0%        0.0%     0.0%         15.4%         2.8%       2.4%      3.4%
 Not sure                                                                0.0%       0.0%         22.6%        44.4%               42.9%          0.0%           35.0%       53.1%    43.8%         19.2%        52.8%      56.1%     34.5%

                                                                                                                 st   nd         rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Indonesia. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
   st
 1 Most Important                                                                              Employee     Consultant                       Independent    Bi- or Multi-                         Financial
                                                                       Office of   Office of      of a       on Bank               Local     Government        lateral               Private       Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                             President   Minister     Ministry   project/PMU          Government    Institution      Agency       NGO      Sector     Private Bank    Academia    Media     Other
 Bureaucratic reform and governance                                     100.0%      25.0%        17.2%        33.3%               50.0%         33.3%           50.0%       31.3%     43.8%         28.0%        38.2%      44.2%     44.8%
 Education                                                               0.0%       37.5%        27.6%        22.2%                0.0%         16.7%           15.0%       15.6%     12.5%         12.0%        14.7%      27.9%     6.9%
 Health care                                                             0.0%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%      6.3%          8.0%         0.0%       0.0%     3.4%
 Poverty alleviation                                                     0.0%       12.5%        17.2%        11.1%               16.7%          0.0%            0.0%       18.8%      0.0%          8.0%        14.7%       9.3%     3.4%
 Food security                                                           0.0%        0.0%        6.9%          0.0%               16.7%          0.0%            0.0%        6.3%      6.3%          0.0%         0.0%       4.7%     3.4%
 Infrastructure                                                          0.0%       25.0%        20.7%        22.2%                0.0%         33.3%           10.0%        0.0%      6.3%         20.0%         5.9%       2.3%     6.9%
 Investment and business climate                                         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%                0.0%          0.0%            5.0%        3.1%      6.3%          0.0%         0.0%       2.3%     3.4%
 Energy sector                                                           0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         11.1%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%     0.0%
 Environment and disaster risk management                                0.0%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%     0.0%
 Disadvantaged, borders, and post conflict areas                         0.0%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       2.3%     0.0%
 Culture, creativity, and technology innovation                          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%      0.0%          4.0%         0.0%       0.0%     0.0%
 People’s welfare                                                        0.0%        0.0%        3.4%          0.0%                0.0%         16.7%            0.0%        9.4%      0.0%          4.0%         8.8%       0.0%     6.9%
 Economy                                                                 0.0%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%               16.7%          0.0%           10.0%        3.1%      6.3%          4.0%         5.9%       2.3%     13.8%
 Politics, law, and security                                             0.0%        0.0%        6.9%          0.0%                0.0%          0.0%           10.0%       12.5%     12.5%         12.0%        11.8%       4.7%     6.9%

   nd
 2 Most Important                                                                              Employee     Consultant                       Independent    Bi- or Multi-                         Financial
                                                                       Office of   Office of      of a       on Bank               Local     Government        lateral               Private       Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                             President   Minister     Ministry   project/PMU          Government    Institution      Agency       NGO      Sector     Private Bank    Academia    Media     Other
 Bureaucratic reform and governance                                       0.0%      37.5%        10.3%         0.0%                0.0%         16.7%           10.0%       15.6%     12.5%         16.0%        20.0%      11.6%     6.9%
 Education                                                               50.0%      12.5%        20.7%        44.4%               33.3%         16.7%           10.0%       18.8%     18.8%          4.0%         8.6%      11.6%     24.1%
 Health care                                                              0.0%       0.0%        6.9%         22.2%                0.0%         16.7%            5.0%        9.4%      0.0%          0.0%         5.7%      18.6%     6.9%
 Poverty alleviation                                                     50.0%       0.0%        6.9%          0.0%               16.7%          0.0%           10.0%       21.9%     12.5%         20.0%        20.0%       9.3%     6.9%
 Food security                                                            0.0%       0.0%        10.3%         0.0%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%      6.3%          4.0%         2.9%       2.3%     3.4%
 Infrastructure                                                           0.0%      25.0%        6.9%          0.0%               33.3%         16.7%           30.0%        3.1%     18.8%         20.0%        14.3%      23.3%     13.8%
 Investment and business climate                                          0.0%       0.0%        3.4%          0.0%                0.0%         16.7%           15.0%        3.1%      6.3%          8.0%         2.9%       2.3%     0.0%
 Energy sector                                                            0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         11.1%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%      0.0%          8.0%         2.9%       2.3%     0.0%
 Environment and disaster risk management                                 0.0%      12.5%        0.0%         11.1%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        6.3%      0.0%          0.0%         2.9%       0.0%     0.0%
 Disadvantaged, borders, and post conflict areas                          0.0%       0.0%        3.4%          0.0%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        6.3%      0.0%          0.0%         2.9%       4.7%     3.4%
 Culture, creativity, and technology innovation                           0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%               16.7%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         2.9%       0.0%     6.9%
 People’s welfare                                                         0.0%      12.5%        10.3%         0.0%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        6.3%     12.5%         12.0%         0.0%       2.3%     6.9%
 Economy                                                                  0.0%       0.0%        10.3%         0.0%                0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%     12.5%          8.0%         5.7%       4.7%     17.2%
 Politics, law, and security                                              0.0%       0.0%        10.3%        11.1%                0.0%         16.7%           20.0%        9.4%      0.0%          0.0%         8.6%       7.0%     3.4%




                                                                                                                           64
The World Bank                                                                                                        Indonesia                                                                                        Country Survey 2012

                                                                                                                 st   nd        rd
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Indonesia. Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
    rd                                                                                            Employee Consultant                       Independent     Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
  3 Most Important
                                                                        Office of    Office of       of a       on Bank         Local       Government         lateral              Private      Sector/
  Percentage of Respondents                                             President Minister         Ministry project/PMU Government           Institution       Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia    Media      Other
  Bureaucratic reform and governance                                       0.0%       12.5%         17.2%        11.1%           0.0%            0.0%           30.0%        9.4%     6.3%         0.0%       19.4%       4.7%      10.3%
  Education                                                                0.0%       25.0%         6.9%          0.0%           0.0%           16.7%            0.0%        3.1%    18.8%        16.0%        8.3%       7.0%      10.3%
  Health care                                                              0.0%       12.5%         6.9%         44.4%           0.0%           33.3%           10.0%        9.4%     6.3%         4.0%       11.1%       7.0%      13.8%
  Poverty alleviation                                                      0.0%        0.0%         10.3%        11.1%           0.0%            0.0%           15.0%        9.4%     0.0%         4.0%       13.9%       7.0%      3.4%
  Food security                                                            0.0%       12.5%         3.4%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%     6.3%         4.0%        2.8%       4.7%      6.9%
  Infrastructure                                                          50.0%        0.0%         6.9%         11.1%           0.0%           16.7%           25.0%       12.5%    18.8%         8.0%       13.9%      23.3%      10.3%
  Investment and business climate                                         50.0%       12.5%         0.0%          0.0%          33.3%            0.0%           10.0%        0.0%     0.0%         8.0%        8.3%       9.3%      0.0%
  Energy sector                                                            0.0%        0.0%         3.4%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            5.0%        0.0%    12.5%         4.0%        2.8%       2.3%      3.4%
  Environment and disaster risk management                                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         11.1%          16.7%           16.7%            5.0%       12.5%     0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      3.4%
  Disadvantaged, borders, and post conflict areas                          0.0%        0.0%         3.4%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        6.3%     0.0%         8.0%        2.8%      14.0%      3.4%
  Culture, creativity, and technology innovation                           0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           16.7%            0.0%        9.4%     0.0%         4.0%        2.8%       2.3%      3.4%
  People’s welfare                                                         0.0%        0.0%         10.3%         0.0%          33.3%            0.0%            0.0%       12.5%     0.0%        20.0%        0.0%       7.0%      3.4%
  Economy                                                                  0.0%       12.5%         20.7%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        0.0%    18.8%        12.0%       11.1%       4.7%      6.9%
  Politics, law, and security                                              0.0%       12.5%         10.3%        11.1%          16.7%            0.0%            0.0%       15.6%    12.5%         8.0%        2.8%       7.0%      20.7%

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Indonesia? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                                              Employee Consultant                         Independent     Bi- or Multi-                           Financial
                                                                       Office of  Office of      of a        on Bank         Local        Government         lateral                Private        Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                            President Minister       Ministry project/PMU Government             Institution       Agency        NGO      Sector      Private Bank Academia Media         Other
 Energy                                                                  0.0%       12.5%       3.2%          22.2%           0.0%            0.0%             5.0%         6.3%      0.0%           3.8%        0.0%      7.0%     0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                    0.0%       12.5%       3.2%          11.1%           0.0%            0.0%            10.0%         9.4%      6.3%           7.7%        2.8%      4.7%     3.4%
 Equality of opportunity                                                 0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           16.7%            15.0%         9.4%     12.5%           0.0%        11.1%     4.7%     3.4%
 Economic growth                                                        50.0%       37.5%       29.0%         33.3%          28.6%           33.3%            30.0%         9.4%     31.3%          46.2%        33.3%    23.3%     27.6%
 Climate change                                                          0.0%        0.0%       3.2%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         3.1%      0.0%           0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     0.0%
 Disaster management                                                     0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         0.0%      6.3%           0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     0.0%
 Regional integration                                                    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             5.0%         0.0%      0.0%           3.8%        2.8%      0.0%     0.0%
 Gender                                                                  0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         6.3%      0.0%           0.0%        2.8%      0.0%     0.0%
 Rural development                                                       0.0%       12.5%       29.0%         44.4%          42.9%           50.0%            20.0%        56.3%     37.5%          26.9%        36.1%    41.9%     34.5%
 Urban development                                                       0.0%        0.0%       3.2%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             5.0%         0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     0.0%
 Education                                                             100.0%       50.0%       41.9%         11.1%          28.6%           50.0%            30.0%        25.0%     43.8%          34.6%        33.3%    48.8%     34.5%
 Regulatory framework                                                    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           16.7%             5.0%         0.0%      6.3%           0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                    0.0%       25.0%       35.5%         44.4%           0.0%           16.7%            20.0%         6.3%     18.8%          42.3%        38.9%    23.3%     24.1%
 Social protection                                                       0.0%       12.5%       3.2%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            30.0%         9.4%      6.3%           3.8%        19.4%     7.0%     6.9%
 Law and justice                                                        50.0%        0.0%       9.7%          22.2%           0.0%            0.0%             5.0%         9.4%      6.3%          15.4%        0.0%     23.3%     13.8%
 Transport                                                              50.0%       12.5%       3.2%          0.0%           14.3%            0.0%             0.0%        12.5%      0.0%          15.4%        5.6%      4.7%     10.3%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                   0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             5.0%         0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        2.8%      2.3%     0.0%
 Public sector governance                                                0.0%       25.0%       16.1%         0.0%           14.3%           33.3%            20.0%        12.5%     31.3%           3.8%        13.9%    14.0%     3.4%
 Domestic private sector development                                     0.0%        0.0%       6.5%          0.0%           14.3%            0.0%             5.0%         3.1%     12.5%           3.8%        5.6%      4.7%     3.4%
 Foreign investment                                                      0.0%        0.0%       6.5%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         3.1%      0.0%           0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     0.0%
 Global integration                                                      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        2.8%      0.0%     0.0%
 Food security                                                           0.0%        0.0%       9.7%          22.2%          28.6%            0.0%            15.0%         9.4%      0.0%           7.7%        2.8%      2.3%     20.7%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                               0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         0.0%      0.0%           3.8%        2.8%      0.0%     0.0%
 Natural resource management                                             0.0%        0.0%       9.7%          11.1%           0.0%            0.0%             5.0%        12.5%      0.0%           3.8%        5.6%     16.3%     6.9%
 Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             5.0%         9.4%      0.0%           0.0%        2.8%      2.3%     3.4%
 Health                                                                  0.0%       25.0%       22.6%         0.0%           14.3%           16.7%            10.0%         9.4%      6.3%          19.2%        2.8%      9.3%     24.1%
 Public financial management                                             0.0%        0.0%       9.7%          0.0%           28.6%           16.7%            10.0%        12.5%      0.0%           3.8%        2.8%      4.7%     0.0%
 Agricultural development                                                0.0%       12.5%       16.1%         44.4%          14.3%            0.0%             5.0%        21.9%     12.5%          11.5%        11.1%     4.7%     3.4%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                   0.0%       37.5%       16.1%         11.1%          42.9%           33.3%            25.0%        18.8%     37.5%          23.1%        38.9%    25.6%     31.0%
 Financial markets                                                       0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           16.7%             0.0%         0.0%      0.0%           3.8%        2.8%      0.0%     3.4%
 Trade and exports                                                       0.0%        0.0%       0.0%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             5.0%         0.0%      6.3%           0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     3.4%
 Anti-corruption                                                        50.0%       25.0%       22.6%         22.2%          28.6%            0.0%            10.0%        21.9%     18.8%          11.5%        16.7%    20.9%     37.9%

                                                                                                                           65
The World Bank                                                                                                  Indonesia                                                                                        Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Indonesia (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Indonesia? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                                             Employee Consultant                       Independent      Bi- or Multi-                        Financial
                                                                     Office of   Office of      of a       on Bank         Local       Government          lateral               Private      Sector/
  Percentage of Respondents                                          President Minister       Ministry project/PMU Government            Institution       Agency        NGO      Sector   Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
  Poverty reduction                                                     0.0%      12.5%        9.7%          0.0%           0.0%           16.7%            10.0%       15.6%       0.0%       23.1%       13.9%     18.6%   13.8%
  Energy                                                                0.0%       0.0%        6.5%         22.2%           0.0%            0.0%            15.0%        3.1%       6.3%        3.8%        2.8%     11.6%   6.9%
  Equality of opportunity                                               0.0%       0.0%        3.2%          0.0%           0.0%           33.3%             5.0%        3.1%       0.0%        0.0%       13.9%      4.7%   3.4%
  Social protection                                                    50.0%      12.5%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             5.0%        6.3%       0.0%        7.7%        2.8%      2.3%   6.9%
  Global integration                                                    0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             5.0%        0.0%       6.3%        0.0%        5.6%      4.7%   0.0%
  Climate change                                                        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%      0.0%   0.0%
  Anti-corruption                                                      50.0%      62.5%        16.1%        22.2%          14.3%           16.7%            20.0%       34.4%      31.3%       26.9%       30.6%     37.2%   24.1%
  Disaster management                                                   0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%      0.0%   0.0%
  Rural development                                                     0.0%      12.5%        32.3%        11.1%          14.3%           33.3%            10.0%       21.9%      18.8%       11.5%       16.7%     32.6%   17.2%
  Foreign investment                                                    0.0%      50.0%        16.1%         0.0%          28.6%           16.7%            20.0%        3.1%      31.3%       19.2%        8.3%      7.0%   10.3%
  Urban development                                                     0.0%       0.0%        6.5%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            10.0%        6.3%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%      2.3%   3.4%
  Water and sanitation                                                  0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%      2.3%   3.4%
  Education                                                            50.0%      12.5%        16.1%        22.2%           0.0%           16.7%             0.0%       15.6%      25.0%       19.2%       16.7%     25.6%   13.8%
  Global information and communications technology                     50.0%      25.0%        3.2%          0.0%           0.0%           16.7%             5.0%        3.1%       6.3%        7.7%        0.0%      7.0%   10.3%
  Regulatory framework                                                  0.0%       0.0%        3.2%          0.0%          14.3%           16.7%            20.0%        3.1%       0.0%        3.8%        0.0%      0.0%   3.4%
  Communicable/non-communicable disease                                 0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%      0.0%   0.0%
  Trade and exports                                                     0.0%      25.0%        25.8%        33.3%          28.6%           16.7%            15.0%        3.1%      18.8%       19.2%       22.2%     20.9%   13.8%
  Public sector governance                                             50.0%       0.0%        6.5%         22.2%           0.0%            0.0%            10.0%       12.5%       6.3%        0.0%       13.9%     14.0%   17.2%
  Regional integration                                                  0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            10.0%        3.1%       0.0%        0.0%        2.8%      2.3%   3.4%
  Domestic private sector development                                   0.0%      25.0%        19.4%         0.0%          14.3%           16.7%            30.0%       28.1%      25.0%       11.5%       22.2%     18.6%   20.7%
  Labor markets/job creation/employment                                 0.0%       0.0%        12.9%        33.3%          42.9%           16.7%            15.0%       31.3%      31.3%       42.3%       27.8%     25.6%   20.7%
  Agricultural development                                              0.0%       0.0%        9.7%         22.2%          28.6%            0.0%             0.0%       25.0%      25.0%        7.7%       11.1%     11.6%   3.4%
  Food security                                                         0.0%       0.0%        3.2%         11.1%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%        3.1%       6.3%        0.0%        0.0%      2.3%   6.9%
  Transport                                                             0.0%       0.0%        19.4%        22.2%          42.9%            0.0%            30.0%        3.1%       6.3%       19.2%        8.3%     16.3%   20.7%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                             0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        2.8%      2.3%   0.0%
  Gender                                                                0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%        6.3%       0.0%        0.0%        2.8%      0.0%   0.0%
  Natural resource management                                           0.0%       0.0%        6.5%         33.3%          28.6%           16.7%            10.0%       21.9%       6.3%       15.4%        5.6%     14.0%   17.2%
  Environmental sustainability                                          0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         11.1%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%        9.4%       0.0%        3.8%        0.0%      0.0%   3.4%
  Health                                                                0.0%       0.0%        3.2%          0.0%           0.0%           16.7%             0.0%        3.1%       6.3%        0.0%        2.8%      2.3%   0.0%
  Basic infrastructure                                                 50.0%      37.5%        38.7%        22.2%          28.6%           50.0%            35.0%       15.6%      31.3%       30.8%       36.1%      7.0%   24.1%
  Law and justice                                                       0.0%       0.0%        16.1%        11.1%           0.0%            0.0%            10.0%        6.3%       0.0%        7.7%       11.1%      0.0%   13.8%
  Public financial management                                           0.0%      25.0%        19.4%         0.0%          14.3%            0.0%            10.0%        6.3%       6.3%       15.4%       19.4%      2.3%   6.9%
  Financial markets                                                     0.0%       0.0%        3.2%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%        3.1%       0.0%        3.8%        0.0%      0.0%   10.3%



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                  66
The World Bank                                                                                                     Indonesia                                                                                            Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Indonesia, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in Indonesia?
(Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                                            Employee Consultant                          Independent      Bi- or Multi-                            Financial
                                                                    Office of Office of        of a        on Bank          Local         Government         lateral                 Private        Sector/
  Percentage of Respondents                                        President Minister        Ministry project/PMU Government               Institution       Agency       NGO         Sector     Private Bank Academia      Media   Other
  Bureaucratic reform and governance                                 50.0%      50.0%         35.5%         44.4%           16.7%            50.0%            60.0%       37.5%        56.3%         26.9%        47.2%     41.9%   48.3%
  Education                                                          50.0%      50.0%         58.1%         22.2%           50.0%            50.0%            10.0%       40.6%        31.3%         42.3%        36.1%     41.9%   44.8%
  Health care                                                         0.0%      12.5%         22.6%         33.3%           16.7%            16.7%             0.0%       37.5%        18.8%         15.4%        27.8%     16.3%   27.6%
  Poverty alleviation                                                 0.0%      62.5%         48.4%         22.2%           33.3%            50.0%            50.0%       56.3%        31.3%         38.5%        44.4%     48.8%   51.7%
  Food security                                                       0.0%       0.0%         19.4%         11.1%           16.7%             0.0%             5.0%        9.4%         0.0%         15.4%         5.6%     16.3%   6.9%
  Infrastructure                                                      0.0%      50.0%         32.3%         77.8%           66.7%            66.7%            70.0%        9.4%        25.0%         42.3%        50.0%     25.6%   41.4%
  Investment and business climate                                    50.0%       0.0%         16.1%         11.1%           33.3%            16.7%            35.0%        6.3%        37.5%          7.7%        19.4%     23.3%   13.8%
  Energy sector                                                       0.0%      12.5%         9.7%           0.0%           16.7%             0.0%            20.0%        3.1%         6.3%         11.5%         0.0%      4.7%   0.0%
  Environment and disaster risk management                            0.0%      12.5%         3.2%          22.2%           16.7%             0.0%            20.0%       28.1%        12.5%          3.8%         5.6%      7.0%   6.9%
  Disadvantaged, borders, and post conflict areas                     0.0%       0.0%         6.5%          11.1%            0.0%             0.0%             5.0%        6.3%        12.5%         19.2%         8.3%     14.0%   10.3%
  Culture, creativity, and technology innovation                     50.0%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            16.7%             5.0%        9.4%        12.5%          7.7%         2.8%      7.0%   0.0%
  People’s welfare                                                    0.0%      12.5%         9.7%          11.1%            0.0%            16.7%             0.0%       25.0%        12.5%         15.4%        16.7%     23.3%   10.3%
  Economy                                                            50.0%      12.5%         19.4%         11.1%           33.3%            16.7%            10.0%       18.8%        37.5%         23.1%        30.6%     16.3%   20.7%
  Politics, law, and security                                        50.0%      12.5%         9.7%          11.1%            0.0%             0.0%            10.0%        3.1%         6.3%         19.2%         0.0%      4.7%   13.8%




                                                                                                                     67
The World Bank                                                                                                         Indonesia                                                                                        Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Indonesia?
 Greatest Value                                                                                   Employee     Consultant                      Independent    Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                        Office of    Office of       of a       on Bank          Local         Government        lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                              President    Minister      Ministry   project/PMU     Government        Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media     Other
 Financial resources                                                      50.0%       25.0%         34.5%        33.3%          33.3%             50.0%           10.5%       50.0%    25.0%        38.5%       28.6%     27.9%     31.0%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                0.0%        0.0%         6.9%         22.2%          50.0%              0.0%            0.0%        6.3%    18.8%         0.0%        8.6%     14.0%     10.3%
 Technical assistance                                                      0.0%       12.5%         20.7%        22.2%           0.0%             16.7%           10.5%        0.0%    18.8%         7.7%       14.3%     14.0%     13.8%
 Policy advice                                                             0.0%       12.5%         3.4%          0.0%           0.0%              0.0%           31.6%        6.3%     6.3%         3.8%       14.3%      9.3%     10.3%
 Donor coordination                                                        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          16.7%              0.0%            0.0%        6.3%     0.0%         0.0%        5.7%      4.7%     0.0%
 Data                                                                      0.0%        0.0%         3.4%          0.0%           0.0%              0.0%            0.0%        9.4%     6.3%         3.8%        2.9%      4.7%     6.9%
 Training/capacity building                                                0.0%       37.5%         17.2%        22.2%           0.0%             16.7%            5.3%        6.3%     6.3%        30.8%        8.6%     11.6%     13.8%
 Studies/analyses                                                          0.0%       12.5%         10.3%         0.0%           0.0%             16.7%           36.8%       15.6%     6.3%         7.7%       17.1%     11.6%     13.8%
 Convening/facilitating                                                   50.0%        0.0%         3.4%          0.0%           0.0%              0.0%            0.0%        0.0%     6.3%         3.8%        0.0%      2.3%     0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                             0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%              0.0%            0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         3.8%        0.0%      0.0%     0.0%
 Other                                                                     0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%              0.0%            5.3%        0.0%     6.3%         0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     0.0%

   nd
 2 Greatest Value                                                                                 Employee     Consultant                      Independent    Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                        Office of    Office of       of a       on Bank          Local         Government        lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                              President    Minister      Ministry   project/PMU     Government        Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media     Other
 Financial resources                                                       0.0%        0.0%         13.8%         0.0%           0.0%             16.7%           15.0%        6.3%    25.0%        19.2%       11.4%     14.0%     6.9%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                0.0%        0.0%         13.8%         0.0%          16.7%             33.3%            0.0%       18.8%     0.0%        15.4%       14.3%      4.7%     17.2%
 Technical assistance                                                     50.0%       50.0%         24.1%        44.4%           0.0%             33.3%           10.0%       12.5%    18.8%        19.2%        2.9%     20.9%     24.1%
 Policy advice                                                             0.0%       25.0%         0.0%         22.2%           0.0%              0.0%           15.0%        6.3%     0.0%         3.8%        8.6%     11.6%     10.3%
 Donor coordination                                                        0.0%       12.5%         0.0%         11.1%           0.0%             16.7%            0.0%        6.3%     0.0%         3.8%        5.7%      9.3%     3.4%
 Data                                                                      0.0%        0.0%         3.4%          0.0%           0.0%              0.0%           20.0%        9.4%     0.0%         7.7%       14.3%      2.3%     6.9%
 Training/capacity building                                                0.0%        0.0%         13.8%        11.1%          50.0%              0.0%           15.0%       15.6%    25.0%        15.4%       22.9%     16.3%     6.9%
 Studies/analyses                                                         50.0%       12.5%         24.1%        11.1%           0.0%              0.0%           15.0%       15.6%    25.0%        15.4%       14.3%      9.3%     17.2%
 Convening/facilitating                                                    0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          16.7%              0.0%            0.0%        3.1%     0.0%         0.0%        5.7%      9.3%     6.9%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                             0.0%        0.0%         3.4%          0.0%           0.0%              0.0%           10.0%        6.3%     6.3%         0.0%        0.0%      2.3%     0.0%
 Other                                                                     0.0%        0.0%         3.4%          0.0%          16.7%              0.0%            0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                                Employee Consultant                            Independent    Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                       Office of   Office of       of a       on Bank         Local            Government        lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                             President Minister        Ministry project/PMU Government                Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media     Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities   50.0%       37.5%        25.8%        11.1%         42.9%                66.7%           21.1%       34.4%    12.5%        34.6%       28.6%     25.6%     37.9%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                 0.0%       12.5%        29.0%        0.0%           0.0%                16.7%           15.8%       21.9%    31.3%        11.5%       22.9%     44.2%     10.3%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures             50.0%       12.5%        22.6%        44.4%         14.3%                 0.0%           42.1%       37.5%    18.8%        34.6%       22.9%     14.0%     20.7%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         11.1%          0.0%                 0.0%            0.0%        3.1%     6.3%         7.7%        0.0%      4.7%     6.9%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                 0.0%       12.5%        12.9%        0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%           21.1%        6.3%    12.5%         0.0%        8.6%      2.3%     6.9%
 Not client focused                                                       0.0%       25.0%        6.5%         0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%            0.0%        3.1%    12.5%         3.8%        2.9%      4.7%     0.0%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                    0.0%        0.0%        3.2%         11.1%          0.0%                 0.0%           10.5%        3.1%     0.0%         7.7%        0.0%      4.7%     6.9%
 Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the
                                                                          0.0%       12.5%        22.6%        0.0%          71.4%                50.0%          15.8%        12.5%    12.5%       7.7%         11.4%     16.3%     17.2%
 country
 Too influenced by developed countries                                   50.0%       37.5%        25.8%        55.6%         28.6%                50.0%          36.8%        34.4%    31.3%       26.9%        22.9%     25.6%     17.2%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                50.0%       12.5%        12.9%        11.1%         42.9%                 0.0%           0.0%         9.4%    12.5%       34.6%        28.6%     25.6%     24.1%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                0.0%       37.5%        16.1%        33.3%          0.0%                16.7%          21.1%        18.8%     0.0%       15.4%        22.9%      7.0%     17.2%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                      0.0%        0.0%        3.2%         0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%         9.4%    12.5%        3.8%        11.4%      4.7%     13.8%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                                      0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%     0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%     3.4%
 Other                                                                    0.0%        0.0%        9.7%         11.1%          0.0%                 0.0%           5.3%         6.3%    12.5%        0.0%        11.4%      0.0%     6.9%




                                                                                                                         68
The World Bank                                                                                                       Indonesia                                                                                               Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                              Employee Consultant                           Independent       Bi- or Multi-                          Financial
                                                                      Office of   Office of      of a        on Bank        Local           Government           lateral                Private       Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                           President Minister        Ministry project/PMU Government               Institution         Agency       NGO       Sector     Private Bank    Academia    Media     Other
 Investment lending                                                     50.0%      12.5%        38.7%         66.7%        28.6%               50.0%              47.4%       18.8%      50.0%         53.8%        30.6%      30.2%     44.8%
 Capacity development                                                    0.0%      37.5%        67.7%         33.3%        85.7%               66.7%              52.6%       59.4%      62.5%         30.8%        75.0%      51.2%     51.7%
 Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government                 0.0%      12.5%        25.8%         22.2%        28.6%               50.0%              10.5%       25.0%       6.3%         26.9%        13.9%      30.2%     20.7%
 Analytical work                                                        50.0%      25.0%         9.7%         0.0%          0.0%               16.7%              21.1%       37.5%      25.0%         26.9%        33.3%      14.0%     20.7%
 Technical assistance                                                  100.0%      62.5%        35.5%         44.4%         0.0%               16.7%              47.4%       37.5%      37.5%         46.2%        33.3%      32.6%     31.0%
 Trust Fund management                                                   0.0%      12.5%        12.9%         11.1%        14.3%                0.0%              10.5%       12.5%       0.0%          3.8%         8.3%       7.0%     6.9%
 Don’t know                                                              0.0%      12.5%         0.0%         11.1%        14.3%                0.0%               0.0%        3.1%       0.0%          3.8%         0.0%       7.0%     10.3%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce poverty in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                                Employee Consultant                         Independent       Bi- or Multi-                          Financial
                                                                       Office of   Office of       of a       on Bank         Local         Government           lateral                Private       Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                            President Minister         Ministry project/PMU Government             Institution         Agency       NGO       Sector     Private Bank    Academia    Media     Other
 Investment lending                                                     50.0%        50.0%        20.0%        11.1%         28.6%             33.3%              20.0%       46.9%      12.5%         26.9%        36.1%      20.9%     10.7%
 Capacity development                                                    0.0%         0.0%         3.3%        11.1%          0.0%              0.0%              10.0%       12.5%       6.3%          7.7%         8.3%       7.0%     10.7%
 Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government                50.0%        25.0%        40.0%        55.6%         28.6%             33.3%              30.0%       43.8%      50.0%         26.9%        55.6%      34.9%     32.1%
 Analytical work                                                        50.0%        37.5%        26.7%        22.2%         14.3%             33.3%              20.0%        9.4%      31.3%         26.9%        16.7%      18.6%     17.9%
 Technical assistance                                                    0.0%         0.0%        30.0%        44.4%         57.1%             16.7%              20.0%       25.0%      25.0%         23.1%        25.0%      32.6%     21.4%
 Trust Fund management                                                   0.0%        37.5%        26.7%        22.2%         28.6%             33.3%              45.0%       21.9%      18.8%         46.2%        16.7%      23.3%     32.1%
 Don’t know                                                              0.0%        12.5%        20.0%        11.1%         14.3%             16.7%              15.0%       18.8%      18.8%          3.8%        11.1%      16.3%     35.7%

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)?
                                                                                                   Employee Consultant                        Independent      Bi- or Multi-                           Financial
                                                                          Office of    Office of      of a        on Bank        Local        Government          lateral                Private        Sector/
  Percentage of Respondents                                               President Minister        Ministry project/PMU Government            Institution        Agency        NGO      Sector      Private Bank Academia Media         Other
  Local Government                                                           0.0%       12.5%        3.2%          22.2%         14.3%           33.3%             25.0%       50.0%        6.3%          3.8%      16.7%        23.3%   10.3%
  Private sector                                                             0.0%       37.5%        51.6%         66.7%         71.4%           16.7%             60.0%       37.5%       25.0%         26.9%      33.3%        25.6%   37.9%
  Donor community                                                           50.0%       50.0%        35.5%         0.0%          28.6%           33.3%             20.0%       21.9%       25.0%         23.1%      25.0%        14.0%   20.7%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                  50.0%       12.5%        25.8%         33.3%          0.0%            0.0%             15.0%        6.3%       50.0%         30.8%      11.1%        18.6%   24.1%
  Media                                                                      0.0%       37.5%        19.4%         11.1%         28.6%           50.0%             15.0%       40.6%       18.8%         34.6%      27.8%        27.9%   17.2%
  Other                                                                      0.0%        0.0%        6.5%          11.1%          0.0%           16.7%             15.0%        6.3%        6.3%          0.0%       0.0%         4.7%   0.0%
  Beneficiaries                                                              0.0%        0.0%        3.2%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%              0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         11.5%       2.8%         7.0%   0.0%
  Foundations                                                              100.0%       25.0%        22.6%         22.2%         28.6%           50.0%             15.0%       18.8%       25.0%         50.0%      61.1%        27.9%   37.9%
  Faith based organizations                                                  0.0%        0.0%        9.7%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             25.0%        6.3%       31.3%          7.7%       8.3%         2.3%   10.3%
  Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                       0.0%        0.0%        6.5%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%              0.0%        3.1%        6.3%          3.8%       5.6%        30.2%   10.3%
  NGOs                                                                       0.0%        0.0%        3.2%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%              5.0%        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%   6.9%
  Parliament                                                                 0.0%       12.5%        6.5%          11.1%          0.0%            0.0%              5.0%        3.1%        0.0%          0.0%       5.6%         2.3%   13.8%




                                                                                                                       69
The World Bank                                                                                                          Indonesia                                                                                         Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Indonesia, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Indonesia in terms of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                                 Employee Consultant                         Independent          Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                         Office of  Office of       of a       on Bank           Local       Government              lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                               President Minister       Ministry project/PMU Government             Institution            Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                              0.0%      37.5%        19.4%        11.1%             0.0%          16.7%                 15.0%       12.5%     6.7%        15.4%        0.0%     11.6%   10.7%
 The Government works inefficiently/too slowly                             50.0%      37.5%        16.1%        33.3%            71.4%           0.0%                 25.0%       37.5%    26.7%        30.8%       33.3%     44.2%   28.6%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation      0.0%      12.5%        16.1%        33.3%            42.9%          50.0%                 10.0%       40.6%     6.7%        23.1%       30.6%     30.2%   25.0%
 Poor donor coordination                                                    0.0%       0.0%        3.2%          0.0%             0.0%           0.0%                 20.0%       15.6%     6.7%        11.5%        5.6%      2.3%   3.6%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up              50.0%      50.0%        48.4%        22.2%            14.3%          16.7%                 20.0%       18.8%     6.7%        38.5%       22.2%     20.9%   14.3%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                       50.0%       0.0%        25.8%        11.1%             0.0%          33.3%                 30.0%        9.4%    60.0%        19.2%       41.7%     25.6%   17.9%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                          0.0%      25.0%        35.5%        44.4%            42.9%          50.0%                 40.0%       21.9%    26.7%        30.8%       30.6%     32.6%   28.6%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges           50.0%      25.0%        25.8%        22.2%            14.3%          33.3%                 35.0%       28.1%    33.3%        15.4%       30.6%     16.3%   39.3%
 Other                                                                      0.0%       0.0%        6.5%          0.0%             0.0%           0.0%                  0.0%       12.5%    13.3%         0.0%        5.6%      4.7%   17.9%




                                                                                                                          70
The World Bank                                                                                                           Indonesia                                                                  Country Survey 2012

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Indonesia, on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                           71
The World Bank                                                                                                          Indonesia                                                                                      Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

When thinking about the development challenges in Indonesia, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                                              Employee Consultant                          Independent      Bi- or Multi-                           Financial
                                                                     Office of   Office of       of a        on Bank         Local         Government          lateral                 Private       Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                          President Minister         Ministry project/PMU Government               Institution       Agency         NGO       Sector    Private Bank Academia Media      Other
 Public sector governance                                              0.0%        62.5%        25.8%         0.0%          57.1%              33.3%            65.0%        37.5%        6.3%        23.1%       44.4%    18.6%   34.5%
 Gender                                                                0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%        12.5%        0.0%         0.0%       5.6%      2.3%   0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                                   0.0%        37.5%        12.9%         0.0%           0.0%               0.0%            20.0%         0.0%       18.8%         7.7%       8.3%     23.3%   20.7%
 Foreign investment                                                    0.0%         0.0%        3.2%          0.0%          14.3%               0.0%            15.0%         0.0%       12.5%         0.0%       2.8%      4.7%   0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                  0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          22.2%          0.0%               0.0%            10.0%         9.4%       12.5%         3.8%       5.6%      2.3%   3.4%
 Trade and exports                                                     0.0%         0.0%        3.2%          0.0%          14.3%               0.0%            10.0%         0.0%        6.3%         3.8%       0.0%      2.3%   3.4%
 Economic growth                                                      50.0%         0.0%        32.3%         33.3%         28.6%              16.7%            10.0%         9.4%       18.8%        26.9%       19.4%    18.6%   13.8%
 Energy                                                                0.0%        12.5%        9.7%          22.2%          0.0%               0.0%             0.0%         3.1%        0.0%         7.7%       2.8%      7.0%   0.0%
 Disaster management                                                   0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         3.8%       0.0%      4.7%   3.4%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                             0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          11.1%          0.0%               0.0%             5.0%         0.0%        0.0%        11.5%       8.3%      4.7%   3.4%
 Education                                                            50.0%        25.0%        35.5%         11.1%         28.6%              50.0%             5.0%        21.9%       18.8%        15.4%       19.4%    39.5%   20.7%
 Social protection                                                    50.0%         0.0%        6.5%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             5.0%         9.4%        6.3%         7.7%       8.3%      4.7%   6.9%
 Climate change                                                        0.0%        25.0%        0.0%          11.1%          0.0%               0.0%             5.0%        12.5%        0.0%         0.0%       8.3%      2.3%   0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                                    50.0%        37.5%        25.8%         11.1%         14.3%              50.0%            20.0%        43.8%       12.5%        15.4%       25.0%    23.3%   34.5%
 Law and justice                                                      50.0%        12.5%        12.9%         22.2%         14.3%              16.7%            10.0%        12.5%       12.5%        11.5%       8.3%      9.3%   17.2%
 Anti-corruption                                                       0.0%        25.0%        9.7%          22.2%         14.3%               0.0%             5.0%        28.1%       12.5%        15.4%       22.2%    27.9%   20.7%
 Financial markets                                                    50.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%              16.7%             0.0%         0.0%        6.3%        15.4%       0.0%      0.0%   3.4%
 Equality of opportunity                                               0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%              16.7%             0.0%         0.0%        6.3%         3.8%       5.6%      0.0%   0.0%
 Urban development                                                     0.0%         0.0%        3.2%          11.1%          0.0%               0.0%            15.0%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%       2.8%      2.3%   6.9%
 Regional integration                                                  0.0%        12.5%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             5.0%         0.0%       12.5%         0.0%       2.8%      4.7%   0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                      0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          14.3%               0.0%             0.0%         3.1%        0.0%         3.8%       0.0%      2.3%   6.9%
 Transport                                                             0.0%        12.5%        9.7%          22.2%          0.0%              16.7%            10.0%         3.1%        0.0%         7.7%       2.8%      7.0%   3.4%
 Agricultural development                                              0.0%        12.5%        9.7%          11.1%         28.6%               0.0%             5.0%        12.5%       12.5%         7.7%       11.1%     9.3%   6.9%
 Natural resource management                                           0.0%         0.0%        12.9%         33.3%         14.3%               0.0%            10.0%         9.4%       12.5%         0.0%       5.6%      4.7%   10.3%
 Public financial management                                           0.0%         0.0%        12.9%         0.0%           0.0%              16.7%            20.0%         3.1%        0.0%         7.7%       5.6%      2.3%   3.4%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                 0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%            10.0%         6.3%       18.8%        15.4%       5.6%      7.0%   13.8%
 Health                                                                0.0%        12.5%        6.5%          0.0%           0.0%              16.7%             0.0%        12.5%        6.3%        11.5%       5.6%     11.6%   0.0%
 Rural development                                                     0.0%        12.5%        19.4%         11.1%         14.3%              33.3%             5.0%        15.6%        6.3%        19.2%       25.0%    16.3%   10.3%
 Global integration                                                    0.0%         0.0%        3.2%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             5.0%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%       2.8%      0.0%   0.0%
 Food security                                                         0.0%         0.0%        9.7%          11.1%         14.3%               0.0%             5.0%         6.3%        6.3%         3.8%       2.8%      7.0%   10.3%
 Environmental sustainability                                          0.0%         0.0%        9.7%          22.2%         28.6%               0.0%             5.0%        12.5%       18.8%         0.0%       11.1%     0.0%   6.9%
 Regulatory framework                                                  0.0%         0.0%        3.2%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%            10.0%         3.1%        6.3%         3.8%       0.0%      0.0%   6.9%
 Basic infrastructure                                                  0.0%         0.0%        16.1%         0.0%           0.0%              16.7%            10.0%         6.3%       12.5%        30.8%       13.9%     9.3%   20.7%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                 0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%         3.1%        0.0%         0.0%       0.0%      0.0%   0.0%

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at …? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                                                                             72
The World Bank                                                                                                                   Indonesia                 Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research …? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                                                                                   73
The World Bank                                                                                                         Indonesia                                                                            Country Survey 2012

E. Working with the World Bank
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Indonesia




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                                Employee Consultant                Independent    Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                       Office of    Office of      of a      on Bank     Local     Government        lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                             President Minister        Ministry project/PMU Government    Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media     Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Indonesia's specific
                                                                          0.0%       50.0%        40.0%       44.4%     28.6%         33.3%          30.0%        28.1%    37.5%       42.3%        50.0%     53.5%     48.3%
 challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                 50.0%       25.0%        36.7%       33.3%     42.9%         16.7%          15.0%        31.3%    37.5%       34.6%        25.0%     18.6%     24.1%
 Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                       0.0%       37.5%        10.0%        0.0%      0.0%          0.0%          20.0%        25.0%    18.8%       11.5%        25.0%      9.3%     13.8%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets         0.0%       12.5%        26.7%       11.1%     42.9%         83.3%          15.0%        18.8%     6.3%       19.2%        8.3%      25.6%     20.7%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                  50.0%       12.5%        10.0%       22.2%      0.0%          0.0%          15.0%        18.8%    12.5%       11.5%        16.7%     11.6%     17.2%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                        100.0%       25.0%        33.3%       22.2%     14.3%         33.3%          25.0%        21.9%    12.5%       38.5%        33.3%     34.9%     27.6%
 Indonesia's economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                                 0.0%       12.5%        13.3%       22.2%      0.0%         16.7%          25.0%         9.4%     6.3%       15.4%        5.6%      11.6%     17.2%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                 0.0%       12.5%        23.3%        0.0%     28.6%         16.7%          40.0%        25.0%    31.3%       19.2%        22.2%     18.6%     20.7%
 Other                                                                    0.0%        0.0%        3.3%        11.1%     28.6%          0.0%           0.0%        15.6%    18.8%        0.0%        8.3%       2.3%     6.9%


                                                                                                                         74
The World Bank                                                                                                          Indonesia                                                                                         Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in CAR? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                             Employee Consultant                                 Independent      Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                     Office of   Office of      of a       on Bank       Local                   Government          lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                           President Minister       Ministry project/PMU Government                     Institution        Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 Local newspapers                                                       0.0%      87.5%        71.0%        77.8%        85.7%                      50.0%             75.0%       87.5%    75.0%        73.1%       86.1%     72.1%   75.9%
 International newspapers                                              50.0%       0.0%         9.7%        0.0%          0.0%                      33.3%             15.0%        6.3%    18.8%         7.7%       11.1%      9.3%   3.4%
 Local radio                                                            0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%        0.0%      9.3%   0.0%
 International radio                                                    0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%        0.0%      0.0%   0.0%
 Local television                                                       0.0%      25.0%        35.5%        0.0%         14.3%                      16.7%             10.0%       18.8%    25.0%        26.9%       22.2%     23.3%   41.4%
 International television                                               0.0%       0.0%         6.5%        11.1%        14.3%                      33.3%              0.0%        0.0%     6.3%         7.7%        0.0%      0.0%   10.3%
 Periodicals                                                            0.0%      12.5%        19.4%        0.0%         14.3%                      16.7%             15.0%        9.4%    18.8%        11.5%       19.4%      9.3%   6.9%
 Internet                                                             100.0%      75.0%        54.8%       100.0%        57.1%                      50.0%             75.0%       68.8%    50.0%        65.4%       55.6%     69.8%   44.8%
 Blogs                                                                  0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%        0.0%      0.0%   0.0%
 Mobile phones                                                          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%        0.0%      0.0%   0.0%
 Instant messaging                                                     50.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%                       0.0%              0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         3.8%        0.0%      0.0%   0.0%
 Other                                                                  0.0%       0.0%         3.2%        11.1%        14.3%                       0.0%              5.0%        6.3%     6.3%         3.8%        5.6%      0.0%   13.8%


How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                                   Employee     Consultant                       Independent      Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                         Office of    Office of       of a       on Bank          Local          Government          lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                               President    Minister      Ministry   project/PMU     Government         Institution        Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 World Bank website                                                         0.0%       37.5%         45.2%        55.6%          71.4%              66.7%             55.0%       68.8%    43.8%        50.0%       50.0%     44.2%   58.6%
 Direct contact with World Bank                                            50.0%       25.0%         61.3%        22.2%          14.3%              33.3%             30.0%       15.6%    37.5%        38.5%       38.9%     41.9%   27.6%
 e-Newsletters                                                             50.0%       25.0%         12.9%        33.3%          14.3%              16.7%             30.0%       12.5%    31.3%        11.5%       16.7%     18.6%   6.9%
 Instant messaging                                                          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%              0.0%        3.1%     6.3%         0.0%        0.0%      4.7%   3.4%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                  0.0%       62.5%         25.8%        44.4%          14.3%              16.7%             40.0%       31.3%    37.5%        34.6%       22.2%     25.6%   34.5%
 World Bank Public Information Center                                       0.0%        0.0%         12.9%        11.1%          42.9%               0.0%             10.0%        3.1%     0.0%        11.5%        5.6%      9.3%   10.3%
 World Bank publications and other written materials                      100.0%       25.0%         38.7%        22.2%          28.6%              66.7%             25.0%       53.1%    18.8%        42.3%       61.1%     25.6%   41.4%
 Mobile phones                                                              0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%              0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%        0.0%      0.0%   0.0%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                  0.0%       12.5%         3.2%         11.1%          14.3%               0.0%              5.0%        9.4%     0.0%         3.8%        2.8%      9.3%   0.0%
 Blogs                                                                      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%              0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%        0.0%      0.0%   0.0%
 Other                                                                      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%              0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%        0.0%      4.7%   6.9%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                                                                Employee Consultant                           Independent         Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                       Office of   Office of       of a        on Bank          Local         Government             lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                            President Minister         Ministry project/PMU Government                Institution          Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 Yes                                                                     0.0%       25.0%         25.8%         33.3%           42.9%             33.3%               40.0%       40.6%    31.3%        34.6%       44.4%     41.9%   34.5%
 No                                                                    100.0%       75.0%         74.2%         66.7%           57.1%             66.7%               60.0%       59.4%    68.8%        65.4%       55.6%     58.1%   65.5%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?*
                                                                                                   Employee     Consultant                       Independent      Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                         Office of    Office of       of a       on Bank          Local          Government          lateral              Private      Sector/
  Percentage of Respondents                                              President    Minister      Ministry   project/PMU     Government         Institution        Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
  Yes                                                                      50.0%       37.5%         22.6%        22.2%          14.3%              50.0%             60.0%       50.0%    25.0%        19.2%       47.2%     18.6%   27.6%
  No                                                                       50.0%       62.5%         77.4%        77.8%          85.7%              50.0%             40.0%       50.0%    75.0%        80.8%       52.8%     81.4%   72.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                                                                   Employee     Consultant                       Independent      Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                         Office of    Office of      of a        on Bank          Local          Government          lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                               President    Minister      Ministry   project/PMU     Government         Institution        Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 Yes                                                                      100.0%      100.0%        100.0%        50.0%          100.0%             100.0%           100.0%       93.8%    75.0%       100.0%       94.1%     75.0%   75.0%
 No                                                                        0.0%        0.0%          0.0%         50.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%         6.3%    25.0%        0.0%         5.9%     25.0%   25.0%


                                                                                                                          75
The World Bank                                                                                                         Indonesia                                                                                   Country Survey 2012



G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                                                                  Employee     Consultant                   Independent    Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                        Office of    Office of      of a        on Bank           Local     Government        lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                              President    Minister      Ministry   project/PMU      Government    Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 Yes                                                                     100.0%      100.0%        100.0%        100.0%          100.0%        100.0%         100.0%       100%     100%        100.0%       100.0%    100%    100%
 No                                                                       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%     0.0%    0.0%

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?
                                                                                                  Employee     Consultant                   Independent    Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                        Office of    Office of       of a       on Bank           Local     Government        lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                              President    Minister      Ministry   project/PMU      Government    Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 Yes                                                                      50.0%       62.5%         87.1%        100.0%          71.4%         83.3%           89.5%       90.6%    87.5%        80.8%       88.6%     72.1%   86.2%
 No                                                                       50.0%       37.5%         12.9%         0.0%           28.6%         16.7%           10.5%        9.4%    12.5%        19.2%       11.4%     27.9%   13.8%

Which do you primarily use?
                                                                                                  Employee     Consultant                   Independent    Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                        Office of    Office of       of a       on Bank           Local     Government        lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                              President    Minister      Ministry   project/PMU      Government    Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/indonesia)          100.0%       60.0%         34.6%        44.4%           60.0%         16.7%           47.1%       65.5%    66.7%        61.9%       46.9%     75.8%   56.0%
 The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                        0.0%        40.0%         65.4%        55.6%           40.0%         83.3%           52.9%       34.5%    33.3%        38.1%       53.1%     24.2%   44.0%

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Informat ion Centers (PICs) in Indonesia?
                                                                                                  Employee     Consultant                   Independent    Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                        Office of    Office of       of a       on Bank           Local     Government        lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                              President    Minister      Ministry   project/PMU      Government    Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 Yes                                                                       0.0%       37.5%         19.4%        22.2%           28.6%         33.3%           30.0%       34.4%     6.3%        19.2%       16.7%     20.9%   10.3%
 No                                                                       50.0%       50.0%         51.6%        55.6%           57.1%         66.7%           40.0%       43.8%    68.8%        53.8%       61.1%     55.8%   62.1%
 I don’t know what a PIC is                                               50.0%       12.5%         29.0%        22.2%           14.3%          0.0%           30.0%       21.9%    25.0%        26.9%       22.2%     23.3%   27.6%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                                                                                         76
The World Bank                                                                                                    Indonesia                                                                                  Country Survey 2012

H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
                                                                                               Employee     Consultant                Independent    Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                      Office of    Office of      of a       on Bank        Local     Government        lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                            President    Minister     Ministry   project/PMU   Government    Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 Yes                                                                    50.0%       50.0%        58.1%        88.9%        14.3%         50.0%           80.0%       43.8%    37.5%        11.5%       41.7%     14.0%   41.4%
 No                                                                     50.0%       50.0%        41.9%        11.1%        85.7%         50.0%           20.0%       56.3%    62.5%        88.5%       58.3%     86.0%   58.6%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                               Employee Consultant                    Independent    Bi- or Multi-                       Financial
                                                                           Office of Office of    of a      on Bank         Local     Government        lateral              Private      Sector/
 Percentage of Respondents                                                 President Minister   Ministry project/PMU     Government    Institution      Agency       NGO     Sector    Private Bank   Academia   Media   Other
 Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)   50.0%    12.5%      16.1%       11.1%         85.7%         33.3%           15.0%       21.9%    18.8%        38.5%       30.6%     44.2%   27.6%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                                 50.0%    62.5%      41.9%       11.1%         14.3%         50.0%           35.0%       37.5%    37.5%        23.1%       30.6%     51.2%   41.4%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                     0.0%    25.0%      45.2%       44.4%         14.3%         16.7%           45.0%       50.0%    56.3%        15.4%       38.9%     25.6%   48.3%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                               50.0%    50.0%      48.4%       55.6%         42.9%         16.7%           70.0%       34.4%    31.3%        15.4%       47.2%     11.6%   31.0%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                 0.0%    12.5%      22.6%       33.3%         28.6%         16.7%           10.0%       43.8%    18.8%        61.5%       27.8%     32.6%   41.4%




                                                                                                                    77
The World Bank                                                           Indonesia                                            Country Survey 2012




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location

A. General Issues facing Indonesia
In general, would you say that Indonesia is headed in...?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                   Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 The right direction                                                            61.7%                        36.6%
 The wrong direction                                                             3.2%                         4.9%
 Not sure                                                                       35.1%                        58.5%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Indonesia.
                                                 st  nd      rd
Please identify which of these you consider the 1 , 2 , and 3 most important development priority.
   st
 1 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                   Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 Bureaucratic reform and governance                                             36.8%                        38.5%
 Education                                                                      17.7%                        17.9%
 Health care                                                                     1.8%                         0.0%
 Poverty alleviation                                                             9.1%                        15.4%
 Food security                                                                   3.2%                         5.1%
 Infrastructure                                                                 10.9%                         2.6%
 Investment and business climate                                                 1.8%                         2.6%
 Energy sector                                                                   0.5%                         0.0%
 Environment and disaster risk management                                        0.0%                         0.0%
 Disadvantaged, borders, and post conflict areas                                 0.5%                         0.0%
 Culture, creativity, and technology innovation                                  0.0%                         2.6%
 People’s welfare                                                                5.0%                         0.0%
 Economy                                                                         4.1%                        10.3%
 Politics, law, and security                                                     8.6%                         5.1%

   nd
 2 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                   Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 Bureaucratic reform and governance                                             13.6%                        10.0%
 Education                                                                      16.4%                        15.0%
 Health care                                                                     6.8%                        15.0%
 Poverty alleviation                                                            13.2%                        10.0%
 Food security                                                                   3.2%                         2.5%
 Infrastructure                                                                 15.0%                        20.0%
 Investment and business climate                                                 4.5%                         2.5%
 Energy sector                                                                   1.8%                         2.5%
 Environment and disaster risk management                                        1.8%                         2.5%
 Disadvantaged, borders, and post conflict areas                                 2.3%                         5.0%
 Culture, creativity, and technology innovation                                  1.4%                         2.5%
 People’s welfare                                                                5.5%                         5.0%
 Economy                                                                         6.4%                         5.0%
 Politics, law, and security                                                     8.2%                         2.5%

   rd
 3 Most Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                                   Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 Bureaucratic reform and governance                                             11.4%                         9.8%
 Education                                                                       9.1%                         4.9%
 Health care                                                                    10.5%                         9.8%
 Poverty alleviation                                                             8.6%                         2.4%
 Food security                                                                   4.1%                         0.0%
 Infrastructure                                                                 14.1%                        14.6%
 Investment and business climate                                                 5.0%                         9.8%
 Energy sector                                                                   3.2%                         2.4%
 Environment and disaster risk management                                        3.6%                         2.4%
 Disadvantaged, borders, and post conflict areas                                 2.3%                        19.5%
 Culture, creativity, and technology innovation                                  2.7%                         4.9%
 People’s welfare                                                                7.3%                         4.9%
 Economy                                                                         8.2%                         7.3%
 Politics, law, and security                                                    10.0%                         7.3%




                                                                            78
The World Bank                                                          Indonesia                                                Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Indonesia (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below
do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Indonesia? (Choose no more than THREE)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                  Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 Energy                                                                         4.9%                          0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                                           5.4%                          7.1%
 Equality of opportunity                                                        6.7%                          2.4%
 Economic growth                                                               29.6%                         23.8%
 Climate change                                                                 0.9%                          0.0%
 Disaster management                                                            0.4%                          0.0%
 Regional integration                                                           1.3%                          0.0%
 Gender                                                                         1.3%                          0.0%
 Rural development                                                             37.2%                         31.0%
 Urban development                                                              0.9%                          0.0%
 Education                                                                     36.3%                         40.5%
 Regulatory framework                                                           1.3%                          0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                                          26.9%                         21.4%
 Social protection                                                              9.9%                          7.1%
 Law and justice                                                               10.3%                         14.3%
 Transport                                                                      7.2%                          7.1%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                          0.4%                          0.0%
 Global information and communications technology                               0.4%                          2.4%
 Public sector governance                                                      14.3%                          9.5%
 Domestic private sector development                                            4.0%                          9.5%
 Foreign investment                                                             1.3%                          0.0%
 Global integration                                                             0.4%                          0.0%
 Food security                                                                  7.6%                         14.3%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                      0.4%                          2.4%
 Natural resource management                                                    7.2%                         11.9%
 Environmental sustainability                                                   2.7%                          2.4%
 Health                                                                        13.5%                          9.5%
 Public financial management                                                    6.3%                          4.8%
 Agricultural development                                                      11.7%                         11.9%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                         24.2%                         40.5%
 Financial markets                                                              1.8%                          0.0%
 Trade and exports                                                              0.9%                          2.4%
 Anti-corruption                                                               20.2%                         23.8%




                                                                           79
The World Bank                                                              Indonesia                                        Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Indonesia (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Indonesia? (Choose no more than THREE)

  Percentage of Respondents                                                      Jabodetabek        Outside of Jabodetabek
  Poverty reduction                                                                 13.5%                   11.9%
  Energy                                                                             6.7%                    7.1%
  Equality of opportunity                                                            5.4%                    2.4%
  Social protection                                                                  4.5%                    2.4%
  Global integration                                                                 2.2%                    2.4%
  Climate change                                                                     0.0%                    0.0%
  Anti-corruption                                                                   29.1%                   26.2%
  Disaster management                                                                0.0%                    0.0%
  Rural development                                                                 20.6%                   21.4%
  Foreign investment                                                                14.3%                    9.5%
  Urban development                                                                  3.1%                    2.4%
  Water and sanitation                                                               0.4%                    2.4%
  Education                                                                         17.9%                   11.9%
  Global information and communications technology                                   6.7%                    2.4%
  Regulatory framework                                                               4.0%                    2.4%
  Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.0%                    0.0%
  Trade and exports                                                                 16.1%                   31.0%
  Public sector governance                                                          10.8%                    9.5%
  Regional integration                                                               2.7%                    0.0%
  Domestic private sector development                                               17.9%                   33.3%
  Labor markets/job creation/employment                                             22.4%                   40.5%
  Agricultural development                                                          11.7%                   11.9%
  Food security                                                                      3.1%                    0.0%
  Transport                                                                         14.3%                   19.0%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                                          0.4%                    2.4%
  Gender                                                                             1.3%                    0.0%
  Natural resource management                                                       14.3%                    7.1%
  Environmental sustainability                                                       2.2%                    2.4%
  Health                                                                             2.2%                    2.4%
  Basic infrastructure                                                              28.7%                   16.7%
  Law and justice                                                                    8.5%                    2.4%
  Public financial management                                                        9.9%                   14.3%
  Financial markets                                                                  2.2%                    2.4%



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                               80
The World Bank                                                              Indonesia                                             Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
To what extent do you believe… (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Indonesia, in which sectoral areas
do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in Indonesia? (Choose no more than THREE)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 Bureaucratic reform and governance                                                 43.5%                        39.0%
 Education                                                                          37.2%                        56.1%
 Health care                                                                        22.9%                        14.6%
 Poverty alleviation                                                                46.2%                        46.3%
 Food security                                                                       9.9%                        12.2%
 Infrastructure                                                                     39.5%                        34.1%
 Investment and business climate                                                    18.8%                        14.6%
 Energy sector                                                                       6.7%                         2.4%
 Environment and disaster risk management                                           10.8%                         9.8%
 Disadvantaged, borders, and post conflict areas                                     8.1%                        17.1%
 Culture, creativity, and technology innovation                                      5.4%                         4.9%
 People’s welfare                                                                   13.9%                        19.5%
 Economy                                                                            21.1%                        22.0%
 Politics, law, and security                                                         9.0%                         2.4%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second
greatest value in Indonesia?
 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 Financial resources                                                                31.8%                        35.0%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                          8.2%                        15.0%
 Technical assistance                                                               13.2%                         7.5%
 Policy advice                                                                       9.5%                         7.5%
 Donor coordination                                                                  1.8%                         7.5%
 Data                                                                                5.0%                         0.0%
 Training/capacity building                                                         13.6%                        12.5%
 Studies/analyses                                                                   14.1%                        10.0%
 Convening/facilitating                                                              1.4%                         5.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                       0.5%                         0.0%
 Other                                                                               0.9%                         0.0%

   nd
 2 Greatest Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 Financial resources                                                                12.2%                        10.0%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                                         10.9%                        12.5%
 Technical assistance                                                               19.5%                        15.0%
 Policy advice                                                                       8.1%                         7.5%
 Donor coordination                                                                  4.5%                         7.5%
 Data                                                                                6.8%                         7.5%
 Training/capacity building                                                         14.9%                        20.0%
 Studies/analyses                                                                   16.7%                         7.5%
 Convening/facilitating                                                              3.2%                         7.5%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                       2.7%                         2.5%
 Other                                                                               0.5%                         2.5%




                                                                               81
The World Bank                                                             Indonesia                                                   Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities             28.1%                         38.1%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                          21.7%                         26.2%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                       27.1%                         14.3%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                             3.2%                          4.8%
 Arrogant in its approach                                                           8.1%                          2.4%
 Not client focused                                                                 4.5%                          2.4%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                              4.1%                          4.8%
 Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the
                                                                                   14.5%                          26.2%
 country
 Too influenced by developed countries                                             28.5%                          31.0%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                          18.6%                          26.2%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                         17.2%                           9.5%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                                6.8%                           4.8%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                0.5%                           0.0%
 Other                                                                              6.3%                           2.4%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 Investment lending                                                                38.7%                         31.0%
 Capacity development                                                              53.6%                         69.0%
 Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government                           21.6%                         23.8%
 Analytical work                                                                   22.1%                         21.4%
 Technical assistance                                                              39.6%                         21.4%
 Trust Fund management                                                              9.0%                          4.8%
 Don’t know                                                                         3.6%                          7.1%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce poverty in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 Investment lending                                                                26.7%                         23.8%
 Capacity development                                                               7.7%                          7.1%
 Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government                           40.7%                         31.0%
 Analytical work                                                                   20.8%                         21.4%
 Technical assistance                                                              23.5%                         40.5%
 Trust Fund management                                                             29.9%                         16.7%
 Don’t know                                                                        16.7%                         16.7%

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should
the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 Local Government                                                                  18.8%                         16.7%
 Private sector                                                                    37.7%                         38.1%
 Donor community                                                                   22.9%                         26.2%
 Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                          21.1%                         14.3%
 Media                                                                             24.2%                         38.1%
 Other                                                                              5.4%                          0.0%
 Beneficiaries                                                                      3.1%                          2.4%
 Foundations                                                                       33.6%                         33.3%
 Faith based organizations                                                         10.3%                          2.4%
 Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                               6.3%                         21.4%
 NGOs                                                                               1.8%                          0.0%
 Parliament                                                                         5.8%                          0.0%




                                                                              82
The World Bank                                                             Indonesia                                              Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Indonesia, on a ten point scale?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Indonesia in terms of…, on a ten point scale?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to?
(Choose no more than TWO)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                     Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                                    11.8%                         11.9%
 The Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                    29.9%                         45.2%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation            25.3%                         28.6%
 Poor donor coordination                                                           7.2%                          4.8%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                     26.7%                         16.7%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                              25.3%                         23.8%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                                29.9%                         40.5%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                  27.6%                         21.4%
 Other                                                                             7.7%                          0.0%




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                              83
The World Bank                                                             Indonesia                                                        Country Survey 2012




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Indonesia, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                               84
The World Bank                                                              Indonesia                                              Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

When thinking about the development challenges in Indonesia, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank
to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Jabodetabek               Outside of Jabodetabek
 Public sector governance                                                          31.8%                          33.3%
 Gender                                                                             2.7%                           2.4%
 Domestic private sector development                                               12.6%                          16.7%
 Foreign investment                                                                 4.0%                           2.4%
 Water and sanitation                                                               4.9%                           7.1%
 Trade and exports                                                                  2.7%                           4.8%
 Economic growth                                                                   18.8%                          21.4%
 Energy                                                                             5.4%                           2.4%
 Disaster management                                                                0.4%                           7.1%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                          4.5%                           2.4%
 Education                                                                         23.8%                          28.6%
 Social protection                                                                  7.2%                           2.4%
 Climate change                                                                     4.0%                           7.1%
 Poverty reduction                                                                 26.0%                          28.6%
 Law and justice                                                                   13.9%                           4.8%
 Anti-corruption                                                                   18.4%                          21.4%
 Financial markets                                                                  3.6%                           0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                                            2.2%                           0.0%
 Urban development                                                                  4.0%                           0.0%
 Regional integration                                                               2.7%                           2.4%
 Global information and communications technology                                   1.3%                           7.1%
 Transport                                                                          6.7%                           4.8%
 Agricultural development                                                           9.9%                           9.5%
 Natural resource management                                                        9.0%                           4.8%
 Public financial management                                                        7.2%                           0.0%
 Labor markets/job creation/employment                                              6.7%                          11.9%
 Health                                                                             7.6%                           4.8%
 Rural development                                                                 15.2%                          19.0%
 Global integration                                                                 1.3%                           0.0%
 Food security                                                                      6.3%                           7.1%
 Environmental sustainability                                                       8.5%                           4.8%
 Regulatory framework                                                               2.7%                           4.8%
 Basic infrastructure                                                              13.0%                          14.3%
 Communicable/non-communicable disease                                              0.4%                           0.0%

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at …? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                               85
The World Bank                                                                    Indonesia                                                                Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)
To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research …? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


E. Working with the World Bank
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations


F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Indonesia




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)




                                                                                     86
The World Bank                                                             Indonesia                                             Country Survey 2012




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Indonesia (continued)

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                     Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Indonesia's specific
                                                                                   40.5%                         50.0%
 challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                           27.9%                         26.2%
 Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                16.7%                          9.5%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                  20.3%                         19.0%
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                            13.5%                         16.7%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                                   30.2%                         26.2%
 Indonesia's economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                                          13.1%                          9.5%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                          22.5%                         21.4%
 Other                                                                              6.3%                          9.5%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                     Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 Local newspapers                                                                 77.1%                         73.8%
 International newspapers                                                          9.9%                          7.1%
 Local radio                                                                       0.4%                          7.1%
 International radio                                                               0.0%                          0.0%
 Local television                                                                 24.7%                         21.4%
 International television                                                          4.9%                          2.4%
 Periodicals                                                                      13.5%                          9.5%
 Internet                                                                         61.4%                         69.0%
 Blogs                                                                             0.0%                          0.0%
 Mobile phones                                                                     0.0%                          0.0%
 Instant messaging                                                                 0.9%                          0.0%
 Other                                                                             4.9%                          7.1%


How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                     Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 World Bank website                                                               51.6%                         54.8%
 Direct contact with World Bank                                                   35.9%                         33.3%
 e-Newsletters                                                                    18.8%                          9.5%
 Instant messaging                                                                 1.8%                          2.4%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                        30.9%                         28.6%
 World Bank Public Information Center                                              6.7%                         19.0%
 World Bank publications and other written materials                              40.8%                         33.3%
 Mobile phones                                                                     0.0%                          0.0%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                         4.9%                          7.1%
 Blogs                                                                             0.0%                          0.0%
 Other                                                                             0.9%                          4.8%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its
possession that is not a list of exceptions?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                     Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 Yes                                                                              37.7%                         31.0%
 No                                                                               62.3%                         69.0%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                     Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 Yes                                                                              35.0%                         21.4%
 No                                                                               65.0%                         78.6%

Were you able to obtain this information?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                     Jabodetabek              Outside of Jabodetabek
 Yes                                                                              90.9%                         88.9%
 No                                                                                9.1%                         11.1%




                                                                              87
The World Bank                                                               Indonesia                                            Country Survey 2012




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Do you have access to the Internet?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 Yes                                                                                100.0%                       100.0%
 No                                                                                  0.0%                         0.0%

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*

  Percentage of Respondents                                                      Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
  Yes                                                                               86.0%                        70.7%
  No                                                                                14.0%                        29.3%
*Significantly different between locations

Which do you primarily use?*

  Percentage of Respondents                                                      Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
  The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/indonesia)                    51.8%                        80.6%
  The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                 48.2%                        19.4%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Informat ion Centers (PICs) in Indonesia?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 Yes                                                                                19.3%                        31.0%
 No                                                                                 56.5%                        45.2%
 I don’t know what a PIC is                                                         24.2%                        23.8%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?

 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 Yes                                                                                43.9%                        21.4%
 No                                                                                 56.1%                        78.6%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)

 Percentage of Respondents                                                       Jabodetabek             Outside of Jabodetabek
 Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)          24.7%                        52.4%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                                        39.5%                        28.6%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                           36.8%                        40.5%
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                      37.2%                        26.2%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                       32.3%                        31.0%




                                                                                88
The World Bank                                                            Indonesia                                             Country Survey 2012




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions by Year1

                             FY ’02 Response Number = 238  FY ’12 Response Number = 265

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
*Significantly different between country surveys.




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)



To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Indonesia, on a ten point scale?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Indonesia in terms of…, on a ten point scale?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




1
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’02 and FY ’12 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.



                                                                              89
The World Bank                                                             Indonesia                                                        Country Survey 2012




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Indonesia, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between country surveys.



E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.




                                                                               90
The World Bank                                                                            Indonesia                                                                                Country Survey 2012



Appendix E: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank
                                                 H3. Currently, do you
                                                                              H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Indonesia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              professionally collaborate/
                                              work with the World Bank?              Observer          Use WB reports/data    Engage in WB activities       Collaborate           Use WB website

Indicator Question                             No Mean         Yes Mean      No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean    No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean    No Mean     Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                 5.76            6.49         6.17              5.79    5.80         6.48       6.01          6.16       5.87         6.41       6.24         5.67
World Bank’s effectiveness in Indonesia.
To what extent do you believe that the
World Bank’s financial instruments meet          5.76            6.18         5.98              5.82    5.76         6.20       5.93          5.93       5.80         6.18       6.08         5.62
the needs of Indonesia?
To what extent do you believe that the
World Bank meets Indonesia’s needs for           6.22            6.72         6.51              6.21    6.02         7.07       6.41          6.46       6.41         6.46       6.63         5.97
knowledge services?
Overall the World Bank currently plays a
                                                 5.93            6.40         6.17              6.03    5.83         6.61       6.07          6.22       6.05         6.27       6.33         5.70
relevant role in development in Indonesia
The World Bank’s work is aligned with
what I consider the development priorities       5.64            6.32         6.03              5.68    5.66         6.38       5.87          6.02       5.78         6.17       6.12         5.51
for this country
Responsiveness                                   5.97            6.51         6.33              5.86    5.99         6.52       6.07          6.38       6.05         6.44       6.32         5.89
Openness (sharing data and other
                                                 6.10            6.90         6.50              6.29    6.18         6.89       6.34          6.60       6.37         6.57       6.62         6.04
information)
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                 6.19            6.63         6.51              6.04    6.14         6.75       6.21          6.64       6.27         6.54       6.49         6.10
Government
Collaboration with the Government                6.81            7.34         7.18              6.64    6.82         7.37       6.89          7.23       6.89         7.27       7.13         6.79
Collaboration with other donors                  6.79            7.05         6.99              6.67    6.75         7.16       6.72          7.21       6.72         7.17       7.16         6.33
To what degree does the World Bank’s
work help achieve sustainable                    5.99            6.43         6.25              6.00    5.95         6.55       6.12          6.27       6.13         6.26       6.31         5.89
development results in Indonesia?
Are adaptable to Indonesia's development
                                                 6.13            6.55         6.34              6.24    6.14         6.57       6.25          6.42       6.17         6.56       6.54         5.85
challenges
Overall, how significant a contribution do
you believe the World Bank’s knowledge
                                                 6.51            6.80         6.74              6.33    6.37         7.03       6.59          6.67       6.55         6.75       6.78         6.29
and research make to development results
in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank’s                      7.05            7.52         7.38              6.90    6.96         7.71       7.23          7.26       7.19         7.34       7.32         7.09
knowledge/research?
Where country systems are adequate, the
World Bank makes appropriate use of              6.43            6.65         6.56              6.45    6.35         6.83       6.43          6.68       6.50         6.58       6.65         6.27
them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.




                                                                                                       91
The World Bank                                      Indonesia                                   Country Survey 2012



Appendix F: Indonesia FY 2012 Questionnaire




                              World Bank Client Survey FY12 – Indonesia


The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Indonesia or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey is meant to give the World Bank’s team that works in Indonesia, more in-depth insight into how the
Bank’s work is perceived. This is one tool the World Bank uses to assess the views of its critical stakeholders.
With this understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies, outreach and programs
that support development in Indonesia. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm to oversee the
logistics of this effort in Indonesia. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To
complete the survey, please circle the number that most accurately reflects your answer.

PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO
NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED
IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING INDONESIA

 A1. In general would you say that Indonesia is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                       92
The World Bank                                     Indonesia                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING INDONESIA (CONT...)

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in INDONESIA .
 Please identify which of these you consider the    FIRST most        SECOND most          THIRD most
                                                 important priority important priority   important priority
 FIRST, SECOND, and THIRD most important          (Choose only       (Choose only        (Choose only
 development priority.                                ONE)               ONE)               ONE)
     Reformasi birokrasi dan tata kelola
  1                                                                                         
     (bureaucratic reform and governance)
     Program aksi bidang pendidikan
  2                                                                                         
     (education)
     Rencana aksi bidang kesehatan (health
  3                                                                                         
     care)
     Penanggulangan kemiskinan (poverty
  4                                                                                         
     alleviation)
     Program aksi di bidang pangan (food
  5                                                                                         
     security)
     Program aksi di bidang infrastruktur
  6                                                                                         
     (infrastructure)
     Iklim investasi dan iklim usaha (investment
  7                                                                                         
     and business climate)
     Program aksi di bidang energi (energy
  8                                                                                         
     sector)
     Program aksi di bidang lingkungan hidup
  9 dan pengelolaan bencana (environment                                                    
     and disaster risk management)
     Daerah tertinggal, terdepan, terluar, dan
 10 pasca konflik (disadvantaged, borders, and                                              
     post conflict areas)
     Kebudayaan, kreativitas, dan inovasi
 11 teknologi (culture, creativity, and                                                     
     technology innovation)
     Bidang kesejahteraan rakyat (people’s
 12                                                                                         
     welfare)
 13 Bidang perekonomian (economy)                                                           
     Bidang politik, hukum, dan keamanan
 14                                                                                         
     (politics, law, and security)




                                                      93
The World Bank                                            Indonesia                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING INDONESIA (CONT...)

 A 3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
 areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute
 most to reducing poverty in INDONESIA ? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy
 2    Water and sanitation
 3    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 4    Economic growth
 5    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Disaster management
 7    Regional integration
 8    Gender
 9    Rural development
 10   Urban development
 11   Education
 12   Regulatory framework
 13   Basic infrastructure
 14   Social protection
 15   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 16   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 17   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 18   Global information and communications technology
 19   Public sector governance
 20   Domestic private sector development
 21   Foreign investment
 22   Global integration
 23   Food security
 24   Monitoring and evaluation
 25   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 26   Environmental sustainability
 27   Health
 28   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 29   Agricultural development
 30   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 31   Financial markets
 32   Trade and exports
 33   Anti corruption




                                                             94
The World Bank                                            Indonesia                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING INDONESIA (CONT…)

 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating
 economic growth in INDONESIA ? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Poverty reduction
 2    Energy
 3    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 4    Social protection
 5    Global integration
 6    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 7    Anti corruption
 8    Disaster management
 9    Rural development
 10   Foreign investment
 11   Urban development
 12   Water and sanitation
 13   Education
 14   Global information and communications technology
 15   Regulatory framework
 16   Communicable/non-communicable disease
 17   Trade and exports
 18   Public sector governance
 19   Regional integration
 20   Domestic private sector development
 21   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 22   Agricultural development
 23   Food security
 24   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 25   Monitoring and evaluation
 26   Gender
 27   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 28   Environmental sustainability
 29   Health
 30   Basic infrastructure
 31   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 32   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 33   Financial markets




                                                             95
The World Bank                                              Indonesia                                                              Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in INDONESIA , on a ten
 point scale?
          1             2       3       4       5       6              7           8         9                  10

 Not familiar at all                                                                                  Extremely familiar




 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in
 INDONESIA , on a ten point scale?
          1             2   3       4       5       6   7          8           9             10                       

 Not effective at all                                                                      Very effective       Don't Know




 To what extent do you believe …
                                                            To no                                                     To a very
                                                            degree                                                   significant      Don't
                                                            at all                                                      degree        know
        The World Bank's financial instruments (i.e.
        investment lending, Development Policy Loan,
 B3                                                            1           2       3   4    5     6   7     8     9        10          
        Trust Fund, Program 4 Result, etc) meet the
        needs of INDONESIA, on a ten point scale?
        The World Bank meets INDONESIA’s needs for
 B4     knowledge services (e.g., research, analysis,          1           2       3   4    5     6   7     8     9        10          
        technical assistance), on a ten point scale?
        The World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the
 B5     global development agenda, on a ten point              1           2       3   4    5     6   7     8     9        10          
        scale?
        The World Bank DOES seek to influence the
 B6     global development agenda, on a ten point              1           2       3   4    5     6   7     8     9        10          
        scale?




                                                               96
The World Bank                                   Indonesia                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B7. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on
 development results in INDONESIA , in which sectoral areas do you believe the
 World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in INDONESIA ?
 (Choose no more than THREE)
  1 Reformasi birokrasi dan tata kelola (bureaucratic reform and governance)
  2 Program aksi bidang pendidikan (education)
  3 Rencana aksi bidang kesehatan (health care)
  4 Penanggulangan kemiskinan (poverty alleviation)
  5 Program aksi di bidang pangan (food security)
  6 Program aksi di bidang infrastruktur (infrastructure)
  7 Iklim investasi dan iklim usaha (investment and business climate)
  8 Program aksi di bidang energi (energy sector)
     Program aksi di bidang lingkungan hidup dan pengelolaan bencana (environment
  9
     and disaster risk management)
     Daerah tertinggal, terdepan, terluar, dan pasca konflik (disadvantaged, borders,
 10
     and post conflict areas)
     Kebudayaan, kreativitas, dan inovasi teknologi (culture, creativity, and technology
 11
     innovation)
 12 Bidang kesejahteraan rakyat (people’s welfare)
 13 Bidang perekonomian (economy)
 14 Bidang politik, hukum, dan keamanan (politics, law, and security)




                                                    97
The World Bank                                              Indonesia                                      Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B8. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in INDONESIA ?
                                                                            Greatest Value   Second Greatest Value
                                                                         (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)
 1    Financial resources                                                                           
 2    Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                    
 3    Technical assistance                                                                          
 4    Policy advice                                                                                 
 5    Donor coordination                                                                            
 6    Data                                                                                          
 7    Training/capacity building                                                                    
 8    Studies/analyses                                                                              
 9    Convening/facilitating                                                                        
      Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge
 10                                                                                                 
      sharing)
 11   Other (please specify):______________________________                                         



 B9. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES
 in its work in INDONESIA ? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 4    Staff too inaccessible
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not client focused
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12   Not aligned with country priorities
 13   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 14   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________




                                                               98
The World Bank                                             Indonesia                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B10. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing
 poverty in INDONESIA ? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    Don’t know



 B11. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to
 reduce poverty in INDONESIA ? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    Don’t know



 B12. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
 interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank work with
 more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more
 than TWO)
 1    NGOs
 2    Local Government
 3    Beneficiaries
 4    Private sector
 5    Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 6    Donor community
 7    Foundations
 8    Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 9    Parliament
 10   Media
 11   Faith based organizations
 12   Other (please specify): __________________________




                                                              99
The World Bank                                               Indonesia                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in
 INDONESIA , on a ten point scale?
                                                                    Strongly                                Strongly   Don't
                                                                    disagree                                   agree   know
        Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
 B13                                                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        role in development in INDONESIA
        The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
 B14                                                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        consider the development priorities for this country
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies
 B15                                                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        that are realistic for INDONESIA
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
 B16                                                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        INDONESIA with respect



 To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in INDONESIA in terms of
 ..., on a ten point scale?
                                                                    To no                                To a very
                                                                                                                       Don't
                                                                    degree at                           significant
                                                                                                                       know
                                                                    all                                    degree
 B17    Follow up and follow through                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
 B19    *Responsiveness                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B20                                                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        services)
        Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B21                                                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        circumstances)
 B22    Being inclusive                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
 B23    Openness (sharing data and other information)                   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
 B24    Staff accessibility                                             1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
 B25    Straightforwardness and honesty                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B26                                                                    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        Government
 B27    Collaboration with the Government                               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
 B28    Collaboration with other donors                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      




                                                                  100
The World Bank                                               Indonesia                Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B29. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which
 TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly
 2    The Government works inefficiently/too slowly
 3    There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4    Poor donor coordination
 5    The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 6    Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 7    Political pressures and obstacles
 8    Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 9    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                               101
The World Bank                              Indonesia                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C1. To what degree does the World Bank’s work, help achieve sustainable development
 results in Indonesia , on a ten point scale?
         1         2   3   4     5     6    7         8   9          10                
 To no degree at                                                       To a very
                                                                                   Don't Know
 all                                                          significant degree




                                                102
The World Bank                                             Indonesia                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS (CONT...)

 How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in INDONESIA , on a ten point scale?
                                                                 Not
                                                                                                             Very    Don't
                                                                 effective
                                                                                                         effective   know
                                                                 at all
 C2     Anti corruption                                            1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C3     Global information and communications technology           1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C4     Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)           1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C5     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                    1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C6     Urban development                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C7     Environmental sustainability                               1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C8     Regulatory framework                                       1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C9     Basic infrastructure                                       1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C10    Communicable/non-communicable disease                      1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C11    Poverty reduction                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C12    Gender                                                     1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C13    Domestic private sector development                        1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C14    Foreign investment                                         1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C15    Water and sanitation                                       1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C16    Trade and exports                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C17    Economic growth                                            1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C18    Energy                                                     1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C19    Disaster management                                        1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C20    Monitoring and evaluation                                  1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Public financial management (e.g., public
 C21                                                               1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 C22    Labor markets/job creation/employment                      1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C23    Financial markets                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C24    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                     1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C25    Health                                                     1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C26    Rural development                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C27    Global integration                                         1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C28    Food security                                              1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C29    Education                                                  1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C30    Social protection                                          1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C31    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)              1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C32    Public sector governance                                   1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C33    Regional integration                                       1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C34    Agricultural development                                   1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C35    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)       1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                             103
The World Bank                                            Indonesia                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 D1. When thinking about the development challenges in INDONESIA , where do you
 believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and
 knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Public sector governance
 2    Gender
 3    Domestic private sector development
 4    Foreign investment
 5    Water and sanitation
 6    Trade and exports
 7    Economic growth
 8    Energy
 9    Disaster management
 10   Monitoring and evaluation
 11   Education
 12   Social protection
 13   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 14   Poverty reduction
 15   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 16   Anti corruption
 17   Financial markets
 18   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 19   Urban development
 20   Regional integration
 21   Global information and communications technology
 22   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 23   Agricultural development
 24   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 25   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 26   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 27   Health
 28   Rural development
 29   Global integration
 30   Food security
 31   Environmental sustainability
 32   Regulatory framework
 33   Basic infrastructure
 34   Communicable/non-communicable disease




                                                             104
The World Bank                                                 Indonesia                                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 How effective do you believe the World Bank's knowledge and research are at …
                                                          Not
                                                                                                                       Very    Don't
                                                          effective
                                                                                                                   effective   know
                                                          at all
 D2    Raising your awareness of the particular topic      1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
 D3    Stimulating public debate/dialogue                  1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
 D4    Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills              1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
 D5    Contributing to good policy making                  1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
       Providing support for program
 D6                                                        1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
       implementation



 To what extent do you believe that the World Bank's knowledge and research …

                                                          To no                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                               Don't
                                                          degree at                                             significant
                                                                                                                               know
                                                          all                                                      degree
 D7      Are timely                                        1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
 D9                                                        1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to INDONESIA 's development
 D10                                                       1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         priorities
 D11     Provide feasible recommendations                  1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D12                                                       1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         understand)
         A source of relevant information on global
 D13                                                       1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         good practices
 D14     Are adequately disseminated                       1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
 D15     Are appropriately translated                      1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         Are adaptable to INDONESIA 's
 D16                                                       1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         development challenges



 D17. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge
 and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?
           1              2   3      4      5         6        7         8       9         10                   

 Not significant at all                                                              Very significant       Don't know




                                                                   105
The World Bank                                          Indonesia                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 D18. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's
 knowledge/research, on a ten point scale?
         1              2       3   4       5       6    7        8   9         10                
 Very low                                                                        Very high
                                                                                              Don't know
 technical quality                                                        technical quality




 D19. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank
 expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing, etc.), on a ten point scale?
           1                2   3   4   5       6       7         8   9          10               

 Not effective at all                                                       Very effective    Don't know




                                                            106
The World Bank                                          Indonesia                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK

 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                       Strongly                                 Strongly   Don't
                                                       disagree                                    agree   know
 E1    The World Bank disburses funds promptly         1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       The World Bank effectively monitors and
 E2    evaluates the projects and programs it          1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       supports
       The World Bank's approvals and reviews are
 E3                                                    1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       done in a timely fashion
       The World Bank's safeguard policy
 E4                                                    1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       requirements are reasonable
       The World Bank imposes reasonable
 E5                                                    1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       conditions on its lending
       Working with the World Bank increases
 E6                                                    1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       INDONESIA 's institutional capacity
       The World Bank ensures consistency and
 E7                                                    1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       continuity through staff changes
       The World Bank's teams and visits are well
 E8                                                    1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       coordinated
       Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
 E9    financial management, etc.) are adequate, the   1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       World Bank makes appropriate use of them




                                                           107
The World Bank                                             Indonesia                                             Country Survey 2012



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN INDONESIA

 F1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play in INDONESIA
 ’s development over the medium term in the near future, on a ten point scale?
         1            2       3      4         5   6      7         8     9            10               
 Not a significant                                                               Very significant
                                                                                                    Don't Know
 role at all                                                                                 role




 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value
 in INDONESIA? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Improve the quality of its experts as related to INDONESIA ’s specific challenges
 2    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3    Focus primarily on advocacy issues
      Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, and other
 4
      terms)
 5    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 6    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on INDONESIA ’s economy
 7    Offer more innovative financial products
 8    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9    Others (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                              108
The World Bank                                             Indonesia                                    Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social
 development issues in INDONESIA ? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Blogs
 10   Mobile phones
 11   Instant messaging
 12   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2     Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Public Information Center
 7    World Bank publications and other written materials
 8    Mobile phones
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________



       Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will
 G3                                                                                               Yes        No
       now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 G4                                                                                               Yes        No
       (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                  Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                        Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?                                           Yes        No




                                                             109
The World Bank                                             Indonesia                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING (CONT...)

 G8. Which do you primarily use?
 1     The World Bank’s country website (www.Indonesia xxx.xxx)
 2     The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 G9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in
 INDONESIA ?
 1     Yes
 2     No
 3     I don’t know what PIC is

 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                                       Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                       disagree                              agree   know
         I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the
 G10                                                                   1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         organization's Open Data policy
         The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of
 G11     information related to development in INDONESIA .             1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         (Only answer if you have used the PIC)
         I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only
 G12                                                                   1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used a World Bank website)
         I find the information on the World Bank’s websites
 G13     useful. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank            1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         website)
         When I need information from the World Bank I know
 G14     how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them,      1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         etc.)
         The World Bank is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                   1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries




                                                              110
The World Bank                                           Indonesia                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position? (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Office of the President
 2    Office of Minister / Coordinating Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Brunch
 21   Other (please specify): ________________________




                                                           111
The World Bank                                            Indonesia                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Agricultural development
 2    Anti corruption
 3    Basic infrastructure
 4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5    Communicable/non-communicable disease
 6    Disaster management
 7    Domestic private sector development
 8    Economic growth
 9    Education
 10   Energy
 11   Environmental sustainability
 12   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 13   Financial markets
 14   Food security
 15   Foreign investment
 16   Gender
 17   Global information and communications technology
 18   Global integration
 19   Health
 20   Labor markets/job creation/employment
 21   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 22   Monitoring and evaluation
 23   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 24   Poverty reduction
 25   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 26   Public sector governance
 27   Regional integration
 28   Regulatory framework
 29   Rural development
 30   Social protection
 31   Trade and exports
 32   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 33   Urban development
 34   Water and sanitation
 35   Other (please specify): _____________________________________________




                                                             112
The World Bank                                              Indonesia                Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your
 country?
 1    Yes
 2    No



 H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in
 INDONESIA ? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.



 H5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1 Jabodetabek
 2 Outside of Jabodetabek but still in Java
 3 Outside of Java




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               113
