                            88534




Nigeria Country Opinion
     Survey Report

  (July 2013 - June 2014)
The World Bank                                         Nigeria                                    Country Survey 2013




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. General Issues facing Nigeria .....................................................10
          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank .................................14
         VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................19
        VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments ..................................23
       VIII. How the World Bank Operates ..................................................33
         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria ...........................38
          X. Communication and Openness..................................................43
         XI. Appendices ................................................................................50




                                                          2
The World Bank                                Nigeria                              Country Survey 2013



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in Nigeria
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Nigeria regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Nigeria;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in Nigeria;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank ’s effectiveness and results, knowledge
               and research, and communication and information sharing in Nigeria; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in Nigeria.

       Use data to help inform the Nigeria country team’s strategy.



II. Methodology
In November and December 2012, 858 stakeholders of the World Bank in Nigeria were invited
to provide their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country
survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President; the office
of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial department, or
implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World Bank-supported
projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a project;
local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral agencies; private sector
organizations; private foundations; the financial sector/private banks; NGOs; community-based
organizations (CBOs); the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-based
groups; academia/research institutes/think tanks; and the judiciary branch. A total of 835
stakeholders participated in the country survey (97%).
Respondents completed questionnaires with a representative of the fielding agency, either in
person or over the telephone. Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Nigeria, their
overall attitudes toward the Bank; the World Bank’s effectiveness and results; the Bank’s
knowledge work and activities; working with the World Bank; the Bank’s future role in Nigeria,
and the Bank’s communication and information sharing.

Every country that engages in the Country Survey must include specific indicator questions that
will be aggregated for the Bank’s annual Corporate Scorecard. These questions are identified
throughout the survey report.

A. General Issues facing Nigeria: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Nigeria was
   headed in the right or wrong direction, the most important development priorities, and which
   areas would contribute most to reducing poverty and generating economic growth in Nigeria.



                                                 3
The World Bank                                Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their familiarity
   with the World Bank, the Bank’s effectiveness in Nigeria, Bank staff preparedness, the extent
   to which the Bank should seek to influence the global development agenda, agreement with
   various statements regarding the Bank’s work, and the extent to which the Bank is an
   effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the sectoral areas on
   which it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its resources, the Bank’s greatest
   values and greatest weaknesses in its work, the most and least effective instruments in
   helping to reduce poverty in Nigeria, with which groups the Bank should work more in
   Nigeria, and how they attribute slow or failed reform efforts.
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the Bank’s level of
   effectiveness across thirty-seven development areas, the extent to which the Bank’s work
   helps achieve sustainable development results in Nigeria, and the extent to which the Bank
   meets Nigeria’s need for financial instruments and knowledge services.
D. The World Bank’s Knowledge: Respondents were asked to indicate how frequently they
   consult Bank knowledge work and activities in the work they do, the areas on which the
   Bank should focus its knowledge work and activities, and to rate the effectiveness and
   quality of the Bank’s knowledge work and activities, including how significant a contribution
   it makes to development results, its technical quality, and the Bank’s effectiveness at
   providing linkage to non-Bank expertise
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement with
   a series of statements regarding working with the Bank, such as the World Bank ’s
   “Safeguard Policy” requirements being reasonable and the Bank disbursing funds promptly.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria: Respondents were asked to rate how
   significant a role the Bank should play in Nigeria’s development in the near future and to
   indicate what the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Nigeria.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate how they get
   information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their access to the Internet, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s website. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s Access to
   Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of agreement
   that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data policy.
   Respondents were also asked to indicate their level of agreement that they know how to find
   information from the Bank and that the Bank is responsive to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank, their exposure
   to the Bank in Nigeria, and their geographic location.

In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 1,256 respondents (84% response rate) who completed the
survey in FY 2007. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were possible.



                                                4
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
       For further analyses, the small number of respondents from the office of a Minister were
        combined with those from the office of the President, respondents from private
        foundations and CBOs were combined with those from NGOs, and the few respondents
        from multilateral agencies and bilateral agencies were included in the “Other” category.




                                                5
The World Bank                   Nigeria      Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                   6
The World Bank                               Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       Responses across geographic locations for all country survey questions can be found in
        the Appendix (see page 93). Only significant differences between geographic locations in
        response to indicator questions will be discussed in the body of this report.




                                                7
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Collaboration with and Exposure to the World Bank

       Differences in responses to the indicator questions, based on levels of collaboration and
        exposure to the World Bank in Nigeria, can be found in the Appendix (page 116). Please
        note that where these two factors appear to have a significant relationship with overall
        views of the Bank, it is highlighted in yellow in that table.




                                                8
The World Bank                                 Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank
   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 5.9; this was
    statistically similar to the mean rating received in the FY ’07 country survey (5.8).
         Consultants on Bank-supported projects indicated the highest levels of familiarity
             with the Bank whereas respondents from the private sector, the office of the
             President/Minister, and faith-based groups indicated significantly lower levels.
         Respondents from Kaduna and FCT indicated the highest levels of familiarity with
             the Bank whereas respondents from Lagos indicated significantly lower levels.
         It should be noted that respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the Bank were
             significantly, moderately correlated with their perceptions of the Bank’s overall
             effectiveness in Nigeria, the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development
             results, and the Bank’s relevance to Nigeria’s development.




                                                 9
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues facing Nigeria

Headed in the Right Direction

       When asked whether Nigeria was headed in the right or wrong direction, a plurality of
        respondents indicated that Nigeria was headed in the right direction.
             A plurality of respondents from PMUs, private sector, the media, academia, and
              other organizations indicated that Nigeria was headed in the right direction.
             A plurality of respondents from the office of the President/Minister, local
              government, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, trade unions, and the judiciary
              branch indicated that Nigeria was headed in the wrong direction.
             A plurality of consultants on Bank-supported projects indicated that they were not
              sure whether Nigeria was headed in the right or wrong direction.
             Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian were split between Nigeria
              being headed in the right direction and not being sure.
             Respondents from independent government institutions and faith-based groups
              were split between Nigeria being headed in the right direction and Nigeria being
              headed in the wrong direction.




                                                10
The World Bank                              Nigeria                           Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)

Development Priorities

       Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey indicated that economic growth (42%) was the
        most important development priority for Nigeria, followed by reducing poverty (27%)
        and reducing corruption (27%).




                                              11
The World Bank                               Nigeria                           Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)

Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction

       Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey indicated that agricultural development (47%),
        increasing employment (39%), and reducing corruption (36%) would contribute most to
        poverty reduction in Nigeria.




                                               12
The World Bank                            Nigeria   Country Survey 2013



IV. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)

Factors Contributing to Economic Growth




                                            13
The World Bank                               Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank
As noted in the “Methodology” section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Survey. These
will be aggregated for the Bank’s annual Corporate Scorecard.


Focusing World Bank Resources

       Respondents in the FY ’07 survey indicated it would be most productive for the Bank to
        focus most of its resources on economic growth (38%) and reducing poverty (27%).




                                               14
The World Bank                                 Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Overall Effectiveness in Nigeria (Indicator Question)

       Ratings of the World Bank’s work achieving sustainable development results in Nigeria
        received a mean rating of 6.5 across all respondents.
             Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from the office of a
              Parliamentarian and trade unions had the highest ratings for the extent to which
              the Bank’s work achieves sustainable development results in Nigeria whereas
              respondents from the office of the President/Minister, private sector, financial
              sector/private banks, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, academia, and other
              organizations had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Kaduna and Enugu had the highest ratings for the extent to
              which the Bank’s work achieves sustainable development results in Nig eria
              whereas respondents from Lagos had significantly lower ratings.

       Across all respondents, ratings of the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Niger ia
        received a mean rating of 6.2; this was statistically similar to the mean overall
        effectiveness rating received in the FY ’07 country survey (6. 2).
             Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from independent
              government institutions had the highest ratings for the Bank’s overall
              effectiveness in Nigeria whereas respondents from private sector, NGOs/CBOs/
              private foundations, the media, academia, and other organizations had
              significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Kaduna, Enugu, and Adamawa had the highest ratings for the
              Bank’s overall effectiveness in Niger ia whereas respondents from Lagos had
              significantly lower ratings.




                                                 15
The World Bank                               Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Bank Staff are Well Prepared to Help Nigeria

       Consultants on Bank-supported projects had the highest ratings for the extent to which
        the Bank’s staff is well prepared to help Nigeria solve its most complicated development
        challenges whereas respondents from independent government institutions, private sector,
        and the media had significantly lower ratings.




                                               16
The World Bank                               Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Greatest Value in Nigeria

       Respondents in the FY ’07 survey indicated that the World Bank’s policy and economic
        advice (43%), technical advice (31%), and financial resources (31%) were its greatest
        values to Nigeria.
       Respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank’s financial resources
        were its greatest value to Nigeria, except respondents from independent government
        institutions who were more likely to indicate that the Bank’s development partner
        coordination was its greatest value.




                                               17
The World Bank                                  Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Nearly half of all respondents in the FY ’07 country survey indicated that the Bank’s
        greatest weakness in its work in Nigeria was imposing technocratic solutions without
        regard to political realities (37%), followed by being too bureaucratic in its operational
        policies and procedures (20%) and being too influenced by the US (18%).




                                                  18
The World Bank                    Nigeria   Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Specific Areas of Effectiveness




                                    19
The World Bank                                 Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their ratings of the Bank’s
        effectiveness across many of these thirty-seven development areas. For the most part,
        consultants on Bank-supported projects tended to have the highest ratings for the Bank ’s
        effectiveness across these areas whereas respondents from the office of the President and
        the judiciary branch tended to have significantly lower ratings. (See the Appendix for full
        details.) Those areas with significant stakeholder differences were:

                    Information and communications technology;
                    Transport;
                    Crime and violence;
                    Law and justice;
                    Urban development;
                    Environmental sustainability;
                    Regulatory framework;
                    Basic infrastructure;
                    Communicable/non-communicable diseases;
                    Gender;
                    Domestic private sector development;
                    Water and sanitation;
                    Economic growth;
                    Energy;
                    Disaster management;
                    Public financial management;
                    Job creation/employment;
                    Financial markets;
                    Equality of opportunity;
                    Global integration;
                    Food security;
                    Education;
                    Public sector reform;
                    Regional integration; and
                    Natural resource management.




                                                 20
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness
        across most areas that could be compared to respondents in the FY ’07 country survey
        (all but two were significantly lower, as noted in the graph).




                                                21
The World Bank                                  Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness and
ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable development results in Nigeria, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-seven specific
areas of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help ac hieve sustainable
development results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of
effectiveness in one specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness or perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Nigeria. The area
        determined to be a key driver from these analyses was:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at community development.
             Of note, the areas determined to be key drivers of the Bank’s overall effectiveness
              in the FY ’07 country survey were:
                o The Bank’s effectiveness in helping to bringing about economic growth; and
                o The Bank’s effectiveness in helping to reduce poverty.

       Achieving Sustainable Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest
        Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related
        to perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results in
        Nigeria, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results.
        The areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at agricultural development; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at community development.




                                                  22
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments

Knowledge: Frequency of Use

       There were some interesting stakeholder group differences in their usage of the World
        Bank’s knowledge work and activities.
             Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from PMUs and
              academia indicated that they consult World Bank knowledge work and activities
              the most frequently, from a few times a year to weekly.
             Employees of ministries/implementation agencies and respondents from the office
              of a Parliamentarian, local government, private sector, financial sector/private
              banks, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, the media, independent government
              institutions, trade unions, faith-based groups, and the judiciary branch indicated
              that they consult World Bank knowledge work and activities much less
              frequently, from never to a few times a year.
             Respondents from the office of the President/ Minister tended to be split, with
              over half indicating that they rarely or never consult World Bank knowledge work
              and activities, but 39% indicating that they consult the Bank’s knowledge work
              and activities monthly or weekly.




                                                23
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Meeting Nigeria’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest levels of
        agreement that the Bank meets Nigeria’s needs for knowledge services whereas
        respondents from the judiciary branch, trade unions, and the media had significantly
        lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from Kaduna had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank meets
        Nigeria’s needs for knowledge services whereas respondents from Lagos had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                24
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Focusing Bank Research

       Respondents in the FY ‘07 country survey indicated that it would be most valuable for
        the Bank to focus its research efforts on education (38%) and poverty (30%) in Nigeria.




                                                25
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Effectiveness

       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from independent government
        institutions had the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge work
        and activities to provide support for program implementation, to enhance knowledge
        and/or skills, to raise awareness of a particular topic, and to stimulate public debate
        whereas respondents from the judiciary branch had significantly lower ratings of
        effectiveness.




                                                26
The World Bank                                 Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Knowledge: Qualities

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower ratings for the extent to
        which the Bank’s knowledge work and activities are available when needed, a source of
        relevant information on global good practices, and adaptable to Nigeria’s chal lenges
        compared to respondents from the FY ’07 country survey (6.9, 7.1, and 6.3, respectively).
       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their ratings across all of these
        aspects of the Bank’s knowledge work and activities (see the Appendix for full details).
        For the most part, consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from
        independent government institutions tended to have the highest ratings for these aspects
        whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOSs/private foundations, trade unions, and the
        judiciary branch tended to have significantly lower ratings.
       There were significant differences between geographic locations in their ratings across all
        of these aspects of the Bank’s knowledge work and activities (see the Appendix for full
        details). For the indicator question, respondents from Kaduna had the highest ratings for
        the extent to which the Bank’s knowledge work and activities are adaptable to Nigeria’s
        challenges whereas respondents from Lagos had significantly lower ratings.




                                                 27
The World Bank                                 Nigeria                           Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Contribution (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from independent government institutions and the office of a
        Parliamentarian and consultants on Bank-supported projects had the highest ratings for
        the significance of the contribution that the World Bank’s knowledge and research make
        to development results in Nigeria whereas respondents from the office of the President/
        Minister, the judiciary branch, and other organizations had significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Kaduna and Enugu had the highest ratings for the significance of the
        contribution that the World Bank’s knowledge and research make to development results
        in Nigeria whereas respondents from Lagos had significantly lower ratings.




                                                 28
The World Bank                                Nigeria                          Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Technical Quality (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from independent government institutions and the office of a
        Parliamentarian and consultants on Bank-supported projects had the highest ratings for
        the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities whereas
        respondents from the office of the President/ Minister, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations,
        and the judiciary branch had significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Kaduna, Enugu, FCT, and Adamawa had the highest ratings for the
        technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities whereas
        respondents from Lagos had significantly lower ratings.




                                                29
The World Bank                                 Nigeria                              Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Linkage to Non-Bank Expertise

       Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for the
        World Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise.




                                                 30
The World Bank                 Nigeria              Country Survey 2013




VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Instruments: Most Effective




Instruments: Least Effective




                                 31
The World Bank                               Nigeria                           Country Survey 2013



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Meeting Nigeria’s Needs (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest levels of
        agreement that the World Bank’s financial instruments meet the needs of Nigeria whereas
        respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, academia/research institutes, and
        other organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from Kaduna had the highest levels of agreement that the World Bank’s
        financial instruments meet the needs of Nigeria whereas respondents from Lagos had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                               32
The World Bank                                 Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



VIII. How the World Bank Operates

The World Bank’s Work in Nigeria

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Nigeria and
        that the Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Nigeria with respect compared to
        respondents from the FY ’07 country survey. Respondents across both country surveys
        had statistically similar levels of agreement regarding the Bank’s relevance and
        alignment with development priorities in Nigeria.
       Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest levels of
        agreement that the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Nigeria,
        that the Bank’s work is aligned with their development priorities for Nigeria, and that the
        World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Nigeria whereas
        respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, the media, and academia had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Consultants on Bank-supported projects had the highest levels of agreement that the
        World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Nigeria with respect whereas respondents
        from trade unions had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from Kaduna had the highest levels of agreement across these areas of the
        World Bank’s work in Nigeria whereas respondents from Lagos had significantly lower
        levels of agreement.




                                                 33
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement
        that the World Bank disburses funds promptly, that the Bank effectively monitors and
        evaluates its projects/programs, and that working with the World Bank increases
        Nigeria’s institutional capacity compared to respondents fro m the FY ’07 country survey
        (6.2, 7.6, and 6.8, respectively). Respondents across both country surveys had
        statistically similar levels of agreement that the World Bank imposes reasonable
        conditions on its lending.




                                                34
The World Bank                                Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their levels of agreement
        regarding several of these aspects of how the World Bank operates.
             Respondents from PMUs had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank
              disburses funds promptly whereas respondents from the judiciary branch had
              significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Consultants on Bank-supported projects had the highest levels of agreement that
              the Bank effectively monitors and evaluates its projects whereas respondents from
              the office of the President/Minister and the judiciary branch had significantly
              lower levels of agreement.
             Consultants on Bank-supported projects had the highest levels of agreement that
              the Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending whereas respondents from
              NGOs/CBOs/private foundations and trade unions had significantly lower levels
              of agreement.
             Respondents from the office a Parliamentarian and consultants on Bank-supported
              projects had the highest levels of agreement that that working with the Bank
              increases Nigeria’s institutional capacity whereas respondents from
              NGOs/CBOs/private foundations had significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest levels of
              agreement that the Bank provides effective implementation support whereas
              respondents from the judiciary branch had significantly lower levels of
              agreement.

       There were significant differences between geographic locations in their ratings across
        nearly all of these aspects of how the World Bank operates (see the Appendix for full
        details). For the indicator question, respondents from Kaduna had the highest levels of
        agreement that where country systems are adequate, the World Bank makes appropriate
        use of them whereas respondents from Lagos had significantly lower ratings.




                                                35
The World Bank                                  Nigeria                               Country Survey 2013



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s
        staff accessibility, but statistically similar ratings for its straightforwardness and honesty
        compared to respondents from the FY ’07 survey (5.7 and 6.6, respectively).




                                                  36
The World Bank                                  Nigeria                              Country Survey 2013



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their ratings across several of
        these aspects of the World Bank as an effective development partner (see the Appendix
        for full details). For the most part, consultants on Bank-supported projects and
        respondents from independent government institutions had the highest ratings across
        these areas whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister, NGOs/CBOs/
        private foundations, trade unions, and the judiciary branch tended to have significantly
        lower ratings. Those areas with significant stakeholder group differences were:
                Responsiveness;
                Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products and services);
                Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances);
                Being inclusive;
                Openness (sharing data and other information);
                Staff accessibility;
                Collaboration with groups outside of the Government;
                Collaboration with the Government;
                Collaboration with other development partners; and
                Follow through over time.

       There were significant differences between geographic locations in their ratings across all
        of these aspects of the World Bank being an effective development partner (see the
        Appendix for full details). For the indicator questions:
             Respondents from Kaduna had the highest ratings for the Bank’s responsiveness
              and collaboration with groups outside of government whereas respondents from
              Lagos and Edo had significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Kaduna, FCT, Enugu, and Cross River had the highest ratings
              for the Bank’s openness whereas respondents from Lagos had significantly lower
              ratings.
             Respondents from Kaduna and FCT had the highest ratings for the Bank’s
              collaboration with the government whereas respondents from Adamawa had
              significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents from Kaduna had the highest ratings for the Bank’s collaboration
              with other development partners whereas respondents from Lagos and Adamawa
              had significantly lower ratings.




                                                  37
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria

Role Significance

       Respondents from independent government institutions, the office of a Parliamentarian,
        and faith-based groups had the highest ratings that the World Bank should play a
        significant role in Nigeria’s development in the near future whereas respondents from the
        media, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, the judiciary branch, the office of the
        President/Minister, and other organizations had significantly lower ratings.




                                                38
The World Bank                     Nigeria             Country Survey 2013



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value




                                     39
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria (continued)

Collaborating in Nigeria

       Although pluralities of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the
        World Bank should collaborate more with NGOs in Nigeria to ensure better development
        results, respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian indicated that the Bank should
        collaborate more with state governments, respondents from PMUs indicated that the
        Bank should collaborate more with CBOs and state governments, respondents from
        independent government institutions indicated that the Bank should collaborate more
        with local governments, and respondents from academia/research institutes indicated that
        the Bank should collaborate more with academia/think tanks/research institutes.




                                                40
The World Bank                                 Nigeria                              Country Survey 2013



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria (continued)

Influencing the Global Development Agenda

       Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, independent government institutions,
        local government, and faith-based groups had the highest ratings that the World Bank
        should seek to influence the global development agenda whereas respondents from the
        judiciary branch and the office of the President/Minister had significantly lower ratings.




                                                 41
The World Bank                                Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       Although pluralities of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they
        attribute slow or failed reform efforts to the government working inefficiently or to
        political pressures, respondents from local government indicated that they were more
        likely to attribute it to the Bank working too slowly and respondents from independent
        government institutions indicated that they were more likely to attribute it to poor
        development partner coordination.




                                                42
The World Bank                               Nigeria                           Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Respondents in the FY ‘07 country survey indicated that they got most of their
        information about economic and social development issues in Nigeria from local
        newspapers (62%), followed by local television (36%) and local radio (33%).




                                               43
The World Bank                              Nigeria                           Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Preferred Information Sources

       Although pluralities of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they
        preferred to receive information through the World Bank website or through World Bank
        seminars/workshops/conferences, consultants on Bank-supported projects preferred
        e-newsletters and respondents from independent government institutions indicated that
        they preferred social media.




                                              44
The World Bank                               Nigeria                           Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information




       Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, financial sector/private banks,
        NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, independent government institutions, trade unions,
        faith-based groups, and other organizations were significantly less likely to have
        requested information from the World Bank compared to respondents from other
        stakeholder groups.




                                               45
The World Bank                                 Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Respondents from the financial sector/private banks, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations,
        the media, trade unions, the judiciary branch, and other organizations were significantly
        less likely to have obtained this information compared to respondents from other
        stakeholder groups.




       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from academia had the highest
        levels of agreement that they use more World Bank data as a result of the Open Data
        policy whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, independent
        government institutions, and faith-based groups had significantly lower levels of
        agreement.




                                                 46
The World Bank                                Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       Respondents from trade unions, faith-based groups, the judiciary, and other organizations
        were significantly less likely to have access to the Internet compared to respondents from
        other stakeholder groups.




       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from the office of the
        President/Minister, the office of a Parliamentarian, the financial sector/private banks,
        NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, faith-based groups, academia, the judiciary branch, and
        other organizations indicated that they utilized 3G/4G Internet connections to access the
        Bank’s website whereas employees of ministries/implementation agencies and
        respondents from PMUs, local government, the media, and independent government
        institutions indicated that they utilized high speed Internet connections.




                                                47
The World Bank                                Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage

       Respondents in this year’s country survey were significantly more likely to have used the
        Bank’s website compared to respondents from the FY ’07 country survey.
       Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, the financial sector/private banks,
        NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, trade unions, faith-based groups, and the judiciary
        branch were significantly less likely to have used the Bank’s website compared to
        respondents from other stakeholder groups.




       Respondents in this year’s country survey were significantly more likely to have used the
        Bank’s main website compared to respondents from the FY ’0 7 country survey.




                                                48
The World Bank                                Nigeria                             Country Survey 2013



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Evaluation

       Consultants on Bank-supported projects had the highest levels of agreement that they find
        information on the World Bank’s websites useful whereas respondents from trade unions
        and the judiciary branch had significantly lower levels of agreement.

       Consultants on Bank-supported projects and respondents from independent government
        institutions had the highest levels of agreement that they find the World Bank’s websites
        easy to navigate whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, trade
        unions, and faith-based groups had significantly lower levels of agreement.




Social Media Evaluation




                                                49
The World Bank                                  Nigeria                              Country Survey 2013



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 51


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 67


          C. Responses to All Questions by Geographic Locations ................... 90


          D. Responses to All Questions by Year ............................................ 110


          E. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank ........ 113


          F. World Bank Client Survey 2013 – Nigeria Questionnaire ........... 114




                                              NIGERIA




                                                  50
The World Bank                                       Nigeria                                  Country Survey 2013


       Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=835)
A. General Issues facing Nigeria

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Nigeria is headed in…?                                   (N=813)
The right direction                                                                        43.2%
The wrong direction                                                                        34.4%
Not sure                                                                                   22.4%

2. When considering development priorities, which ONE               Percentage of Respondents (N=809)
   development priority below is the most important in
                                                                            nd           rd
   Nigeria? Which ONE is the second most important               Most       2 Most      3 Most
   priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?   Important   Important   Important    Combined
Education                                                        25.1%       13.7%       6.9%         45.7%
Anti-corruption                                                  10.0%       8.7%        7.4%         26.2%
Job creation/employment                                          6.3%        8.5%        9.7%         24.5%
Rural development                                                14.1%       5.9%        3.7%         23.7%
Poverty reduction                                                6.4%        8.9%        7.2%         22.5%
Basic infrastructure                                             7.5%        7.3%        6.4%         21.2%
Energy                                                           7.5%        6.4%        6.1%         20.0%
Agricultural development                                         2.5%        3.9%        8.4%         14.8%
Health                                                           3.2%        3.2%        7.2%         13.6%
Governance                                                       2.8%        4.1%        3.2%         10.1%
Youth employment                                                 1.4%        3.2%        2.8%         7.4%
Economic growth                                                  1.7%        1.6%        3.5%         6.8%
Crime and violence                                               1.0%        2.6%        2.2%         5.8%
Food security                                                    1.5%        1.4%        2.8%         5.7%
Social protection                                                0.9%        2.1%        2.0%         4.9%
Transport                                                        1.1%        1.6%        1.5%         4.2%
Water and sanitation                                             0.7%        1.7%        1.6%         4.1%
Natural resource management                                      0.6%        1.6%        1.7%         4.0%
Public sector reform                                             0.5%        2.1%        1.2%         3.8%
Public financial management                                      0.4%        2.0%        0.9%         3.2%
Domestic private sector development                              0.7%        1.2%        0.7%         2.7%
Equality of opportunity                                          0.4%        0.7%        1.5%         2.6%
Monitoring and evaluation                                        0.1%        1.1%        1.0%         2.2%
Foreign direct investment                                        0.5%        1.2%        0.5%         2.2%
Global integration                                               0.5%        0.5%        0.7%         1.7%
Urban development                                                0.2%        0.6%        0.9%         1.7%
Environmental sustainability                                     0.1%        0.2%        1.2%         1.6%
Law and justice                                                  0.4%        0.4%        0.9%         1.6%
Regional integration                                             0.2%        0.5%        0.7%         1.5%
Gender                                                           0.1%        0.7%        0.6%         1.5%
Disaster management                                              0.1%        0.2%        1.0%         1.4%
Regulatory and institutional framework                           0.2%        0.4%        0.6%         1.2%
Information and communications technology                        0.2%        0.4%        0.6%         1.2%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                           0.0%        0.2%        0.9%         1.1%
Financial markets                                                0.1%        0.2%        0.5%         0.9%
Climate change                                                   0.1%        0.4%        0.2%         0.7%
International trade                                              0.0%        0.2%        0.4%         0.6%
Regional trade                                                   0.0%        0.2%        0.2%         0.5%


                                                       51
The World Bank                                     Nigeria                          Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
   different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do
   you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Nigeria?     Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                         (Responses Combined; N=831)
Job creation/employment                                                            36.3%
Education                                                                          34.9%
Economic growth                                                                    31.4%
Energy                                                                             24.7%
Anti-corruption                                                                    24.5%
Rural development                                                                  22.6%
Agricultural development                                                           21.8%
Basic infrastructure                                                               18.7%
Governance                                                                         9.7%
Health                                                                             9.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                            8.5%
Food security                                                                      5.4%
Water and sanitation                                                               4.6%
Crime and violence                                                                 4.5%
Natural resource management                                                        3.9%
Urban development                                                                  3.7%
Social protection                                                                  3.7%
Law and justice                                                                    3.5%
Transport                                                                          3.4%
Domestic private sector development                                                3.4%
Information and communications technology                                          2.3%
Public sector reform                                                               2.0%
Disaster management                                                                1.8%
Environmental sustainability                                                       1.7%
Public financial management                                                        1.7%
Regional integration                                                               1.3%
Gender                                                                             1.3%
Foreign direct investment                                                          1.3%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                          1.3%
Regulatory framework                                                               0.8%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                             0.8%
Financial markets                                                                  0.8%
Trade and exports                                                                  0.7%
Other                                                                              0.7%
Climate change                                                                     0.4%
Global integration                                                                 0.4%




                                                     52
The World Bank                                                 Nigeria                       Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)
4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE
   areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating                 Percentage of Respondents
   economic growth in Nigeria? (Choose no more than THREE)                      (Responses Combined; N=830)
Energy                                                                                      54.5%
Education                                                                                   29.2%
Agricultural development                                                                    28.3%
Job creation/employment                                                                     27.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                             24.3%
Basic infrastructure                                                                        18.2%
Governance                                                                                  11.9%
Rural development                                                                           11.0%
Natural resource management                                                                 10.1%
Foreign direct investment                                                                   8.4%
Trade and exports                                                                           8.2%
Health                                                                                      5.8%
Equality of opportunity                                                                     5.5%
Public financial management                                                                 4.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                         4.7%
Information and communications technology                                                   4.5%
Public sector reform                                                                        4.2%
Food security                                                                               4.2%
Transport                                                                                   3.9%
Urban development                                                                           3.4%
Regulatory and institutional framework                                                      3.4%
Environmental sustainability                                                                2.7%
Global integration                                                                          2.4%
Law and justice                                                                             2.4%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                   2.3%
Financial markets                                                                           2.3%
Water and sanitation                                                                        2.2%
Crime and violence                                                                          2.0%
Social protection                                                                           1.8%
Climate change                                                                              1.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                      1.0%
Regional integration                                                                        0.7%
Gender                                                                                      0.7%
Other                                                                                       0.7%
Disaster management                                                                         0.6%



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Familiarity, Overall Effectiveness, and Bank Staff Preparedness                      N       Mean        SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Nigeria, on a ten-
                                                                                    828       5.89      2.44
   point scale? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank's effectiveness in
                                                                                    779       6.15      2.45
   Nigeria, on a ten-point scale. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank’s staff is well prepared
   (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Nigeria solve its most complicated
                                                                                    724       6.44      2.42
   development challenges, on a ten-point scale?
    (1-To no degree at all; 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                 53
The World Bank                                    Nigeria                           Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact
   on development results in Nigeria, in which sectoral areas do you
   believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and         Percentage of Respondents
   resources in Nigeria? (Choose no more than THREE)                   (Responses Combined; N=831)
Education                                                                          40.7%
Rural development                                                                  33.3%
Energy                                                                             31.6%
Agricultural development                                                           25.4%
Job creation/employment                                                            24.3%
Poverty reduction                                                                  21.1%
Health                                                                             17.7%
Basic infrastructure                                                               14.2%
Economic growth                                                                    10.6%
Anti-corruption                                                                    10.2%
Governance                                                                         7.6%
Crime and violence                                                                 5.8%
Public sector reform                                                               4.8%
Public financial management                                                        4.2%
Transport                                                                          4.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                          3.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                3.6%
Food security                                                                      3.6%
Water and sanitation                                                               3.2%
Natural resource management                                                        3.2%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                          2.6%
Urban development                                                                  2.3%
Gender                                                                             2.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                       2.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                            2.0%
Social protection                                                                  1.9%
Information and communications technology                                          1.8%
International trade                                                                1.6%
Financial markets                                                                  1.3%
Regulatory framework                                                               1.3%
Law and justice                                                                    1.2%
Climate change                                                                     1.1%
Global integration                                                                 0.7%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                             0.7%
Other                                                                              0.7%
Disaster management                                                                0.6%
Regional integration                                                               0.5%
Regional trade                                                                     0.5%




                                                    54
The World Bank                                           Nigeria                                   Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                               Percentage of Respondents (N=806)
5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do
                                                                                           nd
   you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second        Greatest      2 Greatest
   greatest value in Nigeria?                                               Value          Value        Combined
Financial resources                                                         41.3%          12.1%          53.4%
Training/capacity building                                                  13.3%          20.5%          33.7%
Technical assistance                                                        14.4%          18.7%          33.1%
Development partner coordination                                             8.1%          11.0%          19.1%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                   6.2%          10.2%          16.4%
Policy advice                                                                6.8%           8.2%          15.1%
Studies/analyses                                                             2.0%           7.2%           9.2%
Data                                                                         3.1%           4.1%           7.2%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                2.5%           3.5%           6.0%
Convening/facilitating                                                       1.4%           3.5%           4.9%
Other                                                                        1.0%           0.9%           1.9%

6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest                 Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)                      (Responses Combined; N=809)
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political and societal
                                                                                                25.8%
realities
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                     21.1%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                        19.7%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                          18.2%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                           16.7%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                       12.9%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                    12.1%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                        11.7%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Nigeria                               11.0%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                  8.9%
Not enough engagement at state levels                                                           7.8%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                             6.9%
Not client focused                                                                              6.1%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                           4.6%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                        3.6%
Not aligned with other development partners’ work                                               3.5%
Other                                                                                           1.6%
Too much engagement at state levels                                                             1.0%

7. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in               Percentage of Respondents
   reducing poverty in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)                            (Responses Combined; N=828)
Capacity development                                                                             49.9%
Investment lending                                                                               47.0%
Technical assistance                                                                             36.6%
Trust Fund management                                                                            20.2%
Knowledge products/services                                                                      15.7%
Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government                                          12.0%
Don’t know                                                                                       5.6%
Other                                                                                            1.3%




                                                           55
The World Bank                                          Nigeria                                   Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the LEAST effective in             Percentage of Respondents
   reducing poverty in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)                           (Responses Combined; N=819)
Trust Fund management                                                                           48.3%
Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government                                         45.5%
Investment lending                                                                              44.0%
Knowledge products/services                                                                     42.2%
Capacity development                                                                            39.3%
Technical assistance                                                                            38.6%
Don’t know                                                                                      38.5%
Other                                                                                           9.2%

Global Development Agenda                                                                    N      Mean       SD
9. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the
    global development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate
                                                                                            778      7.40     2.16
    change, communicable diseases, international financial systems, trade, statistics,
    etc.), on a ten-point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

10. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as
     its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the
     World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better                Percentage of Respondents
     development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                           (Responses Combined; N=829)
NGOs                                                                                            43.3%
Community Based Organizations                                                                   22.7%
Local Government                                                                                18.5%
Private sector                                                                                  17.9%
State governments                                                                               16.8%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                        14.2%
Youth                                                                                           13.3%
Beneficiaries                                                                                   11.7%
Development partner community                                                                   11.3%
Media                                                                                           9.5%
Faith based organizations                                                                       9.3%
Foundations                                                                                     5.5%
Governors’ Forum                                                                                2.3%
Parliament                                                                                      1.4%
Other                                                                                           0.5%

                                                                                             Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s
work in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)              N     Mean        SD
11. Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Nigeria        775    6.17       2.51
12. The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                            750     5.90      2.41
    for Nigeria
13. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Nigeria          754     6.06      2.43
14. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Nigeria with respect                  668     6.11      2.48




                                                          56
The World Bank                                            Nigeria                                   Country Survey 2013


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                                                     Degree
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Nigeria in
terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)       N     Mean        SD
15. Responsiveness                                                                            727    5.69       2.43
16. Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products and services)                          721     5.44      2.32
17. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                  738     5.35      2.27
18. Being inclusive                                                                           719     5.52      2.37
19. Openness (sharing data and other information)                                             752     6.00      2.53
20. Staff accessibility                                                                       710     5.16      2.62
21. Straightforwardness and honesty                                                           703     6.29      2.47
22. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government (e.g., NGOs, academia,
                                                                                              754     5.85      2.47
    private sector)
23. Collaboration with the Government                                                         776     7.00      2.31
24. Collaboration with other donors                                                           733     6.27      2.36
25. Follow through over time                                                                  672     5.97      2.47

26. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place,
   which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more                  Percentage of Respondents
   than TWO)                                                                          (Responses Combined; N=816)
The Government works inefficiently                                                                32.8%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                 30.3%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                             23.9%
Poor development partner coordination                                                             21.9%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                   18.6%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                               18.3%
The World Bank works too slowly                                                                   16.4%
The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                14.7%
ground
The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                    14.0%
Other                                                                                           2.0%




                                                            57
The World Bank                                       Nigeria                               Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the         Effectiveness
following areas of development in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                           N       Mean      SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                                737      3.87     2.64
2.    Information and communications technology                                      737      5.56     2.59
3.    Transport                                                                      745      4.96     2.53
4.    Crime and violence                                                             694      4.10     2.48
5.    Law and justice                                                                668      4.73     2.56
6.    Urban development                                                              760      5.81     2.48
7.    Environmental sustainability                                                   748      5.55     2.40
8.    Regulatory framework                                                           711      5.40     2.44
9.    Basic infrastructure                                                           769      5.75     2.44
10.   Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                         759      6.37     2.37
11.   Poverty reduction                                                              759      5.38     2.55
12.   Gender                                                                         709      5.49     2.33
13.   Domestic private sector development                                            704      4.98     2.40
14.   Foreign direct investment                                                      717      5.71     2.41
15.   Water and sanitation                                                           757      5.99     2.46
16.   Trade and exports                                                              694      5.37     2.30
17.   Economic growth                                                                758      5.67     2.48
18.   Energy                                                                         742      4.86     2.58
19.   Disaster management                                                            727      5.10     3.63
20.   Monitoring and evaluation                                                      735      5.77     2.47
21.   Public financial management                                                    722      5.59     2.37
22.   Job creation/employment                                                        753      4.92     2.52
23.   Financial markets                                                              708      5.40     2.47
24.   Equality of opportunity                                                        695      5.02     2.50
25.   Health                                                                         769      6.30     2.46
26.   Rural development                                                              773      5.57     2.55
27.   Global integration                                                             725      5.87     2.36
28.   Governance                                                                     751      5.26     2.44
29.   Food security                                                                  749      5.22     2.52
30.   Education                                                                      764      5.60     2.46
31.   Social protection                                                              711      4.93     2.47
32.   Climate change                                                                 713      5.43     2.36
33.   Public sector reform                                                           724      5.15     2.42
34.   Regional integration                                                           725      5.43     2.50
35.   Agricultural development                                                       770      5.72     2.50
36.   Community development                                                          283      5.33     2.63
37.   Natural resource management                                                    642      4.94     2.29




                                                       58
The World Bank                                                 Nigeria                        Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Achieving Development Results                                                         N       Mean       SD
38. To what extent does the World Bank’s work help achieve sustainable
    development results in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale?                            780       6.46      2.21
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World
Bank in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale? (1-Strongly agree; 10-Strongly disagree)       N       Mean       SD
39. The World Bank’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
    Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.) meet the           769       5.53      2.38
    needs of Nigeria
40. The World Bank meets Nigeria’s needs for knowledge services (e.g., research
                                                                                     776       5.79      2.28
    analysis, data, technical assistance)




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge work and                    Percentage of Respondents
   activities (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?                          (N=825)
Weekly                                                                                      6.7%
Monthly                                                                                     13.8%
A few times a year                                                                          26.4%
Rarely                                                                                      28.1%
Never                                                                                       25.0%




                                                                 59
The World Bank                                        Nigeria                                Country Survey 2013


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)
2. When thinking about the development challenges in Nigeria, where do
   you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its
   knowledge work and activities in the next few years? (Choose no more          Percentage of Respondents
   than THREE)                                                                 (Responses Combined; N=831)
Education                                                                                  43.8%
Energy                                                                                     36.0%
Agricultural development                                                                   22.9%
Job creation/employment                                                                    22.7%
Anti-corruption                                                                            22.3%
Poverty reduction                                                                          20.9%
Economic growth                                                                            18.9%
Health                                                                                     12.9%
Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)                                                12.8%
Public sector reform                                                                       10.5%
Rural development                                                                          9.1%
Basic infrastructure                                                                       7.3%
Crime and violence                                                                         5.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                        4.9%
Transport                                                                                  4.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                                  3.4%
Disaster management                                                                        3.4%
Food security                                                                              3.1%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                  3.0%
Information and communications technology                                                  2.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                       2.8%
Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)               2.6%
Trade and exports (regional/international)                                                 2.5%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                    2.4%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                       2.2%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                             2.0%
Urban development                                                                          2.0%
Financial markets                                                                          1.8%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                     1.7%
Gender                                                                                     1.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                               1.3%
Regulatory framework                                                                       1.3%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                              0.8%
Regional integration                                                                       0.7%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                     0.6%
Global integration                                                                         0.2%

In Nigeria, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge work and          Level of Effectiveness
activities are: (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                            N      Mean        SD
3. Raising your awareness of the particular topic                                     763      5.65      2.43
4.   Stimulating public debate/dialogue                                               738      5.55     2.40
5.   Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                                           759      5.75     2.46
6.   Contributing to good policy making                                               760      6.00     2.44
7.   Providing support for program implementation                                     766      6.30     2.45



                                                        60
The World Bank                                                Nigeria                     Country Survey 2013


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

In Nigeria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge work            Degree
and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)             N     Mean      SD
8. Are available when needed                                                        724    5.54     2.56
9.   Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation        717    5.75     2.36
10. Are relevant to Nigeria’s development priorities                                782    5.95     2.36
11. Provide feasible recommendations                                                742    5.87     2.26
12. Are accessible                                                                  737    5.75     2.46
13. A source of relevant information on global good practices                       771    6.36     2.36
14. Are adequately disseminated                                                     748    5.45     2.47
15. Are appropriately translated                                                    742    5.59     2.48
16. Are adaptable to Nigeria’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                    755    5.70     2.38
    circumstances

Overall Evaluations                                                                  N     Mean       SD
16. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank’s
    knowledge work and research make to development results in your country, on     774     6.48     2.22
    a ten-point scale? (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
17. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank’s
    knowledge/research, on a ten-point scale?                                       780     6.96     2.05
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
18. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank
    expertise (e.g., South-South knowledge sharing, etc.)?                          672     5.95     2.26
     (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements,                  Level of Agreement
on a ten-point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                       N      Mean     SD
1. The World Bank disburses funds promptly                                          673      5.47   2.53
2. The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                    757    6.18      2.42
    supports
3. The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion              694    5.79      2.37
4.   The World Bank’s "Safeguard Policy" requirements are reasonable                681    6.21      2.31
5.   The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                    712    5.91      2.46
6.   Working with the World Bank increases Nigeria's institutional capacity         758    6.41      2.36
7.   The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes        652    6.02      2.41
8.  The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated                          684    6.43      2.34
9.  Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank makes appropriate use of
                                                                                    692    6.24      2.41
    them
10. The World Bank provides effective implementation support                        744    6.38      2.48




                                                                61
The World Bank                                                Nigeria                           Country Survey 2013


F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria

The Bank’s Role                                                                          N       Mean      SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play
in Nigeria’s development in the near future, on a ten-point scale?                      810      8.07     1.91
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of               Percentage of Respondents
   greater value in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)                           (Responses Combined; N=823)
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Nigeria’s specific challenges               45.4%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                      35.0%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/ statistics/figures on Nigeria’s
                                                                                              25.2%
economy
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                        16.8%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                      15.3%
Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                            13.7%
Work faster                                                                                   12.6%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                      12.2%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                              10.4%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                                   5.5%
Other                                                                                         2.3%



G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social               Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)                       (Responses Combined; N=821)
Local newspapers                                                                             56.9%
Local television                                                                             37.0%
Internet                                                                                     35.6%
Local radio                                                                                  22.9%
International television                                                                     14.4%
International newspapers                                                                     6.7%
Social media                                                                                 6.2%
International radio                                                                          5.4%
Periodicals                                                                                  4.9%
Mobile phones                                                                                4.8%
Other                                                                                        0.9%
Instant messaging                                                                            0.6%
Blogs                                                                                        0.1%




                                                                62
The World Bank                                      Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?         Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                               (Responses Combined; N=826)
World Bank website                                                                    40.8%
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                             33.2%
World Bank publications and other written materials                                   21.2%
Mobile phones                                                                         20.9%
e-newsletters                                                                         19.5%
Social media                                                                          16.8%
Direct contact with World Bank                                                        13.8%
World Bank Public Information Center                                                  11.3%
Instant messaging                                                                     7.7%
Other                                                                                 3.9%
Blogs                                                                                 0.5%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under
    which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession     Percentage of Respondents
    that is not a list of exceptions?                                               (N=799)
Yes                                                                                  28.3%
No                                                                                   71.7%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities    Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                               (N=776)
Yes                                                                                  27.7%
No                                                                                   72.3%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                        (N=308)
Yes                                                                                  63.6%
No                                                                                   36.4%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                              (N=793)
Yes                                                                                  93.1%
No                                                                                   6.9%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank website?                                     (N=801)
Yes                                                                                  55.4%
No                                                                                   44.6%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                      (N=492)
The World Bank's country website (www.worldbank.org/ng)                              42.7%
The World Bank's main website (www.worldbank.org)                                    57.3%

9. The Internet connection I mainly use when visiting a World Bank         Percentage of Respondents
    website is:                                                                     (N=515)
3G/4G                                                                                45.8%
High speed                                                                           41.7%
Dial-up                                                                              12.4%

                                                      63
The World Bank                                       Nigeria                                    Country Survey 2013




Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten-point              Level of Agreement
scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                          N       Mean      SD
10. I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the organization's Open
                                                                                        603      4.91      2.80
    Data policy
11. I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate.                                    527      6.08      2.55
12. I find the information on the World Bank’s websites useful.                         508      6.49      2.53
13. I find information on World Bank Facebook, Twitter, YouTube or Flickr useful        484      5.31      2.86
14. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it                   637      5.88      2.91
15. The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries               558      5.48      2.92


H. Background Information

1.   Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                        (N=829)
Employee of a Ministry/Implementation Agency                                                 18.5%
Private Sector Organization                                                                  12.3%
NGO                                                                                          12.1%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                       10.1%
Faith-Based Group                                                                            7.0%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                                6.9%
Media                                                                                        6.2%
Trade Union                                                                                  4.9%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                             4.0%
Project Management Unit                                                                      3.6%
Other                                                                                        3.3%
Consultant on World Bank-Supported Project                                                   2.2%
Judiciary Branch                                                                             1.4%
Office of Minister                                                                           1.3%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                    1.2%
Private Foundation                                                                           1.2%
Independent Government Institution                                                           1.2%
Office of the President                                                                      1.0%
Community Based Organization                                                                 0.7%
Bilateral Agency                                                                             0.6%
Multilateral Agency                                                                          0.4%




                                                       64
The World Bank                                        Nigeria                Country Survey 2013


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.     Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                     (N=820)
Other                                                                     15.1%
Education                                                                 12.6%
Health                                                                    9.4%
Financial markets                                                         7.3%
Governance                                                                7.3%
Information and communications technology                                 4.5%
Job creation/employment                                                   3.5%
Law and justice                                                           3.4%
Economic growth                                                           3.2%
Agricultural development                                                  2.9%
Trade and exports                                                         2.3%
Environmental sustainability                                              2.2%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                 2.2%
Basic infrastructure                                                      2.1%
Energy                                                                    2.1%
Water and sanitation                                                      2.1%
Domestic private sector development                                       2.0%
Public sector reform                                                      1.8%
Poverty reduction                                                         1.7%
Anti-corruption                                                           1.6%
Transport                                                                 1.5%
Natural resource management                                               1.3%
Urban development                                                         1.2%
Public financial management                                               1.1%
Crime and violence                                                        1.0%
Rural development                                                         1.0%
Gender                                                                    0.9%
Social protection                                                         0.9%
Regulatory framework                                                      0.7%
Food security                                                             0.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                   0.4%
Foreign direct investment                                                 0.1%
Global integration                                                        0.1%




                                                        65
The World Bank                                       Nigeria                            Country Survey 2013


H. Background Information (continued)

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World        Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in your country?                                                             (N=820)
Yes                                                                                  26.3%
No                                                                                   73.7%

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World     Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)                                        (N=789)
Observer                                                                             62.5%
Use World Bank reports/data                                                          26.9%
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                             26.1%
Use World Bank communication tools for information, data, research, etc.             23.4%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                        15.5%

                                                                           Percentage of Respondents
5. Which best represents your geographic location?                                  (N=828)
Lagos                                                                                18.1%
FCT                                                                                  17.9%
Enugu                                                                                13.9%
Cross River                                                                          13.6%
Edo                                                                                  12.3%
Kaduna                                                                               12.3%
Adamawa                                                                              11.8%




                                                       66
The World Bank                                                                                             Nigeria                                                                           Country Survey 2013


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups
A. General Issues facing Nigeria
In general, would you say that Nigeria is headed in...?
                                   Office of     Office of   Employee    Consultant                                   Financial   NGO/CBO/             Indep.            Faith-
  Percentage of                       the       Parliamen-      of a      on Bank                Local      Private    Sector/      Private             Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
  Respondents                      President      tarian      Ministry     Project    PMU     Government    Sector      Bank      Foundation   Media     Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
  In the right direction             27.8%        44.4%        57.3%       25.0%      56.7%     27.3%       49.0%       35.7%       31.3%      52.9%    40.0%    31.7%   38.6%     43.8%      36.4%      41.2%
  In the wrong direction             61.1%        11.1%        25.3%       31.3%      26.7%     51.5%       32.3%       33.9%       40.9%      27.5%    40.0%    39.0%   38.6%     38.8%      45.5%      26.5%
  Don't know                         11.1%        44.4%        17.3%       43.8%      16.7%     21.2%       18.8%       30.4%       27.8%      19.6%    20.0%    29.3%   22.8%     17.5%      18.2%      32.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                           67
The World Bank                                                                                                    Nigeria                                                                                             Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Nigeria? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
 MOST Important               Office of       Office of   Employee      Consultant                                               Financial    NGO/CBO/                  Indep.                   Faith-
 Percentage of                   the         Parliamen-      of a        on Bank                       Local         Private      Sector/      Private                   Govt.        Trade      Based                Judiciary
 Respondents                  President        tarian      Ministry       Project        PMU       Government        Sector        Bank      Foundation       Media       Inst.       Union     Group      Academia    Branch     Other
 Rural development              11.1%          10.0%        21.5%          23.5%        16.7%           3.0%          9.2%         10.7%        11.6%         29.4%      0.0%         19.5%       8.9%        12.8%     0.0%       6.1%
 Education                      38.9%          20.0%        22.1%          23.5%        13.3%          36.4%         27.6%         19.6%        21.4%         21.6%      50.0%        24.4%      23.2%        33.3%    50.0%      24.2%
 Social protection               0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         1.8%         2.0%       0.0%          2.4%       1.8%         0.0%     8.3%       3.0%
 Transport                       0.0%          10.0%         0.0%           0.0%         3.3%           0.0%          1.0%          0.0%         0.9%         3.9%       0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%       3.0%
 Basic infrastructure            5.6%           0.0%         9.4%          11.8%        16.7%           0.0%          8.2%         17.9%         3.6%         7.8%       10.0%         0.0%       3.6%         9.0%     8.3%       6.1%
 Poverty reduction              16.7%          10.0%         7.4%          17.6%         3.3%           9.1%          7.1%          7.1%         8.9%         2.0%       0.0%          4.9%       0.0%         2.6%     0.0%       9.1%
 Public sector reform            0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         1.3%     8.3%       3.0%
 Regional integration            0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         1.8%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Global integration              0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           3.0%          0.0%          1.8%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Gender                          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Domestic private sector
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         3.3%           0.0%          2.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%       6.1%
 development
 Foreign direct investment       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          2.0%          0.0%         0.0%         2.0%       0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Water and sanitation            0.0%           0.0%         1.3%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          1.0%          0.0%         2.7%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Anti-corruption                 0.0%          10.0%         6.7%          11.8%        13.3%          12.1%         13.3%         19.6%        11.6%         3.9%       10.0%         9.8%       8.9%        10.3%     8.3%       6.1%
 Monitoring and evaluation       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Public financial
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 management
 Job creation/employment         5.6%          10.0%         4.0%           0.0%         0.0%           6.1%          6.1%          5.4%         7.1%         11.8%      0.0%          2.4%      16.1%         5.1%     8.3%       6.1%
 Youth employment                0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          3.1%          1.8%         1.8%         2.0%       0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         2.6%     0.0%       0.0%
 Governance                      0.0%          10.0%         0.0%           0.0%         6.7%           3.0%          3.1%          3.6%         3.6%         5.9%       0.0%          4.9%       3.6%         2.6%     0.0%       3.0%
 Financial markets               0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Urban development               0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Natural resource
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       3.6%         1.3%     0.0%       3.0%
 management
 Environmental
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 sustainability
 Equality of opportunity         0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Health                          5.6%           0.0%         3.4%           0.0%         3.3%           0.0%          3.1%          1.8%         2.7%         2.0%       20.0%         2.4%       3.6%         3.8%     0.0%       9.1%
 Communicable/non-
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 communicable diseases
 Energy                         16.7%          10.0%        10.1%           0.0%        10.0%          12.1%          3.1%          7.1%         6.3%         3.9%       10.0%        12.2%       7.1%         6.4%     8.3%       6.1%
 Food security                   0.0%           0.0%         3.4%           0.0%         0.0%          12.1%          2.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Climate change                  0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Disaster management             0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           5.9%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Agricultural development        0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           5.9%         6.7%           0.0%          2.0%          3.6%         5.4%         2.0%       0.0%          2.4%       1.8%         3.8%     0.0%       0.0%
 Regional trade                  0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 International trade             0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Crime and violence              0.0%          10.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           3.0%          1.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          2.4%       3.6%         0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Economic growth                 0.0%           0.0%         4.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          2.0%          0.0%         1.8%         0.0%       0.0%          2.4%       5.4%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Law and justice                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          1.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Regulatory and institutional
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          1.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 framework
 Information and
 communications                  0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 technology




                                                                                                                   68
The World Bank                                                                                                    Nigeria                                                                                             Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Nigeria? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   nd
 2 MOST Important             Office of       Office of   Employee      Consultant                                               Financial    NGO/CBO/                  Indep.                   Faith-
 Percentage of                   the         Parliamen-      of a        on Bank                       Local        Private       Sector/      Private                   Govt.         Trade     Based                Judiciary
 Respondents                  President        tarian      Ministry       Project        PMU       Government        Sector        Bank      Foundation       Media       Inst.       Union      Group     Academia    Branch     Other
 Rural development               0.0%          10.0%         7.4%           0.0%         6.7%          3.0%           5.1%         10.7%         7.1%          2.0%      0.0%          0.0%       7.1%         7.7%     8.3%       5.9%
 Education                      16.7%          20.0%        18.8%          16.7%         6.7%          15.2%         13.1%          8.9%        12.4%         22.0%      0.0%         12.2%       7.1%        12.8%     8.3%      14.7%
 Social protection               0.0%           0.0%         2.0%           0.0%         3.3%          0.0%           0.0%          1.8%         3.5%          0.0%      0.0%          7.3%       1.8%         3.8%     0.0%       2.9%
 Transport                       5.6%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         3.3%          0.0%           3.0%          1.8%         0.0%          2.0%      10.0%         2.4%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%       5.9%
 Basic infrastructure            5.6%           0.0%         6.7%          11.1%        13.3%          9.1%           8.1%          5.4%         7.1%          8.0%      20.0%         2.4%       3.6%         7.7%    25.0%       5.9%
 Poverty reduction              16.7%           0.0%        10.7%           5.6%         6.7%          18.2%          9.1%         10.7%         4.4%         10.0%      10.0%        12.2%       5.4%         6.4%    16.7%       5.9%
 Public sector reform            0.0%           0.0%         2.0%           5.6%         3.3%          6.1%           0.0%          0.0%         2.7%          2.0%      0.0%          2.4%       1.8%         2.6%     0.0%       5.9%
 Regional integration            0.0%          10.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 Global integration              0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.9%          0.0%      0.0%          2.4%       1.8%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Gender                          0.0%           0.0%         1.3%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           1.0%          0.0%         0.9%          0.0%      0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 Domestic private sector
                                 0.0%           0.0%         2.7%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           1.0%          1.8%         0.0%          4.0%      0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 development
 Foreign direct investment       5.6%           0.0%         1.3%           0.0%         6.7%          0.0%           1.0%          0.0%         2.7%          2.0%      0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%    0.0%        0.0%
 Water and sanitation            5.6%           0.0%         2.0%           0.0%        13.3%          0.0%           3.0%          0.0%         0.9%          0.0%      0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         0.0%    0.0%        2.9%
 Anti-corruption                 0.0%           0.0%         4.7%          16.7%         3.3%          6.1%          11.1%         10.7%         8.8%          6.0%      30.0%         7.3%      12.5%        12.8%    33.3%       2.9%
 Monitoring and evaluation       0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         6.7%          0.0%           1.0%          0.0%         1.8%          2.0%      0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         0.0%    0.0%        2.9%
 Public financial
                                 0.0%           0.0%         2.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           2.0%          7.1%         0.0%          2.0%      0.0%          2.4%       3.6%         1.3%     0.0%       5.9%
 management
 Job creation/employment        11.1%          20.0%         8.1%          11.1%         3.3%          9.1%           6.1%          8.9%        11.5%         10.0%      0.0%          7.3%      14.3%         7.7%     0.0%       2.9%
 Youth employment                0.0%           0.0%         2.0%           0.0%         3.3%          9.1%           3.0%          1.8%         5.3%          0.0%      0.0%          4.9%      10.7%         0.0%     0.0%       2.9%
 Governance                      0.0%          20.0%         4.0%           5.6%         3.3%          0.0%           3.0%          5.4%         3.5%          2.0%      0.0%          0.0%       0.0%        10.3%     0.0%       5.9%
 Financial markets               0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.9%          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Urban development               5.6%           0.0%         1.3%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.9%          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Natural resource
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%        10.0%          0.0%           1.0%          1.8%         0.0%          2.0%      0.0%          2.4%       1.8%         2.6%     0.0%       5.9%
 management
 Environmental
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           1.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%      0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 sustainability
 Equality of opportunity         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          3.0%           1.0%          1.8%         1.8%          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Health                          5.6%          10.0%         2.0%           5.6%         0.0%          0.0%           3.0%          3.6%         5.3%          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%       7.1%         3.8%     0.0%       5.9%
 Communicable/non-
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           1.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 communicable diseases
 Energy                          5.6%           0.0%         5.4%          11.1%         0.0%          3.0%           9.1%         10.7%         4.4%         14.0%      0.0%          7.3%       5.4%         5.1%     8.3%       2.9%
 Food security                  11.1%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          3.0%           2.0%          0.0%         0.9%          2.0%      0.0%          4.9%       3.6%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Climate change                  0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%          3.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 Disaster management             0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Agricultural development        5.6%           0.0%         4.7%           0.0%         3.3%          3.0%           6.1%          0.0%         4.4%          2.0%      0.0%          7.3%       1.8%         5.1%     0.0%       5.9%
 Regional trade                  0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          3.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          2.0%      0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 International trade             0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.9%          0.0%      10.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Crime and violence              0.0%           0.0%         2.0%           0.0%         0.0%          6.1%           2.0%          3.6%         4.4%          4.0%      0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         2.6%     0.0%       5.9%
 Economic growth                 0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           5.6%         0.0%          0.0%           3.0%          1.8%         0.9%          0.0%      10.0%         2.4%       1.8%         2.6%     0.0%       0.0%
 Law and justice                 0.0%          10.0%         0.0%           5.6%         0.0%          0.0%           1.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Regulatory and institutional
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         3.3%          0.0%           0.0%          1.8%         0.9%          0.0%      0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 framework
 Information and
 communications                  0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.9%          0.0%      10.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 technology




                                                                                                                   69
The World Bank                                                                                                    Nigeria                                                                                             Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Nigeria? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   rd
 3 MOST Important             Office of       Office of   Employee      Consultant                                               Financial    NGO/CBO/                  Indep.                   Faith-
 Percentage of                   the         Parliamen-      of a        on Bank                        Local        Private      Sector/      Private                   Govt.        Trade      Based                Judiciary
 Respondents                  President        tarian      Ministry       Project        PMU       Government        Sector        Bank      Foundation       Media       Inst.       Union      Group     Academia    Branch     Other
 Rural development               0.0%           0.0%         6.2%           0.0%         6.7%           3.0%          1.0%          5.4%         3.5%         4.0%       0.0%          2.4%       3.6%         6.4%     0.0%      0.0%
 Education                       5.3%          10.0%         2.7%          22.2%        16.7%           6.1%          6.1%         12.5%         5.3%         4.0%       10.0%         0.0%      14.3%        10.3%     0.0%      3.0%
 Social protection               0.0%           0.0%         3.4%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          3.6%         2.7%         2.0%       0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         5.1%     0.0%      0.0%
 Transport                       0.0%           0.0%         2.7%           0.0%         3.3%           0.0%          1.0%          1.8%         1.8%         0.0%       0.0%          2.4%       1.8%         1.3%     0.0%      0.0%
 Basic infrastructure            5.3%          20.0%         4.1%           5.6%        10.0%          15.2%          7.1%          5.4%         8.0%         6.0%       0.0%         12.2%       3.6%         2.6%     0.0%      6.1%
 Poverty reduction               5.3%           0.0%         8.2%          11.1%         6.7%           6.1%          3.1%          3.6%         4.4%         14.0%      20.0%        14.6%      10.7%         2.6%     8.3%      9.1%
 Public sector reform            0.0%          10.0%         1.4%          11.1%         3.3%           0.0%          2.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%      3.0%
 Regional integration            5.3%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.9%         4.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%      3.0%
 Global integration              0.0%          10.0%         1.4%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          1.8%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%      0.0%
 Gender                          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          1.0%          1.8%         1.8%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%      3.0%
 Domestic private sector
                                 5.3%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          1.0%          1.8%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 development
 Foreign direct investment       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          1.8%         1.8%         0.0%       0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         0.0%    0.0%        0.0%
 Water and sanitation           10.5%           0.0%         1.4%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          2.0%          1.8%         0.9%         2.0%       0.0%          2.4%       1.8%         1.3%    8.3%        0.0%
 Anti-corruption                26.3%           0.0%         4.8%           5.6%         0.0%          24.2%         10.2%          5.4%         4.4%         6.0%       0.0%          2.4%       7.1%        11.5%    25.0%       3.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation       0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         2.0%       10.0%         0.0%       3.6%         1.3%    0.0%        6.1%
 Public financial
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         6.7%           0.0%          1.0%          1.8%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%       3.0%
 management
 Job creation/employment         0.0%           0.0%         7.5%          11.1%        16.7%           3.0%         15.3%          5.4%         7.1%         8.0%       10.0%        17.1%      10.7%        11.5%    16.7%      12.1%
 Youth employment                0.0%           0.0%         4.8%           5.6%         0.0%           3.0%          5.1%          1.8%         0.0%         2.0%       0.0%          4.9%       1.8%         3.8%    0.0%        0.0%
 Governance                      0.0%           0.0%         2.7%           5.6%         3.3%           6.1%          3.1%          1.8%         4.4%         6.0%       10.0%         0.0%       0.0%         3.8%    0.0%        6.1%
 Financial markets               0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           3.0%          1.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         1.3%    0.0%        0.0%
 Urban development               0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         3.3%           0.0%          1.0%          1.8%         0.0%         4.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%    0.0%        3.0%
 Natural resource
                                 0.0%           0.0%         2.1%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          3.1%          1.8%         2.7%         2.0%       0.0%          2.4%       1.8%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 management
 Environmental
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           5.6%         6.7%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         3.5%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 sustainability
 Equality of opportunity         0.0%          10.0%         1.4%           0.0%         0.0%           3.0%          3.1%          1.8%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          4.9%       1.8%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 Health                         15.8%           0.0%         8.9%           0.0%         6.7%           9.1%          3.1%          3.6%         9.7%         4.0%       10.0%         7.3%       7.1%         9.0%     8.3%       6.1%
 Communicable/non-
                                 0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           5.6%         0.0%           0.0%          2.0%          1.8%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 communicable diseases
 Energy                         10.5%          10.0%         4.1%           0.0%         0.0%           6.1%          8.2%          7.1%         4.4%         16.0%      0.0%          2.4%       8.9%         3.8%     8.3%       9.1%
 Food security                   0.0%          10.0%         4.8%           0.0%         0.0%           3.0%          4.1%          1.8%         4.4%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         2.6%     8.3%       0.0%
 Climate change                  0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 Disaster management             5.3%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           6.1%          0.0%          0.0%         0.9%         4.0%       0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Agricultural development        5.3%          10.0%        10.3%           0.0%         0.0%           3.0%          8.2%         12.5%        12.4%         4.0%       10.0%         7.3%       5.4%         9.0%     8.3%      12.1%
 Regional trade                  0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           5.6%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          2.4%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 International trade             0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         2.6%     0.0%       0.0%
 Crime and violence              0.0%           0.0%         2.7%           5.6%         0.0%           0.0%          1.0%          3.6%         2.7%         4.0%       10.0%         4.9%       0.0%         0.0%     8.3%       3.0%
 Economic growth                 0.0%           0.0%         6.2%           0.0%         3.3%           0.0%          2.0%          5.4%         5.3%         2.0%       10.0%         2.4%       5.4%         0.0%     0.0%       3.0%
 Law and justice                 0.0%           0.0%         1.4%           0.0%         3.3%           0.0%          1.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          2.4%       1.8%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 Regulatory and institutional
                                 0.0%          10.0%         0.0%           0.0%         3.3%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       1.8%         1.3%     0.0%       0.0%
 framework
 Information and
 communications                  0.0%           0.0%         0.7%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          2.0%          1.8%         0.9%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%
 technology




                                                                                                                   70
The World Bank                                                                                                      Nigeria                                                                                             Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Nigeria? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of                   Office of    Office of     Employee      Consultant                                             Financial    NGO/CBO/                    Indep.                  Faith-
 Respondents                        the      Parliamen-        of a        on Bank                      Local         Private     Sector/       Private                    Govt.      Trade       Based                 Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)            President      tarian       Ministry       Project       PMU        Government       Sector       Bank       Foundation      Media         Inst.     Union       Group     Academia     Branch     Other
 Water and sanitation              10.5%         0.0%          5.9%           0.0%        6.7%          0.0%           2.0%         3.5%         3.5%         7.8%         0.0%       14.6%        1.7%        3.6%       16.7%      2.9%
 Equality of opportunity            0.0%         0.0%          8.6%          11.1%        6.7%          9.1%           5.9%        10.5%         7.0%         13.7%        10.0%      7.3%        12.1%        9.5%       0.0%      11.4%
 Economic growth                   31.6%       20.0%          25.7%          33.3%       16.7%          33.3%         27.7%        40.4%        30.4%         35.3%        40.0%      46.3%       32.8%       35.7%       41.7%     28.6%
 Climate change                     0.0%         0.0%          0.7%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         1.7%        1.2%       0.0%       0.0%
 Disaster management               15.8%         0.0%          1.3%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           1.0%         0.0%         3.5%         0.0%         0.0%       2.4%         1.7%        1.2%       8.3%       2.9%
 Regional integration               0.0%         0.0%          1.3%           0.0%        0.0%          3.0%           3.0%         0.0%         1.7%         2.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       5.7%
 Gender                             0.0%         0.0%          0.7%           0.0%        3.3%          0.0%           2.0%         1.8%         2.6%         0.0%         10.0%      0.0%         1.7%        1.2%       0.0%       0.0%
 Rural development                 15.8%       10.0%          27.0%          38.9%       30.0%          6.1%          24.8%        14.0%        22.6%         25.5%        10.0%      12.2%       32.8%       23.8%       16.7%     14.3%
 Urban development                  5.3%         0.0%          2.6%           5.6%        0.0%          24.2%          4.0%         3.5%         1.7%         3.9%         10.0%      2.4%         3.4%        1.2%       8.3%       2.9%
 Education                         52.6%       60.0%          36.2%          38.9%       23.3%          39.4%         33.7%        29.8%        38.3%         21.6%        10.0%      29.3%       22.4%       45.2%       41.7%     42.9%
 Regulatory framework               0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         1.8%         2.6%         2.0%         0.0%       2.4%         1.7%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure              10.5%       20.0%          15.8%          22.2%       20.0%          9.1%          24.8%        26.3%        12.2%         21.6%        10.0%      14.6%       22.4%       20.2%       25.0%     17.1%
 Social protection                  5.3%         0.0%          2.0%           5.6%        3.3%          0.0%           2.0%         3.5%         4.3%         2.0%         0.0%       2.4%         3.4%        9.5%       0.0%       8.6%
 Law and justice                    0.0%         0.0%          2.0%           5.6%        6.7%          9.1%           3.0%         0.0%         6.1%         5.9%         0.0%       4.9%         3.4%        1.2%       0.0%       5.7%
 Transport                          0.0%       10.0%           2.6%           0.0%       13.3%          0.0%           5.9%         3.5%         4.3%         5.9%         0.0%       4.9%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       2.9%
 Crime and violence                 5.3%         0.0%          1.3%           5.6%        3.3%          3.0%           7.9%         3.5%         4.3%         5.9%         10.0%      4.9%        10.3%        1.2%       8.3%       5.7%
 Communicable/non-
                                    0.0%         0.0%          0.7%           0.0%        3.3%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         1.7%         0.0%         0.0%       4.9%         0.0%        1.2%       0.0%       0.0%
 communicable diseases
 Information and
 communications                     0.0%       10.0%           3.9%          11.1%        0.0%          0.0%           3.0%         1.8%         1.7%         0.0%         10.0%      2.4%         1.7%        0.0%       0.0%       2.9%
 technology
 Anti-corruption                   31.6%       10.0%          22.4%          27.8%       23.3%          12.1%         29.7%        26.3%        21.7%         31.4%        30.0%      22.0%       25.9%       26.2%       33.3%     20.0%
 Domestic private sector
                                    0.0%         0.0%          5.3%           0.0%        3.3%          0.0%           1.0%         7.0%         2.6%         3.9%         0.0%       0.0%         5.2%        4.8%       0.0%       5.7%
 development
 Foreign direct investment          0.0%         0.0%          0.7%           5.6%        0.0%          0.0%           1.0%         0.0%         1.7%         0.0%         0.0%       4.9%         6.9%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Global integration                 0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           2.0%         1.8%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Energy                            26.3%       40.0%          22.4%          16.7%       20.0%          51.5%         18.8%        33.3%        21.7%         19.6%        30.0%      39.0%       22.4%       21.4%       41.7%     22.9%
 Public sector reform               0.0%       10.0%           2.0%          11.1%        0.0%          0.0%           1.0%         3.5%         0.9%         0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         5.2%        2.4%       0.0%       5.7%
 Monitoring and evaluation          0.0%         0.0%          0.7%           0.0%        3.3%          0.0%           2.0%         0.0%         3.5%         0.0%         0.0%       2.4%         0.0%        0.0%       8.3%       2.9%
 Governance                         0.0%       30.0%          10.5%          11.1%       16.7%          9.1%           3.0%         7.0%        10.4%         7.8%         10.0%      9.8%        12.1%       14.3%       0.0%      14.3%
 Natural resource
                                    5.3%         0.0%          5.3%           0.0%        6.7%          0.0%           6.9%         1.8%         2.6%         3.9%         10.0%      7.3%         0.0%        4.8%       0.0%       0.0%
 management
 Environmental
                                    0.0%       10.0%           2.0%           0.0%        3.3%          0.0%           1.0%         1.8%         3.5%         2.0%         0.0%       0.0%         1.7%        1.2%       0.0%       0.0%
 sustainability
 Health                            15.8%         0.0%         11.2%           5.6%       13.3%          18.2%          6.9%         7.0%        12.2%         9.8%         0.0%       2.4%         8.6%        7.1%       0.0%       8.6%
 Public financial
                                    0.0%         0.0%          2.0%           0.0%        3.3%          3.0%           0.0%         1.8%         4.3%         0.0%         0.0%       2.4%         0.0%        1.2%       0.0%       2.9%
 management
 Agricultural development          31.6%       10.0%          18.4%          11.1%       26.7%          18.2%         18.8%        22.8%        27.8%         23.5%        40.0%      14.6%       22.4%       26.2%       8.3%      22.9%
 Job creation/employment           31.6%       50.0%          45.4%          22.2%       36.7%          39.4%         34.7%        38.6%        33.9%         33.3%        40.0%      26.8%       34.5%       29.8%       41.7%     37.1%
 Financial markets                  0.0%         0.0%          0.7%           0.0%        0.0%          6.1%           1.0%         1.8%         0.0%         0.0%         10.0%      0.0%         0.0%        1.2%       0.0%       0.0%
 Trade and exports                  0.0%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%        0.0%          0.0%           2.0%         0.0%         0.9%         0.0%         0.0%       4.9%         0.0%        1.2%       0.0%       0.0%
 Food security                      0.0%         0.0%          9.9%           5.6%        3.3%          3.0%          10.9%         1.8%         3.5%         7.8%         10.0%      7.3%         1.7%        1.2%       0.0%       0.0%
 Other                              0.0%       10.0%           0.7%           0.0%        3.3%          3.0%           1.0%         0.0%         0.0%         2.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                    71
The World Bank                                                                                                   Nigeria                                                                                       Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Nigeria? (Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of                Office of      Office of     Employee     Consultant                                             Financial   NGO/CBO/                   Indep.              Faith-
  Respondents                     the       Parliamen-         of a       on Bank                     Local         Private      Sector/      Private                   Govt.      Trade   Based               Judiciary
  (Responses Combined)         President       tarian        Ministry      Project       PMU       Government       Sector        Bank      Foundation      Media        Inst.     Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
  Energy                         47.4%         55.6%          52.6%        61.1%        56.7%         45.5%          53.5%        45.6%       58.6%         76.0%       40.0%      63.4%   60.3%     47.6%      50.0%      48.6%
  Equality of opportunity         0.0%          0.0%           6.6%        11.1%        10.0%          0.0%          3.0%          7.0%        5.2%          8.0%       20.0%      12.2%    5.2%      3.6%       0.0%       2.9%
  Social protection               0.0%          0.0%           0.7%         5.6%         3.3%          3.0%          2.0%          3.5%        2.6%          0.0%       0.0%       2.4%     3.4%      1.2%       0.0%       0.0%
  Global integration              0.0%          0.0%           2.0%         0.0%         0.0%          3.0%          3.0%          7.0%        1.7%          4.0%       0.0%       2.4%     0.0%      1.2%       0.0%       5.7%
  Climate change                 15.8%          0.0%           1.3%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          1.0%          0.0%        0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       0.0%     1.7%      0.0%       8.3%       0.0%
  Anti-corruption                15.8%          0.0%          19.7%        27.8%        10.0%         51.5%          26.7%        36.8%       25.0%         14.0%       30.0%      26.8%   31.0%     21.4%      16.7%      22.9%
  Disaster management             0.0%          0.0%           0.7%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          1.0%          1.8%        0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       2.4%     0.0%      1.2%       0.0%       0.0%
  Rural development              15.8%          0.0%          13.2%         5.6%        23.3%          6.1%          7.9%          1.8%       15.5%         14.0%       10.0%      19.5%    5.2%     11.9%       0.0%       2.9%
  Foreign direct investment       5.3%         11.1%          11.2%         0.0%        10.0%          6.1%          5.0%          5.3%        8.6%          6.0%       10.0%      9.8%     8.6%      8.3%       8.3%      14.3%
  Urban development               0.0%          0.0%           2.6%         5.6%         6.7%         18.2%          6.9%          0.0%        1.7%          2.0%       10.0%      2.4%     3.4%      0.0%       0.0%       2.9%
  Water and sanitation            5.3%          0.0%           1.3%         0.0%         3.3%          0.0%          1.0%          3.5%        2.6%          0.0%       0.0%       9.8%     1.7%      2.4%       8.3%       0.0%
  Education                      52.6%         33.3%          34.2%        16.7%        13.3%         30.3%          28.7%        24.6%       31.9%         24.0%       0.0%       14.6%   17.2%     45.2%      33.3%      28.6%
  Information and
  communications                  5.3%         11.1%           2.6%        11.1%        10.0%          0.0%          3.0%          1.8%        4.3%          4.0%       0.0%       2.4%    12.1%      4.8%      16.7%       2.9%
  technology
  Regulatory and institutional
                                  0.0%          0.0%           0.7%         5.6%         3.3%          9.1%          1.0%         10.5%        1.7%          2.0%       10.0%      2.4%    3.4%       4.8%       8.3%       8.6%
  framework
  Communicable/non-
                                  0.0%          0.0%           1.3%         0.0%         0.0%          3.0%          0.0%          1.8%        0.0%          2.0%       0.0%       2.4%    3.4%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  communicable diseases
  Trade and exports               5.3%         22.2%           5.3%         5.6%         3.3%         24.2%          12.9%         7.0%        2.6%          4.0%       10.0%      14.6%   8.6%      11.9%       0.0%       8.6%
  Public sector reform            5.3%         11.1%           4.6%        11.1%         3.3%          3.0%          7.9%          1.8%        4.3%          2.0%       0.0%       2.4%    5.2%       1.2%       0.0%       5.7%
  Regional integration            0.0%         11.1%           0.0%         0.0%         3.3%          3.0%          0.0%          3.5%        0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       2.4%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Domestic private sector
                                  5.3%         22.2%           4.6%        11.1%        10.0%          3.0%          4.0%          5.3%        2.6%          4.0%       10.0%      0.0%    0.0%       7.1%       8.3%       8.6%
  development
  Job creation/employment        42.1%         22.2%          28.9%        38.9%        23.3%         39.4%          22.8%        35.1%       24.1%         26.0%       20.0%      17.1%   29.3%     16.7%      33.3%      37.1%
  Agricultural development       21.1%         33.3%          25.0%        27.8%        16.7%          9.1%          38.6%        24.6%       32.8%         36.0%       20.0%      31.7%   27.6%     29.8%      41.7%      17.1%
  Food security                   0.0%          0.0%           5.3%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          4.0%          3.5%        7.8%          6.0%       10.0%      4.9%     3.4%      3.6%      0.0%        2.9%
  Governance                      5.3%         11.1%          10.5%         5.6%        33.3%          9.1%          8.9%          8.8%       11.2%          6.0%       20.0%      9.8%     8.6%     21.4%      16.7%      14.3%
  Transport                       0.0%          0.0%           4.6%         5.6%        10.0%          0.0%          4.0%          0.0%        2.6%          6.0%       0.0%       4.9%     3.4%      3.6%      0.0%       11.4%
  Monitoring and evaluation       0.0%          0.0%           3.9%         0.0%         3.3%          3.0%          1.0%          0.0%        2.6%          6.0%       0.0%       2.4%     3.4%      1.2%      0.0%        0.0%
  Gender                          0.0%          0.0%           0.7%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          1.0%          0.0%        0.0%          2.0%       0.0%       2.4%     3.4%      0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
  Natural resource
                                  5.3%         22.2%          15.8%        16.7%         0.0%          6.1%          5.0%         10.5%        9.5%          8.0%       0.0%       9.8%    10.3%     11.9%       8.3%      14.3%
  management
  Environmental
                                  5.3%          0.0%           2.0%         0.0%         3.3%          0.0%          3.0%          5.3%        2.6%          2.0%       0.0%       4.9%    3.4%       1.2%       8.3%       2.9%
  sustainability
  Health                         10.5%          0.0%           7.2%         0.0%         0.0%          3.0%          4.0%          0.0%       11.2%         10.0%       0.0%       2.4%     5.2%      7.1%      0.0%        2.9%
  Basic infrastructure           21.1%         11.1%          15.1%        27.8%        30.0%          9.1%          25.7%        24.6%       13.8%         10.0%       60.0%      12.2%   15.5%     22.6%      8.3%       11.4%
  Law and justice                 0.0%          0.0%           2.0%         0.0%         0.0%          3.0%          3.0%          1.8%        3.4%          2.0%       0.0%       0.0%     3.4%      0.0%      16.7%       5.7%
  Crime and violence              0.0%          0.0%           2.6%         0.0%         3.3%          3.0%          3.0%          3.5%        1.7%          2.0%       0.0%       2.4%     1.7%      0.0%      0.0%        2.9%
  Public financial
                                  0.0%         11.1%           6.6%         0.0%         3.3%          3.0%          5.9%          7.0%        2.6%          6.0%       10.0%      0.0%    5.2%       2.4%       8.3%      11.4%
  management
  Financial markets               0.0%          0.0%           2.6%         0.0%         0.0%          3.0%          0.0%          5.3%        0.9%          2.0%       10.0%      0.0%    5.2%       4.8%       0.0%       2.9%
  Other                           5.3%         11.1%           0.7%         0.0%         3.3%          0.0%          1.0%          0.0%        0.9%          0.0%       0.0%       0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                  72
The World Bank                                                                                                                 Nigeria                                                                  Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective; 1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                73
The World Bank                                                                                                      Nigeria                                                                                              Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Nigeria, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in Nigeria?
   (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of                 Office of    Office of     Employee     Consultant                                                Financial    NGO/CBO/                   Indep.                    Faith-
 Respondents                      the      Parliamen-        of a       on Bank                        Local         Private      Sector/       Private                   Govt.         Trade      Based                 Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)          President     tarian        Ministry      Project       PMU         Government         Sector       Bank       Foundation     Media         Inst.        Union      Group      Academia    Branch     Other
 Rural development               15.8%       50.0%          37.3%        16.7%        40.0%            27.3%          31.7%        21.1%        32.2%         37.3%       40.0%         46.3%      34.5%        39.3%     25.0%      17.6%
 Education                       47.4%       50.0%          36.6%        33.3%        20.0%            66.7%          38.6%        40.4%        40.9%         25.5%       70.0%         39.0%      44.8%        48.8%     66.7%      38.2%
 Social protection                0.0%        0.0%           2.0%         0.0%         6.7%            0.0%            1.0%         1.8%         3.5%         2.0%        0.0%           2.4%       0.0%         2.4%      0.0%       2.9%
 Governance                       0.0%       30.0%           7.8%        16.7%        16.7%            0.0%            7.9%         5.3%         8.7%         5.9%        0.0%           9.8%       5.2%         6.0%      8.3%       8.8%
 Transport                        5.3%       20.0%           4.6%         5.6%        13.3%            0.0%            5.0%         3.5%         3.5%         2.0%        0.0%           0.0%       3.4%         1.2%      0.0%       8.8%
 Poverty reduction               36.8%       20.0%          23.5%        16.7%        20.0%            12.1%          22.8%        26.3%        16.5%         35.3%       30.0%         22.0%      17.2%        14.3%     16.7%      11.8%
 Public sector reform             5.3%       10.0%           5.2%        11.1%        10.0%            21.2%           2.0%         1.8%         2.6%         5.9%        0.0%           0.0%       5.2%         1.2%      0.0%      14.7%
 Regional integration             0.0%        0.0%           0.7%         0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            1.0%         0.0%         0.9%         0.0%        0.0%           0.0%       0.0%         1.2%      0.0%       0.0%
 Gender                           0.0%        0.0%           3.3%         5.6%         0.0%            3.0%            0.0%         3.5%         4.3%         0.0%        0.0%           2.4%       0.0%         2.4%      0.0%       0.0%
 Crime and violence              10.5%        0.0%           4.6%         0.0%         0.0%            12.1%           3.0%         5.3%         8.7%         7.8%        0.0%           4.9%      13.8%         2.4%      0.0%       5.9%
 Domestic private sector
                                  5.3%        0.0%           3.3%         0.0%         3.3%            0.0%            5.9%         5.3%         1.7%         3.9%        0.0%           4.9%       6.9%         1.2%      8.3%       5.9%
 development
 Foreign direct investment        0.0%        0.0%           5.2%        11.1%         0.0%            0.0%            5.0%         1.8%         5.2%         3.9%        0.0%           2.4%       3.4%         2.4%     16.7%       2.9%
 Water and sanitation             5.3%        0.0%           6.5%         0.0%        13.3%            0.0%            2.0%         1.8%         4.3%         3.9%        0.0%           2.4%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%        2.9%
 Energy                          21.1%       30.0%          35.3%        27.8%        16.7%            42.4%          33.7%        28.1%        28.7%         43.1%       30.0%         31.7%      25.9%        31.0%     41.7%      32.4%
 Monitoring and evaluation        0.0%        0.0%           1.3%        11.1%         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%         5.3%         1.7%         2.0%        0.0%           7.3%       3.4%         6.0%     0.0%        2.9%
 Public financial
                                  0.0%       10.0%           3.3%         5.6%         6.7%            3.0%            5.9%         5.3%         2.6%         3.9%        10.0%          7.3%       0.0%         3.6%      0.0%      11.8%
 management
 Job creation/employment         42.1%        0.0%          17.6%        27.8%        20.0%            33.3%          29.7%        17.5%        23.5%         27.5%       10.0%         22.0%      31.0%        22.6%     33.3%      32.4%
 Financial markets                0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            2.0%         3.5%         0.9%         0.0%        0.0%           2.4%       0.0%         2.4%     8.3%        5.9%
 Urban development                0.0%        0.0%           3.3%        11.1%         0.0%            0.0%            3.0%         1.8%         1.7%         5.9%        0.0%           0.0%       3.4%         0.0%     0.0%        2.9%
 Environmental
                                  0.0%        0.0%           3.9%         5.6%         3.3%            0.0%            2.0%         1.8%         0.9%         0.0%        0.0%           4.9%       1.7%         2.4%      0.0%       0.0%
 sustainability
 Equality of opportunity          0.0%        0.0%           1.3%         0.0%         6.7%            0.0%            3.0%         3.5%         1.7%         3.9%        0.0%           0.0%       5.2%         0.0%     0.0%        2.9%
 Health                          21.1%       20.0%          15.0%        16.7%        23.3%            15.2%          10.9%        22.8%        19.1%         17.6%       40.0%         17.1%      20.7%        15.5%     25.0%      23.5%
 Global integration               0.0%        0.0%           0.7%         0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.9%         0.0%        0.0%           4.9%       1.7%         1.2%     0.0%        0.0%
 Food security                    0.0%        0.0%           5.9%         5.6%         3.3%            3.0%            3.0%         1.8%         3.5%         2.0%        10.0%          7.3%       3.4%         2.4%     8.3%        0.0%
 Climate change                  15.8%        0.0%           2.0%         0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            1.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%           0.0%       1.7%         0.0%     8.3%        0.0%
 Agricultural development        21.1%       20.0%          26.8%        16.7%        16.7%            21.2%          27.7%        26.3%        30.4%         21.6%       20.0%         14.6%      24.1%        29.8%     8.3%       29.4%
 International trade              0.0%       10.0%           2.0%         0.0%         3.3%            0.0%            2.0%         1.8%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%           4.9%       1.7%         1.2%     0.0%        2.9%
 Regional trade                   0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         3.3%            0.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%           2.4%       0.0%         1.2%     8.3%        0.0%
 Economic growth                  0.0%       10.0%          11.8%        11.1%         6.7%            18.2%           9.9%         8.8%        12.2%         15.7%       0.0%          12.2%       8.6%        11.9%     0.0%        5.9%
 Law and justice                  5.3%        0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         3.3%            0.0%            2.0%         1.8%         1.7%         2.0%        0.0%           0.0%       0.0%         0.0%     0.0%        2.9%
 Regulatory framework            10.5%        0.0%           0.7%         0.0%         3.3%            0.0%            0.0%         5.3%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%           0.0%       3.4%         2.4%     0.0%        0.0%
 Communicable/non-
                                  0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         6.7%            0.0%            0.0%         1.8%         0.9%         2.0%        10.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 communicable diseases
 Basic infrastructure            10.5%       10.0%          11.1%        27.8%        26.7%            15.2%          15.8%        26.3%         8.7%         5.9%        20.0%          9.8%      13.8%        21.4%      8.3%       8.8%
 Natural resource
                                  0.0%       10.0%           1.3%         0.0%         6.7%            0.0%            5.0%         3.5%         4.3%         3.9%        0.0%           4.9%       5.2%         3.6%      0.0%       0.0%
 management
 Anti-corruption                  5.3%        0.0%           7.8%        11.1%         0.0%            6.1%           12.9%        14.0%        20.0%         7.8%        10.0%          0.0%       6.9%        11.9%      8.3%      11.8%
 Information and
 communications                   5.3%        0.0%           2.0%         0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            2.0%         0.0%         1.7%         0.0%        0.0%           4.9%       1.7%         3.6%      0.0%       2.9%
 technology
 Disaster management              0.0%        0.0%           1.3%         0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            1.0%         0.0%         0.0%         2.0%        0.0%           2.4%       0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%
 Other                            5.3%        0.0%           0.7%         0.0%         0.0%            0.0%            1.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%           0.0%       0.0%         2.4%      0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                     74
The World Bank                                                                                                         Nigeria                                                                                 Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Nigeria?
 GREATEST Value                Office of      Office of      Employee       Consultant                                                Financial     NGO/CBO/             Indep.            Faith-
 Percentage of                    the        Parliamen-         of a         on Bank                       Local          Private      Sector/         Private            Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
 Respondents                   President       tarian         Ministry        Project       PMU       Government           Sector       Bank        Foundation   Media    Inst.    Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 Financial resources             52.6%         44.4%           43.2%           33.3%        44.8%         57.6%            36.4%        48.2%          38.1%     37.3%    0.0%     39.0%   43.4%     40.2%      41.7%      43.8%
 Mobilizing third party
                                  0.0%         11.1%            6.2%            0.0%        20.7%          3.0%             4.0%         5.4%           8.0%     9.8%    0.0%      9.8%    5.7%       4.9%       0.0%       3.1%
 financial resources
 Technical assistance            10.5%         11.1%           15.1%           22.2%        6.9%           9.1%            17.2%        10.7%          11.5%     9.8%    71.4%     7.3%    20.8%     15.9%       8.3%      21.9%
 Policy advice                   21.1%          0.0%            4.1%           11.1%        6.9%           6.1%             6.1%        10.7%           8.0%     9.8%    14.3%     2.4%     5.7%      2.4%       8.3%      15.6%
 Development partner
                                  0.0%         11.1%           11.0%           16.7%        3.4%           6.1%             5.1%         8.9%           8.8%     11.8%   14.3%     7.3%    7.5%       6.1%       0.0%       6.3%
 coordination
 Data                             0.0%         11.1%            2.1%            0.0%        0.0%           3.0%             4.0%         0.0%           5.3%     2.0%    0.0%      7.3%    0.0%       4.9%      16.7%       0.0%
 Training/capacity building       0.0%         11.1%           15.8%           16.7%        10.3%          9.1%            18.2%         8.9%          12.4%     11.8%   0.0%      17.1%   5.7%      20.7%      16.7%       6.3%
 Studies/analyses                15.8%          0.0%            0.7%            0.0%        3.4%           3.0%             0.0%         0.0%           0.0%     3.9%    0.0%      2.4%    5.7%       2.4%      8.3%        3.1%
 Convening/facilitating           0.0%          0.0%            0.7%            0.0%        0.0%           0.0%             2.0%         1.8%           1.8%     2.0%    0.0%      2.4%    3.8%       1.2%      0.0%        0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank
                                  0.0%          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%        3.4%           0.0%             4.0%         3.6%           5.3%     2.0%    0.0%      4.9%    1.9%       1.2%       0.0%       0.0%
 expertise
 Other                            0.0%          0.0%            1.4%            0.0%        0.0%           3.0%             3.0%         1.8%           0.9%     0.0%    0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%

   nd
 2 GREATEST Value               Office of      Office of      Employee      Consultant                                               Financial    NGO/CBO/               Indep.            Faith-
 Percentage of                     the        Parliamen-         of a        on Bank                      Local          Private      Sector/       Private               Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
 Respondents                    President       tarian         Ministry       Project       PMU        Government        Sector        Bank       Foundation     Media     Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 Financial resources              0.0%          11.1%           14.5%         27.8%         7.1%         12.1%           15.2%         16.1%        10.5%        13.7%    16.7%    17.1%    5.7%      6.3%      16.7%      9.7%
 Mobilizing third party
                                  26.3%          11.1%         13.1%           0.0%         7.1%           15.2%         12.1%         7.1%          9.6%        13.7%   16.7%     7.3%    11.3%      2.5%      16.7%       3.2%
 financial resources
 Technical assistance             26.3%          33.3%         17.9%          27.8%         39.3%          9.1%          13.1%        16.1%          14.0%       21.6%   0.0%      26.8%   20.8%     16.3%      41.7%      22.6%
 Policy advice                     5.3%           0.0%          7.6%          22.2%         10.7%          6.1%          5.1%         10.7%           5.3%       7.8%    16.7%     14.6%    7.5%      8.8%      0.0%       12.9%
 Development partner
                                  10.5%          11.1%          9.0%           5.6%         7.1%           30.3%         12.1%         8.9%          12.3%       11.8%   33.3%     0.0%    13.2%      8.8%       0.0%      16.1%
 coordination
 Data                              0.0%           0.0%          3.4%           5.6%         0.0%           3.0%          6.1%          7.1%           3.5%       0.0%    0.0%      7.3%     7.5%      2.5%       0.0%       9.7%
 Training/capacity building       21.1%          33.3%         26.2%           5.6%         7.1%           15.2%         19.2%        21.4%          25.4%       21.6%   16.7%     17.1%   15.1%     22.5%       8.3%      12.9%
 Studies/analyses                  0.0%           0.0%          4.8%           0.0%         14.3%          6.1%          8.1%          5.4%           8.8%       3.9%    0.0%      4.9%     7.5%     15.0%       8.3%       9.7%
 Convening/facilitating            0.0%           0.0%          1.4%           0.0%         7.1%           3.0%          4.0%          1.8%           3.5%       3.9%    0.0%      2.4%     7.5%      7.5%       0.0%       3.2%
 Linkage to non-Bank
                                  10.5%          0.0%           2.1%           5.6%         0.0%           0.0%           4.0%         3.6%          5.3%        2.0%    0.0%      0.0%    3.8%       7.5%       8.3%       0.0%
 expertise
 Other                             0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%           1.0%         1.8%          1.8%        0.0%    0.0%      2.4%    0.0%       2.5%       0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                        75
The World Bank                                                                                                      Nigeria                                                                            Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of                   Office of      Office of     Employee    Consultant                                             Financial   NGO/CBO/             Indep.           Faith-
 Respondents                       the         Parliamen-        of a      on Bank                        Local       Private     Sector/      Private             Govt.   Trade   Based               Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)           President        tarian        Ministry     Project         PMU        Government      Sector      Bank      Foundation   Media    Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 Imposing technocratic
 solutions without regard to
                                  17.6%          50.0%          25.2%       50.0%          20.0%          15.6%        20.6%       28.1%       21.9%      30.6%   40.0%    25.0%   15.1%     34.1%      36.4%      33.3%
 political and societal
 realities
 Not exploring alternative
                                  23.5%           0.0%           9.3%        5.6%          10.0%          6.3%         18.6%        8.8%       10.5%      8.2%    20.0%    15.0%   15.1%     12.2%      18.2%       9.1%
 policy options
 Too bureaucratic in its
 operational policies and         23.5%          30.0%          23.2%       22.2%          23.3%          43.8%        19.6%        7.0%       20.2%      22.4%   10.0%    25.0%   18.9%     20.7%       9.1%      21.2%
 procedures
 Staff too inaccessible           17.6%           0.0%          17.9%        5.6%          20.0%          37.5%        13.4%       12.3%       19.3%      12.2%   20.0%    25.0%   22.6%     24.4%      36.4%       6.1%
 Arrogant in its approach         11.8%          10.0%           3.3%        5.6%           3.3%          3.1%          6.2%        1.8%        1.8%      6.1%    0.0%     5.0%     3.8%      2.4%      0.0%        0.0%
 Not client focused                5.9%           0.0%           4.6%        0.0%           3.3%          3.1%         11.3%        1.8%        6.1%      12.2%   0.0%     2.5%     5.7%      7.3%      9.1%        9.1%
 The credibility of its
                                   0.0%           0.0%           3.3%       11.1%           6.7%          3.1%          6.2%        8.8%       3.5%       4.1%    0.0%     5.0%    5.7%       4.9%       9.1%       0.0%
 knowledge/data
 Not willing to honestly
 criticize policies and reform     5.9%           0.0%          11.9%       22.2%          23.3%          15.6%        13.4%       14.0%       9.6%       14.3%   10.0%    5.0%    17.0%      8.5%       0.0%      15.2%
 efforts in the country
 Too influenced by
                                  11.8%          10.0%          17.2%       16.7%           3.3%          15.6%        20.6%       17.5%       16.7%      14.3%   20.0%    22.5%   13.2%     17.1%       0.0%      24.2%
 developed countries
 Not enough public
                                   5.9%          10.0%          19.2%       11.1%          16.7%          12.5%        21.6%       28.1%       17.5%      22.4%   30.0%    20.0%   35.8%      9.8%      27.3%      18.2%
 disclosure of its work
 World Bank processes too
                                  23.5%          20.0%          21.9%       16.7%          26.7%          9.4%          9.3%        7.0%       10.5%      8.2%    0.0%     25.0%   1.9%       6.1%      18.2%       9.1%
 slow and complex
 Not aligned with country
                                  11.8%          10.0%           7.3%        5.6%           6.7%          0.0%          5.2%       10.5%       7.9%       2.0%    10.0%    5.0%    7.5%       8.5%       0.0%       9.1%
 priorities
 Not aligned with other
 development partners’             0.0%           0.0%           2.6%        0.0%           0.0%          6.3%          2.1%        5.3%       5.3%       12.2%   0.0%     0.0%    5.7%       2.4%       0.0%       0.0%
 work
 Not collaborating enough
                                  11.8%           0.0%           4.6%        0.0%          10.0%          12.5%         4.1%        8.8%       15.8%      14.3%   30.0%    5.0%    5.7%       9.8%       9.1%      15.2%
 with non-state actors
 Not adequately sensitive to
 political/social realities in    17.6%          20.0%          12.6%       16.7%           3.3%          6.3%          8.2%       21.1%       10.5%      12.2%   10.0%    5.0%    5.7%      14.6%       0.0%       9.1%
 Nigeria
 Not enough engagement at
                                   0.0%          30.0%           7.9%       11.1%          13.3%          3.1%          6.2%        5.3%       9.6%       2.0%    0.0%     10.0%   7.5%      11.0%       9.1%       3.0%
 state levels
 Too much engagement at
                                   0.0%           0.0%           0.7%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          1.0%        0.0%       3.5%       0.0%    0.0%     2.5%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       3.0%
 state levels
 Other                             0.0%          10.0%           0.7%        0.0%           3.3%          0.0%          4.1%        3.5%       1.8%       0.0%    0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       2.4%       0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                    76
The World Bank                                                                                                      Nigeria                                                                            Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of                Office of      Office of    Employee       Consultant                                             Financial   NGO/CBO/             Indep.            Faith-
 Respondents                     the        Parliamen-       of a         on Bank                       Local        Private     Sector/      Private             Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)         President       tarian       Ministry        Project        PMU        Government       Sector      Bank      Foundation   Media     Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 Investment lending             33.3%         30.0%         39.7%           27.8%         53.3%         57.6%         50.0%       61.4%       39.5%      51.0%    70.0%    51.3%   48.3%     56.0%      25.0%      45.7%
 Capacity development           44.4%         50.0%         59.6%           55.6%         46.7%         45.5%         44.1%       52.6%       54.4%      45.1%    40.0%    30.8%   48.3%     50.0%      50.0%      45.7%
 Policy based lending /
 Budget support to the          22.2%         30.0%         13.2%           16.7%         13.3%          0.0%         10.8%      12.3%        11.4%      11.8%   0.0%      15.4%   12.1%      8.3%      16.7%      14.3%
 Government
 Knowledge
                                11.1%         10.0%         13.9%            5.6%         10.0%          0.0%         15.7%      15.8%        23.7%      7.8%    10.0%     23.1%   19.0%     20.2%       8.3%      14.3%
 products/services
 Technical assistance           44.4%         60.0%         38.4%           77.8%         43.3%         30.3%         37.3%      29.8%        31.6%      35.3%   60.0%     41.0%   27.6%     33.3%      50.0%      37.1%
 Trust Fund management          11.1%          0.0%         16.6%            5.6%         13.3%         39.4%         21.6%      21.1%        24.6%      41.2%   20.0%     12.8%   24.1%      9.5%      16.7%      17.1%
 Other                           5.6%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%         0.0%           3.0%          1.0%       1.8%         0.0%      0.0%    0.0%      0.0%     1.7%      3.6%      0.0%        8.6%
 Don’t know                      0.0%          0.0%          4.6%            0.0%         6.7%           0.0%         11.8%       3.5%         6.1%      2.0%    0.0%      17.9%    3.4%      4.8%      8.3%        2.9%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in reducing poverty in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of                Office of      Office of     Employee       Consultant                                            Financial   NGO/CBO/             Indep.            Faith-
 Respondents                     the        Parliamen-         of a        on Bank                       Local        Private    Sector/      Private             Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)         President       tarian        Ministry        Project        PMU        Government      Sector      Bank      Foundation   Media     Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 Investment lending             38.9%         20.0%           28.3%          41.2%        20.0%          18.2%        25.0%       26.8%       29.8%      27.5%    0.0%     20.5%   27.6%     25.9%      33.3%      14.7%
 Capacity development           27.8%         10.0%           19.7%          23.5%        26.7%          33.3%        22.0%       14.3%       12.3%      23.5%    50.0%    20.5%   17.2%      9.9%       8.3%      23.5%
 Policy based lending /
 Budget support to the          22.2%         20.0%           28.3%          23.5%        30.0%          24.2%        30.0%      35.7%        31.6%      27.5%   50.0%     33.3%   25.9%     32.1%      25.0%      17.6%
 Government
 Knowledge
                                38.9%         20.0%           18.4%          29.4%        26.7%          48.5%        26.0%      28.6%        14.9%      19.6%   50.0%     33.3%   17.2%     21.0%      25.0%      17.6%
 products/services
 Technical assistance            0.0%         50.0%           17.1%           5.9%        20.0%          3.0%         21.0%      14.3%        20.2%      19.6%   20.0%     17.9%   22.4%     18.5%      33.3%      17.6%
 Trust Fund management          33.3%         40.0%           36.8%          52.9%        43.3%          27.3%        38.0%      46.4%        42.1%      27.5%   20.0%     28.2%   37.9%     37.0%      50.0%      29.4%
 Other                           0.0%         10.0%            0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.9%      3.9%    0.0%      0.0%     1.7%      1.2%      0.0%        2.9%
 Don’t know                      5.6%         10.0%           18.4%           5.9%        10.0%          12.1%        20.0%      19.6%        18.4%      23.5%   0.0%      20.5%   19.0%     17.3%      0.0%       32.4%




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                     77
The World Bank                                                                                                         Nigeria                                                                                               Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)
  Percentage of                    Office of      Office of    Employee       Consultant                                              Financial   NGO/CBO/                     Indep.                 Faith-
  Respondents                         the        Parliamen-       of a         on Bank                       Local        Private      Sector/       Private                    Govt.      Trade      Based                  Judiciary
  (Responses Combined)             President       tarian       Ministry        Project        PMU       Government        Sector       Bank      Foundation       Media         Inst.     Union      Group      Academia      Branch    Other
  NGOs                               63.2%         30.0%         40.1%           41.2%        26.7%         57.6%          32.7%        36.8%        71.6%         43.1%        11.1%      53.7%      36.8%       33.3%        58.3%     23.5%
  Local Government                   26.3%         30.0%         25.0%            5.9%        26.7%          6.1%          14.9%        17.5%        12.9%         19.6%        66.7%      17.1%      12.3%       17.9%        25.0%     17.6%
  Beneficiaries                       5.3%         10.0%         10.5%           23.5%        13.3%         18.2%          12.9%        15.8%        10.3%         19.6%        11.1%       4.9%       8.8%        9.5%         8.3%      8.8%
  Private sector                     10.5%         20.0%         16.4%           35.3%        10.0%         24.2%          28.7%        15.8%         8.6%         13.7%        22.2%      24.4%      17.5%       14.3%         8.3%     29.4%
  Community Based
                                     36.8%          0.0%         26.3%           11.8%        36.7%          6.1%          18.8%        24.6%        25.9%         13.7%        0.0%       24.4%      35.1%       21.4%         8.3%     17.6%
  Organizations
  Development partner
                                      5.3%         20.0%         13.2%           23.5%         6.7%          3.0%          10.9%        14.0%        10.3%         11.8%        11.1%      19.5%       7.0%        9.5%         0.0%     17.6%
  community
  Foundations                         0.0%          0.0%          3.9%            0.0%        13.3%          6.1%           5.0%         3.5%         6.9%         7.8%         0.0%        9.8%       7.0%        4.8%        16.7%      2.9%
  Academia/think
                                      0.0%          0.0%         11.8%            5.9%        10.0%          3.0%          17.8%        12.3%        13.8%         2.0%         22.2%       2.4%       5.3%       48.8%         8.3%     11.8%
  tanks/research institutes
  Parliament                          0.0%         20.0%          1.3%            0.0%         0.0%          9.1%           1.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        2.4%       0.0%        0.0%        16.7%      2.9%
  Media                               5.3%         20.0%          6.6%           17.6%         6.7%         21.2%           8.9%         8.8%         4.3%         33.3%        0.0%        7.3%      10.5%        6.0%         0.0%     11.8%
  State governments                  15.8%         50.0%         24.3%           17.6%        36.7%         18.2%           8.9%        17.5%        11.2%         9.8%         22.2%      12.2%      15.8%       10.7%        16.7%     23.5%
  Governors’ Forum                    0.0%          0.0%          1.3%            5.9%         3.3%          3.0%           1.0%         7.0%         2.6%         2.0%         11.1%       0.0%       0.0%        1.2%         8.3%      5.9%
  Faith based organizations           5.3%          0.0%          6.6%            5.9%         6.7%         18.2%          11.9%        10.5%         9.5%         5.9%         0.0%        0.0%      33.3%        6.0%         0.0%      2.9%
  Youth                              21.1%         10.0%          9.2%            0.0%         3.3%          3.0%          24.8%        15.8%        11.2%         13.7%        22.2%      14.6%      10.5%       15.5%        25.0%     14.7%
  Other                               0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          3.0%           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         2.0%         0.0%        2.4%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%      2.9%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                        78
The World Bank                                                                                                             Nigeria                                                                                  Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Nigeria, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10- To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of                  Office of       Office of     Employee      Consultant                                               Financial    NGO/CBO/                     Indep.           Faith-
 Respondents                       the        Parliamen-         of a         on Bank                       Local          Private    Sector/      Private                      Govt.   Trade   Based               Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)           President        tarian        Ministry       Project         PMU       Government         Sector      Bank      Foundation            Media    Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 The World Bank works too
                                  27.8%          20.0%          20.5%          11.1%         10.0%         41.9%           21.8%       12.3%        17.1%               6.1%   20.0%    20.0%   5.2%       7.2%      18.2%      18.2%
 slowly
 The Government works
                                  33.3%          30.0%          32.5%          44.4%         36.7%         12.9%           29.7%       35.1%        33.3%              34.7%   30.0%    40.0%   37.9%     31.3%       9.1%      36.4%
 inefficiently
 There is not an adequate
 level of citizen/civil society   33.3%          20.0%          22.5%          16.7%         16.7%         19.4%           21.8%       24.6%        27.0%              28.6%   30.0%    27.5%   19.0%     25.3%      27.3%      27.3%
 participation
 Poor development partner
                                  11.1%          10.0%          22.5%          27.8%         23.3%         38.7%           22.8%       12.3%        19.8%              26.5%   50.0%    22.5%   22.4%     21.7%      18.2%      15.2%
 coordination
 The World Bank does not
 do adequate follow                5.6%          20.0%          10.6%          16.7%         10.0%          3.2%            8.9%       28.1%        10.8%              16.3%   10.0%    22.5%   13.8%     22.9%      18.2%      12.1%
 through/follow-up
 Lack of/inadequate levels
                                  11.1%          20.0%          19.9%          27.8%         10.0%         12.9%           19.8%       19.3%        22.5%              18.4%   20.0%    12.5%   20.7%     12.0%      18.2%      18.2%
 of capacity in Government
 Political pressures and
                                  27.8%          10.0%          35.8%          22.2%         60.0%         19.4%           35.6%       21.1%        23.4%              36.7%   10.0%    15.0%   37.9%     26.5%      36.4%      33.3%
 obstacles
 Reforms are not well
 thought out in light of          27.8%          20.0%          21.2%           5.6%         10.0%         16.1%           17.8%       22.8%        21.6%              10.2%   20.0%    20.0%   12.1%     22.9%      27.3%      12.1%
 country challenges
 The World Bank is not
 sensitive enough to
                                   5.6%          30.0%           7.9%          16.7%         16.7%         22.6%           12.9%       19.3%        16.2%              16.3%   10.0%    17.5%   10.3%     20.5%       9.1%      15.2%
 political/social realities on
 the ground
 Other                             0.0%           0.0%           0.7%           0.0%          3.3%          3.2%            3.0%        0.0%         1.8%               2.0%   0.0%     0.0%    5.2%       4.8%       0.0%       0.0%



                                                                                                                           79
The World Bank                                                                                                             Nigeria                                                                Country Survey 2013

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                            80
The World Bank                                                                                                         Nigeria                                                                               Country Survey 2013

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge
How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge work and activities (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?*
                                   Office of     Office of Employee      Consultant                                                  Financial    NGO/CBO/             Indep.            Faith-
  Percentage of                       the       Parliamen-    of a        on Bank                           Local        Private      Sector/       Private             Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
  Respondents                      President      tarian    Ministry       Project          PMU         Government       Sector        Bank       Foundation   Media     Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
  Weekly                             11.1%         0.0%       6.8%           5.6%          23.3%            0.0%          5.9%          7.0%         2.6%      7.8%     20.0%    9.8%     0.0%     10.7%       8.3%       5.7%
  Monthly                            27.8%        10.0%      14.9%          44.4%          26.7%            3.0%         10.9%          7.0%        11.3%      17.6%    0.0%     4.9%     3.5%     23.8%       8.3%      20.0%
  A few times a year                  5.6%        30.0%      33.1%          16.7%          26.7%            15.2%        26.7%         36.8%        24.3%      23.5%    20.0%    24.4%   15.8%     32.1%       8.3%      28.6%
  Rarely                             38.9%        30.0%      28.4%          16.7%          16.7%            42.4%        32.7%         22.8%        30.4%      33.3%    40.0%    17.1%   36.8%     21.4%      50.0%       5.7%
  Never                              16.7%        30.0%      16.9%          16.7%           6.7%            39.4%        23.8%         26.3%        31.3%      17.6%    20.0%    43.9%   43.9%     11.9%      25.0%      40.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                        81
The World Bank                                                                                                       Nigeria                                                                                               Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)
When thinking about the development challenges in Nigeria, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its knowledge work and activities in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of                 Office of    Office of       Employee     Consultant                                               Financial     NGO/CBO/                     Indep.                 Faith-
 Respondents                      the      Parliamen-          of a       on Bank                       Local         Private      Sector/       Private                      Govt.      Trade      Based                  Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)          President      tarian         Ministry      Project        PMU       Government        Sector        Bank       Foundation     Media            Inst.     Union      Group    Academia       Branch     Other
 Public sector reform            10.5%        30.0%           13.2%        27.8%          16.7%         6.1%           7.8%          5.3%          7.8%        13.7%          0.0%       12.2%      12.1%        2.4%       16.7%      14.3%
 Gender                           0.0%         0.0%            4.0%         5.6%          0.0%          0.0%           2.0%          0.0%          1.7%        2.0%           10.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Education                       52.6%        40.0%           38.4%        27.8%          30.0%        63.6%          47.1%         29.8%         46.1%        39.2%          90.0%      43.9%      46.6%       53.0%       58.3%      37.1%
 Domestic private sector
                                  0.0%         0.0%            5.3%         5.6%          6.7%          3.0%           3.9%          3.5%          5.2%        5.9%           0.0%        2.4%       1.7%        4.8%        8.3%      20.0%
 development
 Foreign direct investment       10.5%         0.0%            2.0%         5.6%          3.3%          6.1%           1.0%          0.0%          4.3%        3.9%           10.0%       2.4%       8.6%        3.6%        0.0%       2.9%
 Water and sanitation             5.3%         0.0%            4.0%         0.0%          3.3%          3.0%           2.0%          1.8%          5.2%        0.0%           0.0%        4.9%       3.4%        1.2%        0.0%       0.0%
 Trade and exports
                                  0.0%         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%          6.7%          0.0%           6.9%          0.0%          1.7%        3.9%           10.0%       7.3%       0.0%        2.4%        0.0%       5.7%
 (regional/international)
 Economic growth                 26.3%        10.0%           19.9%        27.8%          10.0%        12.1%          21.6%         24.6%         19.1%        25.5%          50.0%      17.1%       8.6%       18.1%        8.3%       8.6%
 Energy                          36.8%        20.0%           38.4%        38.9%          20.0%        36.4%          37.3%         42.1%         33.0%        35.3%          30.0%      34.1%      43.1%       36.1%       41.7%      28.6%
 Disaster management              5.3%         0.0%            5.3%         0.0%          3.3%          3.0%           2.9%          3.5%          2.6%        3.9%           10.0%       4.9%       5.2%        0.0%        0.0%       2.9%
 Monitoring and evaluation        0.0%        10.0%            4.6%        11.1%          0.0%          9.1%           2.0%          1.8%          0.9%        2.0%           0.0%       12.2%       0.0%        0.0%        8.3%       0.0%
 Governance                      21.1%        30.0%           14.6%        22.2%          16.7%        24.2%          15.7%         14.0%          7.8%        13.7%          0.0%        2.4%       5.2%       10.8%        8.3%      14.3%
 Social protection (e.g.,
 pensions, targeted social        0.0%        10.0%            1.3%         0.0%          10.0%         0.0%           0.0%          3.5%          1.7%        2.0%           0.0%        2.4%       1.7%        4.8%        0.0%       0.0%
 assistance)
 Climate change                   5.3%         0.0%            0.7%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%           2.0%          0.0%          0.9%        0.0%           0.0%        2.4%       0.0%        1.2%        0.0%       0.0%
 Poverty reduction               26.3%        30.0%           15.2%        22.2%          26.7%         9.1%          21.6%         19.3%         20.9%        29.4%          30.0%      31.7%      17.2%       19.3%       25.0%      25.7%
 Law and justice                  0.0%         0.0%            1.3%         0.0%          6.7%          3.0%           1.0%          3.5%          4.3%        0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       5.2%        0.0%        8.3%       5.7%
 Anti-corruption                 26.3%        30.0%           19.9%        11.1%          20.0%        15.2%          33.3%         29.8%         26.1%        19.6%          0.0%        7.3%      13.8%       21.7%       25.0%      25.7%
 Financial markets                0.0%         0.0%            1.3%         0.0%          0.0%          9.1%           0.0%          3.5%          0.9%        2.0%           10.0%       7.3%       1.7%        1.2%        0.0%       0.0%
 Equality of opportunity          0.0%         0.0%            2.6%         0.0%          0.0%          9.1%           0.0%          0.0%          2.6%        0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       1.7%        2.4%        0.0%       2.9%
 Urban development               15.8%         0.0%            3.3%         0.0%          3.3%          0.0%           2.0%          1.8%          0.9%        2.0%           0.0%        0.0%       3.4%        0.0%        8.3%       0.0%
 Crime and violence               0.0%         0.0%            6.0%         0.0%          10.0%        15.2%           2.9%          5.3%          7.8%        5.9%           0.0%        7.3%       8.6%        4.8%        0.0%       0.0%
 Regional integration             0.0%         0.0%            0.7%         0.0%          3.3%          3.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        2.0%           0.0%        2.4%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       2.9%
 Information and
 communications                   0.0%         0.0%            2.0%         5.6%          0.0%          3.0%           2.9%          3.5%          1.7%        2.0%           0.0%        7.3%       3.4%        3.6%        8.3%       5.7%
 technology
 Transport                        5.3%         0.0%            5.3%         5.6%          6.7%          6.1%           3.9%          5.3%          1.7%        7.8%           0.0%        9.8%       1.7%        2.4%        8.3%       0.0%
 Agricultural development        10.5%        10.0%           19.2%        27.8%          20.0%        12.1%          28.4%         24.6%         20.9%        23.5%          20.0%      14.6%      27.6%       34.9%       33.3%      20.0%
 Natural resource
                                  0.0%        10.0%            2.0%         5.6%          3.3%          0.0%           2.9%          5.3%          2.6%        0.0%           0.0%        0.0%       0.0%        2.4%        0.0%       2.9%
 management
 Public financial
                                  0.0%        10.0%            1.3%         5.6%          6.7%          0.0%           2.0%          5.3%          3.5%        2.0%           0.0%        0.0%       1.7%        2.4%        0.0%       8.6%
 management
 Job creation/employment         26.3%        30.0%           22.5%         5.6%          20.0%        18.2%          20.6%         26.3%         21.7%        23.5%          0.0%       17.1%      32.8%       25.3%        8.3%      34.3%
 Health                          10.5%        20.0%           14.6%        11.1%          13.3%        12.1%          12.7%          1.8%         20.0%        3.9%           20.0%      12.2%      22.4%        7.2%        8.3%      14.3%
 Rural development                0.0%        10.0%           10.6%        16.7%          13.3%         3.0%           4.9%          8.8%          9.6%        15.7%          0.0%       14.6%       6.9%       12.0%        0.0%       2.9%
 Global integration               0.0%         0.0%            0.7%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%        2.4%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Food security                    0.0%         0.0%            5.3%        11.1%          3.3%          0.0%           1.0%          5.3%          5.2%        0.0%           0.0%        7.3%       0.0%        2.4%        0.0%       0.0%
 Environmental
                                  5.3%         0.0%            2.6%         0.0%          6.7%          0.0%           0.0%          1.8%          0.0%        2.0%           0.0%        2.4%       1.7%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 sustainability
 Regulatory framework             0.0%         0.0%            0.7%         0.0%          6.7%          3.0%           0.0%          1.8%          0.0%        2.0%           0.0%        0.0%       1.7%        3.6%        0.0%       2.9%
 Basic infrastructure             0.0%         0.0%            6.0%         0.0%          3.3%          3.0%           6.9%         10.5%          7.8%        5.9%           10.0%       4.9%      12.1%       10.8%       16.7%       8.6%
 Communicable/non-
                                  0.0%         0.0%            0.7%         0.0%          0.0%          3.0%           0.0%          3.5%          0.0%        0.0%           0.0%        2.4%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 communicable diseases




                                                                                                                      82
The World Bank                                                                                                             Nigeria                        Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)
In Nigeria, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities are at: (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Nigeria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank's knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                            83
The World Bank                                                                                                                 Nigeria                              Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                84
The World Bank                                                                                                          Nigeria      Country Survey 2013

E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten-point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                        85
The World Bank                                                                                                     Nigeria                                                                            Country Survey 2013

F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria (continued)

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of                 Office of     Office of     Employee       Consultant                                           Financial   NGO/CBO/             Indep.            Faith-
 Respondents                      the      Parliamen-          of a        on Bank                       Local       Private    Sector/      Private             Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)          President      tarian        Ministry        Project         PMU       Government      Sector     Bank      Foundation   Media    Inst.    Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 Improve the quality of its
 experts as related to           26.3%        40.0%          50.3%           33.3%         50.0%        51.5%         52.5%     50.9%        38.1%      34.7%   66.7%     42.5%   35.1%     50.6%      25.0%      52.9%
 Nigeria’s specific challenges
 Reduce the complexity of
 obtaining World Bank            57.9%        30.0%          37.3%           33.3%         33.3%        30.3%         27.7%     28.1%        39.8%      36.7%   33.3%     50.0%   33.3%     28.9%      33.3%      35.3%
 financing
 Focus primarily on
                                 21.1%        10.0%           9.8%           16.7%         16.7%         6.1%         12.9%     17.5%        20.4%      16.3%   22.2%     12.5%   12.3%     14.5%       0.0%       5.9%
 advocacy issues
 Improve the
 competitiveness of its
                                 10.5%         0.0%           7.8%            5.6%         13.3%         9.1%         13.9%     12.3%        8.0%       12.2%   0.0%      10.0%   14.0%     13.3%      16.7%       8.8%
 financing compared to
 markets
 Ensure greater selectivity in
                                 36.8%        20.0%          17.0%           27.8%         16.7%        18.2%         15.8%     17.5%        15.9%      8.2%    22.2%     20.0%   22.8%      8.4%      25.0%      17.6%
 its work
 Provide more adequate
 data/knowledge/statistics/
                                  5.3%        20.0%          28.8%           16.7%         20.0%        33.3%         31.7%     22.8%        24.8%      24.5%   11.1%     17.5%   19.3%     32.5%      16.7%      14.7%
 figures on Nigeria’s
 economy
 Offer more innovative
                                 15.8%        20.0%          15.7%           27.8%          3.3%        12.1%          6.9%     17.5%        15.0%      20.4%   22.2%     20.0%   22.8%     15.7%      25.0%       5.9%
 financial products
 Offer more innovative
                                 10.5%        20.0%          13.7%           16.7%         20.0%         6.1%         10.9%      8.8%        13.3%      12.2%   0.0%      7.5%    14.0%     14.5%       8.3%       8.8%
 knowledge services
 Increase availability of Fee-
                                  0.0%         0.0%           4.6%            5.6%          3.3%         0.0%          6.9%      5.3%        9.7%       4.1%    0.0%      2.5%    5.3%       6.0%       8.3%       8.8%
 Based services
 Work faster                     10.5%        20.0%          10.5%           11.1%         16.7%        18.2%         15.8%      7.0%        9.7%       24.5%   22.2%     12.5%   15.8%      3.6%      16.7%      17.6%
 Other                            0.0%         0.0%           0.7%            0.0%          6.7%         0.0%          3.0%      8.8%        0.9%       0.0%    0.0%      0.0%     0.0%      4.8%      8.3%        5.9%



G. Communication and Information Sharing

How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of                  Office of     Office of   Employee      Consultant                                             Financial   NGO/CBO/             Indep.            Faith-
 Respondents                       the      Parliamen-       of a        on Bank                      Local        Private      Sector/      Private             Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)           President      tarian      Ministry       Project        PMU       Government      Sector        Bank      Foundation   Media     Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 Local newspapers                 63.2%        60.0%        65.5%         50.0%          73.3%        25.8%         60.8%        60.7%       50.4%      46.0%    60.0%    61.5%   40.4%     56.6%      75.0%      65.7%
 International newspapers         10.5%         0.0%         2.7%         16.7%          10.0%        6.5%          3.9%          8.9%        4.3%      6.0%     10.0%    7.7%    15.8%      7.2%       8.3%      11.4%
 Local radio                      26.3%        30.0%        27.0%          5.6%          10.0%        58.1%         17.6%         5.4%       28.7%      24.0%    20.0%    35.9%   33.3%      4.8%      16.7%      22.9%
 International radio               5.3%         0.0%         2.7%         11.1%          6.7%         3.2%          7.8%          0.0%        4.3%      12.0%    20.0%    5.1%     7.0%      4.8%       0.0%       8.6%
 Local television                 57.9%        10.0%        35.8%         38.9%          33.3%        67.7%         30.4%        37.5%       38.3%      38.0%    40.0%    46.2%   42.1%     26.5%      41.7%      31.4%
 International television         10.5%        20.0%        15.5%         11.1%          16.7%        9.7%          20.6%        21.4%       10.4%      10.0%    0.0%     5.1%    10.5%     18.1%      16.7%      17.1%
 Periodicals                       5.3%         0.0%         6.1%          5.6%          6.7%         0.0%          4.9%          7.1%        3.5%      4.0%     10.0%    0.0%     1.8%     10.8%       0.0%       2.9%
 Internet                         15.8%        60.0%        30.4%         50.0%          40.0%        19.4%         32.4%        42.9%       33.9%      46.0%    40.0%    25.6%   31.6%     57.8%      16.7%      22.9%
 Social media                      0.0%        10.0%         4.7%          0.0%          0.0%         3.2%          8.8%          7.1%        8.7%      10.0%    0.0%     5.1%     7.0%      4.8%       8.3%       5.7%
 Blogs                             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          1.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Mobile phones                     5.3%         0.0%         5.4%          0.0%          3.3%         0.0%          8.8%          5.4%        5.2%      2.0%     0.0%     2.6%     5.3%      6.0%       0.0%       2.9%
 Instant messaging                 5.3%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        2.6%      0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       8.3%       0.0%
 Other                             0.0%         0.0%         0.7%          5.6%          0.0%         0.0%          2.0%          3.6%        0.9%      0.0%     0.0%     0.0%     0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                    86
The World Bank                                                                                                          Nigeria                                                                                     Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of                  Office of      Office of   Employee     Consultant                                                    Financial     NGO/CBO/                  Indep.            Faith-
 Respondents                       the        Parliamen-      of a        on Bank                          Local          Private      Sector/        Private                  Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)          President        tarian      Ministry      Project      PMU              Government        Sector        Bank        Foundation      Media       Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 World Bank website               36.8%         30.0%        48.0%         16.7%       56.7%              33.3%           47.1%         42.9%         25.4%         35.3%      40.0%    24.4%   32.1%     58.0%      33.3%      51.4%
 Direct contact with World
                                  10.5%         10.0%        14.5%         27.8%       23.3%                6.1%           9.8%         10.7%         18.4%         29.4%     0.0%      22.0%   7.1%       3.7%       8.3%      11.4%
 Bank
 e-newsletters                    15.8%         20.0%        22.4%         44.4%       13.3%                6.1%          17.6%         25.0%         26.3%         13.7%     20.0%     12.2%   16.1%     17.3%       8.3%      20.0%
 Instant messaging                 5.3%         20.0%         7.9%         11.1%       3.3%                 0.0%          8.8%           3.6%         11.4%         3.9%      20.0%     22.0%    7.1%      3.7%       0.0%       5.7%
 World Bank seminars/
                                  36.8%         40.0%        33.6%         33.3%       43.3%                24.2%         24.5%         25.0%         36.0%         35.3%     30.0%     19.5%   37.5%     43.2%      50.0%      34.3%
 workshops/conferences
 World Bank Public
                                  26.3%         10.0%         6.6%          0.0%       13.3%                9.1%          18.6%         5.4%          10.5%          5.9%     20.0%     19.5%   12.5%      7.4%      33.3%      14.3%
 Information Center
 World Bank publications
                                   5.3%         20.0%        23.0%         16.7%       16.7%                12.1%         16.7%         28.6%         18.4%         27.5%     0.0%      22.0%   32.1%     30.9%       8.3%      11.4%
 and other written materials
 Mobile phones                    26.3%         10.0%        15.8%         22.2%       16.7%                27.3%         31.4%         25.0%         25.4%         9.8%      20.0%     24.4%   26.8%     13.6%      16.7%      11.4%
 Social media                      5.3%         20.0%        13.2%         22.2%       3.3%                 30.3%         19.6%         23.2%         15.8%         27.5%     50.0%     12.2%   10.7%     11.1%      16.7%      22.9%
 Blogs                             0.0%         10.0%         0.0%          0.0%       0.0%                 3.0%          0.0%           0.0%          0.9%         0.0%      0.0%      2.4%     0.0%      0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
 Other                            15.8%          0.0%         5.3%          0.0%       0.0%                 24.2%         1.0%           5.4%          3.5%         0.0%      0.0%      0.0%     1.8%      2.5%      0.0%        5.7%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                               Office of       Office of     Employee     Consultant                                                Financial      NGO/CBO/                   Indep.            Faith-
 Percentage of                    the         Parliamen-        of a        on Bank                       Local        Private       Sector/         Private                   Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
 Respondents                   President        tarian        Ministry      Project        PMU        Government        Sector        Bank         Foundation        Media      Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 Yes                             42.1%          37.5%          30.6%         16.7%         37.9%         45.5%          27.7%         28.6%           16.4%           31.9%    20.0%    26.3%   22.8%     36.3%      25.0%      18.8%
 No                              57.9%          62.5%          69.4%         83.3%         62.1%         54.5%          72.3%         71.4%           83.6%           68.1%    80.0%    73.7%   77.2%     63.8%      75.0%      81.3%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?*
                                   Office of     Office of Employee         Consultant                                                Financial     NGO/CBO/                  Indep.            Faith-
  Percentage of                       the       Parliamen-     of a          on Bank                       Local          Private      Sector/        Private                  Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
  Respondents                      President      tarian    Ministry          Project        PMU        Government        Sector        Bank        Foundation      Media       Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
  Yes                                47.4%        12.5%       31.3%           33.3%          37.9%        32.3%           36.8%         18.2%         15.7%         34.8%      20.0%    18.4%    7.1%     44.2%      25.0%      16.1%
  No                                 52.6%        87.5%       68.7%           66.7%          62.1%        67.7%           63.2%         81.8%         84.3%         65.2%      80.0%    81.6%   92.9%     55.8%      75.0%      83.9%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?*
                                   Office of     Office of    Employee      Consultant                                                Financial     NGO/CBO/                  Indep.            Faith-
  Percentage of                       the       Parliamen-       of a        on Bank                       Local          Private      Sector/        Private                  Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
  Respondents                      President       tarian      Ministry       Project        PMU        Government        Sector        Bank        Foundation      Media      Inst.    Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
  Yes                                72.7%        100.0%        69.6%         83.3%         100.0%        78.6%           68.8%         45.5%         41.9%         48.3%     100.0%    27.3%   80.0%     80.5%      50.0%      41.7%
  No                                 27.3%          0.0%        30.4%         16.7%          0.0%         21.4%           31.3%         54.5%         58.1%         51.7%      0.0%     72.7%   20.0%     19.5%      50.0%      58.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you have access to the Internet?*
                                   Office of     Office of    Employee      Consultant                                                Financial     NGO/CBO/                  Indep.            Faith-
  Percentage of                       the       Parliamen-       of a        on Bank                       Local          Private      Sector/        Private                  Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
  Respondents                      President       tarian      Ministry       Project        PMU        Government        Sector        Bank        Foundation      Media      Inst.    Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
  Yes                                84.2%        100.0%        93.0%         100.0%         96.6%        93.1%           99.0%         96.4%         93.5%         93.8%     100.0%    83.8%   86.0%     95.1%      75.0%      84.4%
  No                                 15.8%          0.0%         7.0%          0.0%          3.4%          6.9%            1.0%          3.6%          6.5%         6.3%       0.0%     16.2%   14.0%      4.9%      25.0%      15.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                         87
The World Bank                                                                                                          Nigeria                                                                              Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*
                                   Office of     Office of    Employee      Consultant                                             Financial   NGO/CBO/               Indep.             Faith-
  Percentage of                       the       Parliamen-      of a         on Bank                       Local         Private    Sector/      Private               Govt.    Trade    Based               Judiciary
  Respondents                      President      tarian       Ministry       Project        PMU        Government       Sector      Bank      Foundation    Media     Inst.    Union    Group    Academia    Branch     Other
  Yes                                  63.2%          44.4%       56.6%          83.3%        80.0%           50.0%        59.4%      43.6%          45.9%    63.8%     60.0%    40.5%   38.6%       71.6%      41.7%    53.1%
  No                                   36.8%          55.6%       43.4%          16.7%        20.0%           50.0%        40.6%      56.4%          54.1%    36.2%     40.0%    59.5%   61.4%       28.4%      58.3%    46.9%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which do you primarily use?
                                 Office of      Office of     Employee      Consultant                                             Financial   NGO/CBO/               Indep.             Faith-
 Percentage of                      the        Parliamen-       of a         on Bank                       Local         Private    Sector/      Private               Govt.    Trade    Based               Judiciary
 Respondents                     President       tarian        Ministry       Project        PMU        Government       Sector      Bank      Foundation    Media     Inst.    Union    Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 The World Bank's country
                                   75.0%          25.0%         45.9%         23.1%         33.3%          62.5%          43.5%     41.9%        35.1%       45.7%    33.3%     35.0%    43.5%     45.9%      50.0%      33.3%
 website
 The World Bank's main
                                   25.0%          75.0%         54.1%         76.9%         66.7%          37.5%          56.5%     58.1%        64.9%       54.3%    66.7%     65.0%    56.5%     54.1%      50.0%      66.7%
 website

The Internet connection I mainly use when visiting a World Bank website is:*
                                   Office of     Office of   Employee       Consultant                                             Financial   NGO/CBO/               Indep.             Faith-
  Percentage of                       the       Parliamen-      of a         on Bank                       Local         Private    Sector/      Private               Govt.    Trade    Based               Judiciary
  Respondents                      President       tarian     Ministry        Project       PMU         Government       Sector      Bank      Foundation    Media      Inst.   Union    Group    Academia    Branch     Other
  High speed                         23.1%          0.0%       46.5%          13.3%         57.7%         56.3%          44.6%       35.3%       38.2%       52.9%     66.7%    42.1%    30.4%     39.1%       0.0%      47.4%
  Dial-up                            15.4%          0.0%       11.1%           6.7%         11.5%         12.5%          10.8%       14.7%        5.9%       20.6%     16.7%    15.8%    26.1%     15.6%      40.0%       0.0%
  3G/4G                              61.5%        100.0%       42.4%          80.0%         30.8%         31.3%          44.6%       50.0%       55.9%       26.5%     16.7%    42.1%    43.5%     45.3%      60.0%      52.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten-point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                        88
The World Bank                                                                                                    Nigeria                                                                           Country Survey 2013

H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
                                  Office of    Office of     Employee      Consultant                                        Financial   NGO/CBO/             Indep.            Faith-
 Percentage of                       the      Parliamen-        of a        on Bank                  Local         Private    Sector/      Private             Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
 Respondents                      President      tarian       Ministry       Project     PMU      Government       Sector      Bank      Foundation   Media     Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 Yes                                36.8%        20.0%         46.7%         56.3%       70.0%      18.2%          13.7%       12.5%       17.0%      42.0%    50.0%    7.3%    10.5%     13.4%       8.3%      38.2%
 No                                 63.2%        80.0%         53.3%         43.8%       30.0%      81.8%          86.3%       87.5%       83.0%      58.0%    50.0%    92.7%   89.5%     86.6%      91.7%      61.8%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of                   Office of      Office of    Employee      Consultant                                        Financial   NGO/CBO/             Indep.            Faith-
 Respondents                        the        Parliamen-       of a        on Bank                     Local      Private    Sector/      Private             Govt.    Trade   Based               Judiciary
 (Responses Combined)            President       tarian       Ministry       Project       PMU       Government    Sector      Bank      Foundation   Media     Inst.   Union   Group    Academia    Branch     Other
 Observer                          52.6%         40.0%         46.6%         18.8%        33.3%         74.2%      72.4%       73.1%       67.9%      72.3%    50.0%    80.0%   85.5%     55.0%      80.0%      55.9%
 Use World Bank
                                   31.6%         20.0%         26.0%         37.5%        20.0%         12.9%      20.4%      32.7%        31.2%      12.8%   37.5%     17.5%   12.7%     45.0%      30.0%      50.0%
 reports/data
 Engage in World Bank
 related/sponsored                 42.1%         50.0%         32.2%         50.0%        53.3%         16.1%      13.3%      13.5%        30.3%      38.3%   50.0%     20.0%   14.5%     20.0%      30.0%      17.6%
 events/activities
 Collaborate as part of my
                                   21.1%          0.0%         27.4%         50.0%        36.7%         16.1%      11.2%       9.6%        7.3%       17.0%   25.0%     5.0%    3.6%      10.0%      10.0%      20.6%
 professional duties
 Use World Bank
 communication tools for
                                   26.3%         20.0%         15.8%         12.5%        16.7%         25.8%      28.6%      25.0%        18.3%      23.4%   37.5%     20.0%   32.7%     40.0%      10.0%      14.7%
 information, data,
 research, etc.




                                                                                                                  89
The World Bank                                                                                                      Nigeria                                                                                        Country Survey 2013


Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location
A. General Issues facing Nigeria
In general, would you say that Nigeria is headed in...?
  Percentage of Respondents                                    Adamawa             Cross River             Edo                Enugu                FCT                Kaduna               Lagos
  In the right direction                                        17.5%                59.5%                68.3%               42.6%               50.4%                33.3%               30.2%
  In the wrong direction                                        72.2%                26.1%                19.8%               25.2%               25.5%                41.2%               36.7%
  Don't know                                                    10.3%                14.4%                11.9%               32.2%               24.1%                25.5%               33.1%
*Significantly different between locations

When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Nigeria? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
 MOST Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                  Adamawa                Cross River            Edo                 Enugu               FCT                Kaduna                Lagos
 Rural development                                             4.2%                  21.4%               29.7%                23.9%              12.7%                4.0%                 6.2%
 Education                                                     45.8%                 17.5%               21.8%                18.6%              28.2%                24.8%               21.2%
 Social protection                                             2.1%                   1.0%                0.0%                 1.8%               1.4%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Transport                                                     1.0%                   1.0%                1.0%                 1.8%               2.1%                0.0%                 0.7%
 Basic infrastructure                                          1.0%                   9.7%                5.0%                 3.5%              14.1%                3.0%                12.3%
 Poverty reduction                                             7.3%                   5.8%                8.9%                 6.2%               2.8%                9.9%                 6.2%
 Public sector reform                                          1.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.9%               0.0%                0.0%                 1.4%
 Regional integration                                          0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 1.8%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Global integration                                            0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 1.8%               0.7%                1.0%                 0.0%
 Gender                                                        1.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                           0.0%                   1.0%                0.0%                 2.7%               0.7%                0.0%                 0.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                     1.0%                   2.9%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                          2.1%                   1.0%                0.0%                 0.9%               1.4%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                               5.2%                   7.8%               10.9%                 7.1%               9.2%                13.9%               13.7%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                     0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.7%
 Public financial management                                   0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.9%               1.4%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                       3.1%                   8.7%                5.0%                 8.0%               3.5%                10.9%                5.5%
 Youth employment                                              3.1%                   1.0%                0.0%                 0.9%               0.7%                3.0%                 1.4%
 Governance                                                    0.0%                   2.9%                0.0%                 0.9%               4.2%                2.0%                 7.5%
 Financial markets                                             0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Urban development                                             0.0%                   0.0%                2.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Natural resource management                                   0.0%                   1.9%                1.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                1.0%                 0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                  0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                       0.0%                   1.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                1.0%                 0.0%
 Health                                                        6.3%                   2.9%                1.0%                 2.7%               1.4%                8.9%                 1.4%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                        0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Energy                                                        10.4%                  6.8%                1.0%                 4.4%               5.6%                5.9%                16.4%
 Food security                                                 4.2%                   1.0%                2.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                1.0%                 1.4%
 Climate change                                                0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Disaster management                                           0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Agricultural development                                      0.0%                   3.9%                3.0%                 7.1%               0.7%                1.0%                 2.1%
 Regional trade                                                0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 International trade                                           0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Crime and violence                                            0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.9%               0.7%                5.9%                 0.0%
 Economic growth                                               1.0%                   0.0%                5.0%                 1.8%               0.7%                2.0%                 1.4%
 Law and justice                                               0.0%                   0.0%                1.0%                 0.0%               1.4%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Regulatory and institutional framework                        0.0%                   0.0%                0.0%                 0.9%               0.7%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Information and communications technology                     0.0%                   1.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                1.0%                 0.0%




                                                                                                                     90
The World Bank                                                                                                      Nigeria                                                                                        Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Nigeria? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   nd
 2 MOST Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                  Adamawa               Cross River             Edo                 Enugu               FCT                Kaduna                Lagos
 Rural development                                             1.1%                  7.7%                 6.9%                10.6%               7.0%                2.0%                 5.4%
 Education                                                     15.8%                 22.1%               23.5%                 9.7%               9.1%                10.9%                9.5%
 Social protection                                             6.3%                  1.0%                 1.0%                 0.9%               2.8%                3.0%                 0.7%
 Transport                                                     2.1%                  1.0%                 2.0%                 0.0%               1.4%                1.0%                 3.4%
 Basic infrastructure                                          7.4%                  3.8%                 4.9%                 4.4%               9.1%                5.0%                12.9%
 Poverty reduction                                             21.1%                 13.5%                5.9%                 6.2%               4.2%                9.9%                 5.4%
 Public sector reform                                          3.2%                  1.9%                 2.9%                 3.5%               2.8%                0.0%                 0.7%
 Regional integration                                          1.1%                  0.0%                 1.0%                 0.9%               0.7%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Global integration                                            1.1%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 2.7%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Gender                                                        2.1%                  0.0%                 2.0%                 1.8%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                           1.1%                  2.9%                 2.0%                 1.8%               0.0%                1.0%                 0.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                     1.1%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 3.5%               2.8%                0.0%                 0.7%
 Water and sanitation                                          3.2%                  1.9%                 1.0%                 1.8%               2.8%                2.0%                 0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                               8.4%                  14.4%                6.9%                 9.7%               7.0%                8.9%                 7.5%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                     0.0%                  1.9%                 1.0%                 3.5%               0.7%                0.0%                 0.7%
 Public financial management                                   0.0%                  1.0%                 2.9%                 3.5%               1.4%                2.0%                 2.7%
 Job creation/employment                                       3.2%                  3.8%                 5.9%                 8.0%               5.6%                18.8%               13.6%
 Youth employment                                              3.2%                  2.9%                 4.9%                 0.0%               3.5%                3.0%                 4.1%
 Governance                                                    0.0%                  0.0%                 1.0%                 4.4%              11.2%                1.0%                 6.8%
 Financial markets                                             0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 0.9%               0.7%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Urban development                                             0.0%                  0.0%                 2.0%                 0.0%               1.4%                0.0%                 0.7%
 Natural resource management                                   1.1%                  1.9%                 1.0%                 4.4%               1.4%                0.0%                 1.4%
 Environmental sustainability                                  0.0%                  0.0%                 1.0%                 0.9%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                       1.1%                  1.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                2.0%                 0.7%
 Health                                                        4.2%                  3.8%                 2.9%                 1.8%               3.5%                4.0%                 1.4%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                        0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                1.0%                 0.0%
 Energy                                                        3.2%                  2.9%                 2.9%                 3.5%               6.3%                10.9%               12.2%
 Food security                                                 0.0%                  2.9%                 2.0%                 0.9%               0.7%                3.0%                 0.7%
 Climate change                                                0.0%                  1.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                1.0%                 0.0%
 Disaster management                                           1.1%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Agricultural development                                      3.2%                  3.8%                 5.9%                 3.5%               2.8%                3.0%                 4.8%
 Regional trade                                                1.1%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 0.9%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 International trade                                           1.1%                  0.0%                 1.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Crime and violence                                            1.1%                  0.0%                 3.9%                 2.7%               3.5%                5.0%                 2.0%
 Economic growth                                               1.1%                  1.9%                 2.0%                 1.8%               1.4%                2.0%                 1.4%
 Law and justice                                               0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%               2.1%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Regulatory and institutional framework                        0.0%                  1.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%               1.4%                0.0%                 0.0%
 Information and communications technology                     1.1%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 1.8%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%




                                                                                                                     91
The World Bank                                                                                                      Nigeria                                                                                        Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Nigeria? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   rd
 3 MOST Important
 Percentage of Respondents                                  Adamawa               Cross River             Edo                 Enugu               FCT                Kaduna                Lagos
 Rural development                                             1.0%                  5.8%                 4.0%                 5.4%              2.8%                 5.9%                 1.4%
 Education                                                     9.4%                  3.9%                 5.9%                 2.7%              7.0%                 6.9%                10.3%
 Social protection                                             1.0%                  1.9%                 3.0%                 1.8%              2.8%                 1.0%                 2.1%
 Transport                                                     2.1%                  0.0%                 1.0%                 0.0%              2.8%                 4.0%                 0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                          4.2%                  4.9%                 3.0%                 4.5%              9.9%                 5.0%                10.3%
 Poverty reduction                                             6.3%                  10.7%                4.0%                 3.6%              6.3%                 10.9%                8.9%
 Public sector reform                                          0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 1.8%              4.2%                 0.0%                 1.4%
 Regional integration                                          0.0%                  0.0%                 1.0%                 0.9%              2.8%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Global integration                                            1.0%                  1.0%                 1.0%                 0.9%              1.4%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Gender                                                        1.0%                  0.0%                 2.0%                 0.0%              1.4%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                           0.0%                  1.0%                 2.0%                 0.0%              1.4%                 0.0%                 0.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                     0.0%                  0.0%                 1.0%                 0.0%              0.0%                 2.0%                 0.7%
 Water and sanitation                                          4.2%                  1.0%                 0.0%                 2.7%              0.0%                 2.0%                 2.1%
 Anti-corruption                                               18.8%                 11.7%                3.0%                 6.3%              4.2%                 2.0%                 8.2%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                     2.1%                  0.0%                 2.0%                 1.8%              1.4%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Public financial management                                   0.0%                  1.9%                 0.0%                 0.9%              0.7%                 0.0%                 2.1%
 Job creation/employment                                       12.5%                 9.7%                12.9%                 8.9%              8.5%                 6.9%                 9.6%
 Youth employment                                              2.1%                  5.8%                 5.0%                 0.9%              2.1%                 2.0%                 2.7%
 Governance                                                    1.0%                  3.9%                 4.0%                 1.8%              4.2%                 4.0%                 3.4%
 Financial markets                                             0.0%                  1.9%                 0.0%                 0.9%              0.7%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Urban development                                             1.0%                  0.0%                 2.0%                 1.8%              0.0%                 1.0%                 0.7%
 Natural resource management                                   0.0%                  2.9%                 2.0%                 2.7%              0.7%                 2.0%                 2.1%
 Environmental sustainability                                  1.0%                  0.0%                 2.0%                 5.4%              0.7%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                       1.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 2.7%              1.4%                 4.0%                 1.4%
 Health                                                        15.6%                 6.8%                 7.9%                 2.7%              7.7%                 6.9%                 4.8%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                        0.0%                  0.0%                 1.0%                 2.7%              0.7%                 0.0%                 0.7%
 Energy                                                        1.0%                  5.8%                10.9%                 4.5%              1.4%                 6.9%                11.6%
 Food security                                                 0.0%                  1.9%                 1.0%                 8.9%              2.1%                 2.0%                 3.4%
 Climate change                                                0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%              1.4%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Disaster management                                           2.1%                  0.0%                 2.0%                 0.9%              0.7%                 2.0%                 0.0%
 Agricultural development                                      7.3%                  7.8%                 8.9%                10.7%              4.9%                 13.9%                7.5%
 Regional trade                                                0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 0.9%              0.7%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 International trade                                           0.0%                  1.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%              0.0%                 2.0%                 0.0%
 Crime and violence                                            2.1%                  3.9%                 2.0%                 0.9%              2.8%                 4.0%                 0.7%
 Economic growth                                               0.0%                  2.9%                 5.0%                 5.4%              4.2%                 2.0%                 3.4%
 Law and justice                                               1.0%                  1.0%                 0.0%                 1.8%              2.1%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Regulatory and institutional framework                        0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%                 1.8%              2.1%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Information and communications technology                     0.0%                  1.0%                 0.0%                 0.9%              1.4%                 1.0%                 0.0%




                                                                                                                     92
The World Bank                                                                                                     Nigeria                                                                                             Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Nigeria? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                         Adamawa              Cross River             Edo                Enugu                FCT               Kaduna                Lagos
 Water and sanitation                                            12.4%                4.4%                 2.0%                7.0%               2.7%                 4.9%                 1.3%
 Equality of opportunity                                         11.3%                9.7%                 8.0%                2.6%               7.5%                14.7%                 8.0%
 Economic growth                                                 43.3%                31.9%               39.0%               27.0%              23.8%                34.3%                27.3%
 Climate change                                                  1.0%                 0.9%                 0.0%                0.9%               0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Disaster management                                             10.3%                0.0%                 1.0%                0.9%               0.7%                 1.0%                 0.7%
 Regional integration                                            0.0%                 0.0%                 2.0%                4.3%               1.4%                 1.0%                 0.7%
 Gender                                                          1.0%                 0.0%                 1.0%                4.3%               1.4%                 1.0%                 0.7%
 Rural development                                               1.0%                 32.7%               27.0%               32.2%              28.6%                 8.8%                22.7%
 Urban development                                               14.4%                0.9%                 2.0%                1.7%               5.4%                 2.0%                 1.3%
 Education                                                       35.1%                25.7%               45.0%               24.3%              41.5%                35.3%                35.3%
 Regulatory framework                                            1.0%                 0.0%                 1.0%                0.9%               1.4%                 1.0%                 0.7%
 Basic infrastructure                                            4.1%                 15.0%               13.0%               13.9%              34.0%                10.8%                27.3%
 Social protection                                               3.1%                 5.3%                 3.0%                6.1%               2.0%                 2.9%                 4.0%
 Law and justice                                                 7.2%                 3.5%                 1.0%                4.3%               3.4%                 1.0%                 4.0%
 Transport                                                       3.1%                 1.8%                 2.0%                1.7%               5.4%                 2.9%                 5.3%
 Crime and violence                                              16.5%                1.8%                 2.0%                2.6%               0.7%                 7.8%                 3.3%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                          0.0%                 0.9%                 0.0%                4.3%               0.0%                 1.0%                 0.0%
 Information and communications technology                       2.1%                 8.0%                 3.0%                0.9%               0.7%                 2.0%                 0.7%
 Anti-corruption                                                 36.1%                16.8%               18.0%               25.2%              19.7%                40.2%                20.0%
 Domestic private sector development                             0.0%                 6.2%                 3.0%                2.6%               4.8%                 1.0%                 4.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                       1.0%                 0.9%                 6.0%                0.0%               0.0%                 1.0%                 1.3%
 Global integration                                              0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%                1.7%               0.0%                 0.0%                 0.7%
 Energy                                                          28.9%                18.6%               26.0%               18.3%              18.4%                28.4%                34.0%
 Public sector reform                                            1.0%                 2.7%                 1.0%                3.5%               2.0%                 1.0%                 2.7%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                       0.0%                 3.5%                 3.0%                2.6%               0.7%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Governance                                                      4.1%                 8.0%                 8.0%               10.4%              17.0%                10.8%                 7.3%
 Natural resource management                                     1.0%                 9.7%                 2.0%                7.0%               2.7%                 2.0%                 2.7%
 Environmental sustainability                                    0.0%                 2.7%                 3.0%                5.2%               0.7%                 1.0%                 0.0%
 Health                                                          12.4%                8.8%                 8.0%               13.0%               5.4%                13.7%                 6.0%
 Public financial management                                     1.0%                 0.0%                 2.0%                3.5%               3.4%                 0.0%                 1.3%
 Agricultural development                                        13.4%                25.7%               27.0%               24.3%              21.1%                27.5%                16.0%
 Job creation/employment                                         23.7%                45.1%               34.0%               29.6%              35.4%                35.3%                46.7%
 Financial markets                                               2.1%                 0.0%                 0.0%                1.7%               0.7%                 2.0%                 0.0%
 Trade and exports                                               1.0%                 1.8%                 1.0%                1.7%               0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%
 Food security                                                   2.1%                 6.2%                 5.0%                7.0%               3.4%                 2.0%                10.7%
 Other                                                           0.0%                 0.0%                 1.0%                0.9%               1.4%                 0.0%                 1.3%




                                                                                                                    93
The World Bank                                                                                                   Nigeria                                                                       Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues facing Nigeria (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Nigeria? (Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                        Adamawa             Cross River             Edo               Enugu                FCT               Kaduna              Lagos
  Energy                                                        46.4%               58.4%                66.3%              53.9%               47.3%               49.0%              60.7%
  Equality of opportunity                                        3.1%                5.3%                11.9%               2.6%                5.5%               7.8%                4.0%
  Social protection                                              2.1%                1.8%                 2.0%               0.9%                2.1%               3.9%                0.7%
  Global integration                                             0.0%                6.2%                 3.0%               3.5%                0.0%               0.0%                4.0%
  Climate change                                                 6.2%                0.0%                 0.0%               1.7%                0.0%               0.0%                0.0%
  Anti-corruption                                               47.4%               11.5%                16.8%              17.4%               24.0%               24.5%              28.7%
  Disaster management                                            2.1%                1.8%                 0.0%               0.9%                0.0%               0.0%                0.0%
  Rural development                                              3.1%               14.2%                15.8%              13.0%               11.0%               5.9%               12.7%
  Foreign direct investment                                      4.1%               14.2%                13.9%               7.0%                6.2%               6.9%                8.0%
  Urban development                                             14.4%                0.0%                 2.0%               1.7%                2.7%               2.9%                1.3%
  Water and sanitation                                           7.2%                0.9%                 1.0%               1.7%                2.7%               2.0%                0.7%
  Education                                                     35.1%               26.5%                35.6%              25.2%               30.1%               30.4%              24.7%
  Information and communications technology                      2.1%                6.2%                 9.9%               2.6%                5.5%               2.0%                3.3%
  Regulatory and institutional framework                         3.1%                0.9%                 0.0%               3.5%                4.1%               7.8%                3.3%
  Communicable/non-communicable diseases                         0.0%                0.9%                 0.0%               3.5%                0.0%               2.9%                0.0%
  Trade and exports                                             16.5%                8.8%                 8.9%               7.0%                6.8%               6.9%                4.7%
  Public sector reform                                           1.0%                5.3%                 2.0%              10.4%                4.8%               0.0%                4.0%
  Regional integration                                           0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.9%                0.7%               2.0%                1.3%
  Domestic private sector development                            1.0%                2.7%                 2.0%               3.5%               13.7%               2.0%                4.7%
  Job creation/employment                                       41.2%               24.8%                22.8%              28.7%               17.8%               36.3%              26.0%
  Agricultural development                                      17.5%               31.0%                30.7%              38.3%               25.3%               30.4%              26.0%
  Food security                                                  7.2%                3.5%                 3.0%               3.5%                6.8%               2.9%                2.0%
  Governance                                                     7.2%                9.7%                 9.9%               6.1%               19.9%               9.8%               16.7%
  Transport                                                      4.1%                4.4%                 1.0%               2.6%                5.5%               2.0%                6.0%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                      0.0%                2.7%                 2.0%               5.2%                2.7%               2.9%                0.7%
  Gender                                                         0.0%                0.0%                 1.0%               1.7%                0.0%               2.0%                0.0%
  Natural resource management                                    1.0%               11.5%                12.9%              12.2%                6.8%               18.6%               8.7%
  Environmental sustainability                                   2.1%                1.8%                 2.0%              11.3%                0.7%               0.0%                0.7%
  Health                                                         4.1%                9.7%                 5.0%               7.8%                2.7%               12.7%               1.3%
  Basic infrastructure                                           5.2%               25.7%                 5.0%              10.4%               28.8%               16.7%              26.7%
  Law and justice                                                1.0%                0.9%                 4.0%               0.9%                2.1%               2.0%                4.7%
  Crime and violence                                             4.1%                1.8%                 1.0%               0.9%                2.1%               2.9%                2.0%
  Public financial management                                    4.1%                5.3%                 5.9%               6.1%                5.5%               2.0%                5.3%
  Financial markets                                              4.1%                1.8%                 2.0%               2.6%                2.1%               2.0%                2.0%
  Other                                                          0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                2.7%               0.0%                1.3%




                                                                                                                 94
The World Bank                                                                                                                  Nigeria                                                        Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective; 1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                                                                                 95
The World Bank                                                                                                       Nigeria                                                                                            Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Nigeria, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in Nigeria?
   (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                       Adamawa            Cross River                Edo                 Enugu                FCT                Kaduna                 Lagos
 Rural development                                            17.5%               44.2%                 38.2%                 47.4%               31.1%                18.6%                 34.5%
 Education                                                    53.6%               39.8%                 42.2%                 22.8%               41.2%                50.0%                 38.5%
 Social protection                                             4.1%               0.9%                   2.9%                  0.0%                2.0%                1.0%                   2.7%
 Governance                                                    0.0%               8.0%                   9.8%                  5.3%               14.2%                7.8%                   6.1%
 Transport                                                     0.0%               2.7%                   3.9%                  1.8%               10.8%                0.0%                   5.4%
 Poverty reduction                                            36.1%               24.8%                 19.6%                 15.8%               16.9%                25.5%                 14.2%
 Public sector reform                                          7.2%               1.8%                   1.0%                  7.9%                8.1%                1.0%                   5.4%
 Regional integration                                          0.0%               0.0%                   1.0%                  0.9%                0.0%                2.0%                   0.0%
 Gender                                                        4.1%               0.9%                   3.9%                  1.8%                2.7%                2.0%                   0.0%
 Crime and violence                                           11.3%               2.7%                  11.8%                  7.9%                1.4%                8.8%                   1.4%
 Domestic private sector development                           0.0%               3.5%                   2.9%                  1.8%                6.8%                2.0%                   6.1%
 Foreign direct investment                                     2.1%               5.3%                   7.8%                  2.6%                2.7%                2.9%                   4.1%
 Water and sanitation                                          2.1%               3.5%                   2.9%                  7.9%                4.1%                2.0%                   0.7%
 Energy                                                       30.9%               31.9%                 36.3%                 23.7%               21.6%                30.4%                 44.6%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                     0.0%               3.5%                   0.0%                  3.5%                5.4%                0.0%                   4.1%
 Public financial management                                   3.1%               0.9%                   3.9%                  6.1%                6.8%                1.0%                   6.1%
 Job creation/employment                                      42.3%               26.5%                 17.6%                 19.3%               12.2%                33.3%                 25.7%
 Financial markets                                             1.0%               0.9%                   2.0%                  2.6%                0.7%                2.0%                   0.0%
 Urban development                                             0.0%               0.0%                   4.9%                  1.8%                4.7%                1.0%                   2.7%
 Environmental sustainability                                  1.0%               3.5%                   1.0%                  7.0%                1.4%                1.0%                   0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                       0.0%               0.0%                   5.9%                  4.4%                2.0%                2.0%                   0.7%
 Health                                                       29.9%               20.4%                 14.7%                 14.0%               20.3%                19.6%                  7.4%
 Global integration                                            0.0%               0.9%                   0.0%                  1.8%                1.4%                0.0%                   0.7%
 Food security                                                 1.0%               6.2%                   3.9%                  9.6%                1.4%                0.0%                   3.4%
 Climate change                                                5.2%               0.0%                   0.0%                  0.9%                0.7%                2.0%                   0.0%
 Agricultural development                                     12.4%               23.9%                 26.5%                 36.8%               22.3%                31.4%                 25.0%
 International trade                                           1.0%               1.8%                   0.0%                  4.4%                1.4%                0.0%                   1.4%
 Regional trade                                                1.0%               0.9%                   0.0%                  0.0%                0.7%                1.0%                   0.0%
 Economic growth                                              10.3%               8.0%                  11.8%                 13.2%                7.4%                10.8%                 12.2%
 Law and justice                                               1.0%               0.9%                   2.0%                  0.0%                0.7%                0.0%                   3.4%
 Regulatory framework                                          0.0%               0.0%                   0.0%                  0.0%                4.1%                2.0%                   2.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                        2.1%               0.0%                   0.0%                  1.8%                0.7%                1.0%                   0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                          3.1%               14.2%                  6.9%                  7.9%               21.6%                10.8%                 27.0%
 Natural resource management                                   1.0%               0.0%                   3.9%                  6.1%                2.0%                7.8%                   2.7%
 Anti-corruption                                               9.3%               11.5%                  5.9%                  7.9%                9.5%                18.6%                  9.5%
 Information and communications technology                     4.1%               4.4%                   2.0%                  0.0%                1.4%                0.0%                   1.4%
 Disaster management                                           0.0%               0.0%                   1.0%                  2.6%                0.7%                0.0%                   0.0%
 Other                                                         1.0%               0.9%                   1.0%                  0.0%                0.7%                0.0%                   1.4%




                                                                                                                      96
The World Bank                                                                                                          Nigeria                                                   Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Nigeria?
 GREATEST Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                      Adamawa               Cross River             Edo                  Enugu                  FCT    Kaduna   Lagos
 Financial resources                                              51.1%                  38.0%               41.7%                 41.2%                 33.8%    52.0%   38.1%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                        6.7%                  5.6%                 6.3%                  4.4%                  7.0%    11.8%    3.4%
 Technical assistance                                              7.8%                  11.1%               12.5%                 16.7%                 21.1%    7.8%    18.4%
 Policy advice                                                     5.6%                  5.6%                10.4%                  3.5%                  7.0%    2.0%    12.2%
 Development partner coordination                                  4.4%                  5.6%                 2.1%                 14.9%                  9.2%    8.8%     8.8%
 Data                                                              2.2%                  1.9%                 4.2%                  4.4%                  4.9%    2.9%     1.4%
 Training/capacity building                                        5.6%                  27.8%               14.6%                 11.4%                 13.4%    5.9%    13.6%
 Studies/analyses                                                  8.9%                  0.9%                 4.2%                  0.0%                  0.7%    1.0%     0.0%
 Convening/facilitating                                            1.1%                  0.9%                 1.0%                  0.9%                  0.7%    2.0%     1.4%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                     6.7%                  2.8%                 3.1%                  0.9%                  1.4%    2.0%     2.0%
 Other                                                             0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%                  1.8%                  0.7%    3.9%     0.7%

   nd
 2 GREATEST Value
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Adamawa              Cross River              Edo                Enugu                 FCT      Kaduna   Lagos
 Financial resources                                              16.9%                 10.2%                 14.6%                6.1%                 8.7%      18.6%   11.6%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                       24.7%                  6.5%                  9.4%                7.9%                 8.7%      9.8%     8.2%
 Technical assistance                                             15.7%                 17.6%                 12.5%               14.0%                28.3%      14.7%   23.1%
 Policy advice                                                     7.9%                  5.6%                  8.3%                8.8%                 7.2%      11.8%    8.2%
 Development partner coordination                                 13.5%                 14.8%                  9.4%                8.8%                 8.7%      13.7%    9.5%
 Data                                                              3.4%                  3.7%                  5.2%                7.0%                 3.6%      2.9%     3.4%
 Training/capacity building                                        9.0%                 20.4%                 20.8%               25.4%                19.6%      14.7%   28.6%
 Studies/analyses                                                  4.5%                 10.2%                 14.6%                9.6%                 7.2%      4.9%     2.0%
 Convening/facilitating                                            1.1%                  4.6%                  3.1%                7.0%                 2.2%      2.9%     3.4%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                     3.4%                  5.6%                  2.1%                4.4%                 4.3%      2.9%     2.0%
 Other                                                             0.0%                  0.9%                  0.0%                0.9%                 1.4%      2.9%     0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                            Adamawa            Cross River              Edo              Enugu                      FCT     Kaduna   Lagos
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
                                                                   23.4%               13.0%                28.4%             22.5%                    38.2%     16.0%    33.3%
 political and societal realities
 Not exploring alternative policy options                          26.6%               12.0%                 8.4%             10.8%                    10.4%      5.0%    10.7%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                                   22.3%               10.2%                26.3%             25.2%                    29.9%     16.0%    16.7%
 procedures
 Staff too inaccessible                                            17.0%               25.9%                29.5%             27.0%                     6.9%     15.0%    12.7%
 Arrogant in its approach                                           5.3%               3.7%                  4.2%              5.4%                     4.9%     2.0%      0.0%
 Not client focused                                                 7.4%               10.2%                 5.3%              9.0%                     3.5%     9.0%      1.3%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                              2.1%               2.8%                  7.4%              5.4%                     1.4%     12.0%     2.7%
 Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts
                                                                   13.8%               14.8%                 7.4%              9.0%                    15.3%     14.0%    9.3%
 in the country
 Too influenced by developed countries                             17.0%               19.4%                17.9%             13.5%                    15.3%     15.0%    19.3%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                           9.6%               18.5%                16.8%             27.9%                     9.0%     24.0%    30.7%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                          9.6%               21.3%                13.7%             14.4%                    12.5%     9.0%     10.7%
 Not aligned with country priorities                                6.4%               12.0%                 6.3%              9.0%                     5.6%     4.0%      5.3%
 Not aligned with other development partners’ work                  7.4%               4.6%                  1.1%              1.8%                     2.1%     8.0%      0.7%
 Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                     9.6%               7.4%                 10.5%              4.5%                     8.3%     11.0%    11.3%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                    7.4%               10.2%                 7.4%              7.2%                    13.2%     12.0%    15.3%
 Nigeria
 Not enough engagement at state levels                              6.4%               9.3%                  7.4%              4.5%                     9.7%      9.0%    8.0%
 Too much engagement at state levels                                0.0%               1.9%                  1.1%              0.0%                     0.0%      2.0%    2.0%
 Other                                                              0.0%               1.9%                  0.0%              0.0%                     2.1%      4.0%    2.7%
                                                                                                                         97
The World Bank                                                                                                     Nigeria                                    Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                         Adamawa             Cross River              Edo               Enugu    FCT    Kaduna   Lagos
 Investment lending                                             64.3%                40.7%                48.0%              41.7%   41.1%    60.4%   41.9%
 Capacity development                                           29.6%                61.9%                49.0%              58.3%   55.5%    39.6%   49.3%
 Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government         9.2%                 9.7%                13.0%               9.6%   15.8%    9.9%    14.2%
 Knowledge products/services                                    19.4%                17.7%                28.0%              13.9%   11.6%    13.9%   10.1%
 Technical assistance                                           29.6%                27.4%                39.0%              27.8%   47.3%    31.7%   48.0%
 Trust Fund management                                          31.6%                18.6%                21.0%              26.1%    5.5%    29.7%   15.5%
 Other                                                           0.0%                 1.8%                 0.0%               0.0%    1.4%    1.0%     4.1%
 Don’t know                                                      0.0%                 9.7%                 0.0%              15.7%    3.4%    2.0%     6.1%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in reducing poverty in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                          Adamawa              Cross River             Edo              Enugu    FCT    Kaduna   Lagos
 Investment lending                                              28.9%                 9.9%                39.8%             32.7%   24.0%    19.0%   30.6%
 Capacity development                                            29.9%                 22.5%               27.6%             14.2%   15.1%    18.0%   11.6%
 Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government         27.8%                 30.6%               34.7%             27.4%   34.2%    15.0%   32.7%
 Knowledge products/services                                     30.9%                 25.2%               23.5%             20.4%   19.2%    17.0%   25.9%
 Technical assistance                                            26.8%                 21.6%               16.3%             17.7%   19.9%    18.0%   10.9%
 Trust Fund management                                           20.6%                 40.5%               37.8%             35.4%   39.7%    40.0%   42.2%
 Other                                                            1.0%                 0.9%                 0.0%              0.0%    0.7%    2.0%     1.4%
 Don’t know                                                       3.1%                 18.9%                9.2%             33.6%   13.0%    24.0%   21.1%




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                                                                   98
The World Bank                                                                                                         Nigeria                                                                                               Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)
  Percentage of Respondents
  (Responses Combined)                                            Adamawa               Cross River             Edo               Enugu                 FCT               Kaduna                Lagos
  NGOs                                                              72.9%                 51.3%                47.1%               33.9%               35.6%               55.4%                20.8%
  Local Government                                                  12.5%                 11.5%                14.7%               22.6%               28.1%               14.9%                20.8%
  Beneficiaries                                                      7.3%                  9.7%                11.8%               6.1%                13.0%                9.9%                20.1%
  Private sector                                                    12.5%                 13.3%                17.6%               21.7%               23.3%                9.9%                22.8%
  Community Based Organizations                                     12.5%                 30.1%                27.5%               20.9%               27.4%                7.9%                28.2%
  Development partner community                                      2.1%                 13.3%                 7.8%               13.9%               15.1%               13.9%                10.1%
  Foundations                                                        3.1%                  4.4%                 2.0%               15.7%                2.1%                9.9%                 2.7%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                           7.3%                 15.0%                17.6%               20.9%                9.6%                6.9%                20.8%
  Parliament                                                         0.0%                  0.9%                 0.0%               1.7%                 1.4%                2.0%                 3.4%
  Media                                                             13.5%                  8.8%                10.8%               6.1%                 8.9%               15.8%                 5.4%
  State governments                                                  3.1%                 11.5%                12.7%               13.9%               21.2%               31.7%                20.8%
  Governors’ Forum                                                   4.2%                  0.0%                 1.0%               1.7%                 4.8%                4.0%                 0.7%
  Faith based organizations                                         19.8%                 11.5%                17.6%               6.1%                 3.4%                2.0%                 7.4%
  Youth                                                             25.0%                 16.8%                 9.8%               13.0%                4.8%               13.9%                13.4%
  Other                                                              0.0%                  0.0%                 1.0%               0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%                 1.3%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                                                                        99
The World Bank                                                                                                             Nigeria                                                            Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Nigeria, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10- To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between locations

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                             Adamawa              Cross River             Edo                Enugu               FCT                    Kaduna   Lagos
 The World Bank works too slowly                                    27.1%                 25.7%               29.0%                9.0%             12.2%                     8.2%    10.1%
 The Government works inefficiently                                 20.8%                 27.5%               28.0%               60.4%             32.0%                     27.6%   31.5%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                    31.3%                 21.1%               33.0%               11.7%             23.8%                    15.3%    30.2%
 participation
 Poor development partner coordination                              35.4%                 27.5%               20.0%               18.9%             17.0%                    22.4%    17.4%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow
                                                                    6.3%                  14.7%               13.0%               17.1%             11.6%                    22.4%    14.1%
 through/follow-up
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                21.9%                 13.8%               18.0%               17.1%             21.1%                    21.4%    14.1%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                  24.0%                 33.0%               29.0%               33.3%             23.8%                    38.8%    32.9%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                                    12.5%                 24.8%               11.0%               20.7%             24.5%                     9.2%    22.1%
 challenges
 The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social
                                                                    5.2%                  11.9%               18.0%                9.9%             17.0%                    12.2%    22.8%
 realities on the ground
 Other                                                              0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%              4.1%                     6.1%    2.0%




                                                                                                                           100
The World Bank                                                                                                             Nigeria                                                                Country Survey 2013

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                                                                           101
The World Bank                                                                                                         Nigeria                                                  Country Survey 2013

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge
How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge work and activities (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                 Adamawa                 Cross River                Edo                Enugu                 FCT    Kaduna   Lagos
  Weekly                                                       7.2%                    5.3%                    8.1%                2.7%                15.6%    0.0%     4.8%
  Monthly                                                      3.1%                   11.5%                   13.1%               11.5%                28.6%    10.8%   12.9%
  A few times a year                                           17.5%                  23.0%                   16.2%               38.1%                30.6%    28.4%   27.9%
  Rarely                                                       46.4%                  33.6%                   39.4%               14.2%                15.0%    27.5%   29.3%
  Never                                                        25.8%                  26.5%                   23.2%               33.6%                10.2%    33.3%   25.2%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                                                                       102
The World Bank                                                                                                      Nigeria                                                                                              Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)
When thinking about the development challenges in Nigeria, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its knowledge work and activities in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                         Adamawa               Cross River            Edo                Enugu                 FCT                 Kaduna                Lagos
 Public sector reform                                            8.2%                  8.8%                5.9%               20.0%                14.4%                  4.9%                 8.8%
 Gender                                                          3.1%                  0.0%                6.9%                0.9%                 0.7%                  1.0%                 0.0%
 Education                                                      61.2%                 38.9%               52.0%               33.0%                43.2%                 47.1%                38.5%
 Domestic private sector development                             4.1%                  7.1%                2.0%                7.0%                 9.6%                  0.0%                 3.4%
 Foreign direct investment                                       6.1%                  2.7%                9.8%                0.9%                 3.4%                  1.0%                 1.4%
 Water and sanitation                                            4.1%                  5.3%                0.0%                1.7%                 5.5%                  1.0%                 1.4%
 Trade and exports (regional/international)                     10.2%                  0.9%                3.9%                0.9%                 2.7%                  0.0%                 0.7%
 Economic growth                                                17.3%                 17.7%               23.5%               21.7%                14.4%                 24.5%                15.5%
 Energy                                                         41.8%                 36.3%               43.1%               24.3%                26.0%                 33.3%                47.3%
 Disaster management                                             7.1%                  0.9%                6.9%                3.5%                 2.1%                  1.0%                 3.4%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                       4.1%                  5.3%                2.0%                2.6%                 3.4%                  2.9%                 0.7%
 Governance                                                     20.4%                 15.9%                8.8%               12.2%                15.8%                  5.9%                10.8%
 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
                                                                 2.0%                  0.9%                2.0%                1.7%                 3.4%                  2.9%                 1.4%
 assistance)
 Climate change                                                  1.0%                  0.0%                1.0%                1.7%                 0.7%                  0.0%                 1.4%
 Poverty reduction                                              17.3%                 25.7%               14.7%               22.6%                19.9%                 21.6%                24.3%
 Law and justice                                                 2.0%                  0.0%                2.9%                1.7%                 2.1%                  1.0%                 5.4%
 Anti-corruption                                                12.2%                 23.0%               19.6%               25.2%                19.2%                 28.4%                25.7%
 Financial markets                                               3.1%                  0.0%                0.0%                2.6%                 2.1%                  4.9%                 0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                         2.0%                  0.9%                1.0%                0.9%                 1.4%                  3.9%                 1.4%
 Urban development                                               6.1%                  0.9%                1.0%                2.6%                 2.7%                  0.0%                 1.4%
 Crime and violence                                              7.1%                  5.3%                9.8%                3.5%                 4.1%                  9.8%                 3.4%
 Regional integration                                            2.0%                  0.0%                1.0%                2.6%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
 Information and communications technology                       0.0%                  6.2%                4.9%                3.5%                 0.7%                  2.9%                 2.7%
 Transport                                                       1.0%                  2.7%                4.9%                2.6%                 5.5%                  2.0%                 8.8%
 Agricultural development                                       10.2%                 23.0%               19.6%               33.9%                17.8%                 29.4%                26.4%
 Natural resource management                                     0.0%                  1.8%                2.9%                5.2%                 1.4%                  0.0%                 3.4%
 Public financial management                                     0.0%                  0.9%                2.0%                3.5%                 4.8%                  0.0%                 5.4%
 Job creation/employment                                        18.4%                 28.3%               19.6%               20.9%                15.8%                 38.2%                20.9%
 Health                                                         19.4%                 13.3%                8.8%                7.8%                16.4%                 15.7%                 9.5%
 Rural development                                               1.0%                 14.2%               11.8%               11.3%                14.4%                  4.9%                 5.4%
 Global integration                                              0.0%                  0.9%                0.0%                0.9%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
 Food security                                                   1.0%                  4.4%                3.9%                4.3%                 2.7%                  2.0%                 3.4%
 Environmental sustainability                                    1.0%                  1.8%                1.0%                2.6%                 2.1%                  0.0%                 0.7%
 Regulatory framework                                            0.0%                  0.0%                0.0%                0.0%                 3.4%                  3.9%                 0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                            2.0%                  4.4%                2.9%                5.2%                11.6%                  4.9%                14.9%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                          0.0%                  0.9%                0.0%                3.5%                 0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%




                                                                                                                    103
The World Bank                                                                                                             Nigeria                        Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)
In Nigeria, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge work and activities are at: (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between locations

In Nigeria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank's knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                                                                           104
The World Bank                                                                                                                  Nigeria                    Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                                                                                105
The World Bank                                                                                                          Nigeria      Country Survey 2013

E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten-point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                                                                        106
The World Bank                                                                                                     Nigeria                                    Country Survey 2013

F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Nigeria




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role) *Significantly different between locations

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                          Adamawa              Cross River             Edo              Enugu    FCT    Kaduna   Lagos
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Nigeria’s
                                                                 42.3%                 55.4%               53.0%             46.9%   42.4%   41.2%    41.2%
 specific challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing         36.1%                 30.4%               48.0%             29.2%   34.7%   32.4%    37.2%
 Focus primarily on advocacy issues                              18.6%                 7.1%                17.0%             15.0%   16.0%   11.8%    10.1%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to
                                                                 13.4%                 12.5%                7.0%             9.7%    9.7%     5.9%    14.2%
 markets
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                          20.6%                 17.9%                7.0%             24.8%   13.2%   22.5%    12.8%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/
                                                                 29.9%                 17.0%               29.0%             23.0%   23.6%   22.5%    29.7%
 figures on Nigeria’s economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                        10.3%                 10.7%                7.0%             19.5%   16.0%   23.5%    18.9%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                         9.3%                 19.6%                7.0%             8.8%    15.3%   14.7%    10.1%
 Increase availability of Fee-Based services                      4.1%                 7.1%                 4.0%             6.2%     4.2%   7.8%      4.7%
 Work faster                                                      1.0%                 20.5%               20.0%             12.4%   13.2%   9.8%     11.5%
 Other                                                            0.0%                 0.9%                 1.0%             0.9%     3.5%   2.0%      5.4%



G. Communication and Information Sharing

How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                         Adamawa             Cross River            Edo               Enugu      FCT    Kaduna   Lagos
 Local newspapers                                               33.0%               69.9%               48.5%              63.2%     62.8%    34.3%   73.0%
 International newspapers                                        2.1%                8.0%                3.0%               0.0%     10.3%    10.1%   10.8%
 Local radio                                                    48.9%               17.7%               28.7%              24.6%      9.7%    30.3%   12.8%
 International radio                                            10.6%                7.1%                5.0%               1.8%      2.1%    10.1%    3.4%
 Local television                                               64.9%               30.1%               48.5%              47.4%     20.0%    41.4%   22.3%
 International television                                        5.3%               15.9%               14.9%              11.4%     19.3%    14.1%   16.2%
 Periodicals                                                     1.1%                9.7%                4.0%               1.8%      9.0%    1.0%     4.1%
 Internet                                                       19.1%               27.4%               30.7%              27.2%     49.7%    41.4%   45.3%
 Social media                                                    5.3%                6.2%                8.9%               5.3%      5.5%    7.1%     6.1%
 Blogs                                                           0.0%                0.0%                0.0%               0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.7%
 Mobile phones                                                   5.3%                1.8%                6.9%              11.4%      1.4%    6.1%     2.0%
 Instant messaging                                               2.1%                0.0%                0.0%               0.9%      0.7%    0.0%     0.7%
 Other                                                           0.0%                0.0%                1.0%               0.9%      1.4%    2.0%     0.7%




                                                                                                                   107
The World Bank                                                                                                          Nigeria                                                               Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                         Adamawa            Cross River                   Edo                 Enugu                 FCT                 Kaduna   Lagos
 World Bank website                                             33.7%              40.5%                      42.6%                30.7%                47.6%                 44.1%   44.6%
 Direct contact with World Bank                                 10.2%              19.8%                      24.8%                11.4%                14.5%                 11.8%    6.8%
 e-newsletters                                                   7.1%              10.8%                      18.8%                17.5%                31.0%                 6.9%    32.4%
 Instant messaging                                               8.2%               7.2%                       8.9%                 3.5%                 5.5%                 13.7%    8.8%
 World Bank seminars/ workshops/conferences                     31.6%              36.0%                      37.6%                39.5%                33.1%                 21.6%   32.4%
 World Bank Public Information Center                           21.4%               7.2%                       5.0%                20.2%                 8.3%                 8.8%    10.1%
 World Bank publications and other written materials            12.2%              27.0%                      17.8%                28.1%                21.4%                 15.7%   24.3%
 Mobile phones                                                  23.5%              30.6%                      25.7%                22.8%                 9.7%                 24.5%   16.2%
 Social media                                                   15.3%              11.7%                      14.9%                14.0%                13.8%                 29.4%   18.9%
 Blogs                                                           0.0%               1.8%                       0.0%                 0.0%                 1.4%                 0.0%     0.0%
 Other                                                          13.3%               0.9%                       0.0%                 0.0%                 0.7%                 10.8%    2.7%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                     Adamawa            Cross River               Edo                 Enugu                    FCT                Kaduna   Lagos
  Yes                                                             41.2%               28.2%                 23.7%                22.7%                   26.5%                43.6%   18.2%
  No                                                              58.8%               71.8%                 76.3%                77.3%                   73.5%                56.4%   81.8%
*Significantly different between locations

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                     Adamawa               Cross River              Edo                 Enugu                 FCT                 Kaduna   Lagos
  Yes                                                             31.6%                 28.0%                 36.2%                22.7%                32.6%                 29.0%   17.6%
  No                                                              68.4%                 72.0%                 63.8%                77.3%                67.4%                 71.0%   82.4%
*Significantly different between locations

Were you able to obtain this information?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                       Adamawa             Cross River              Edo                 Enugu                 FCT                 Kaduna   Lagos
  Yes                                                              59.3%                60.0%                 43.4%                85.7%                67.3%                 88.2%   63.2%
  No                                                               40.7%                40.0%                 56.6%                14.3%                32.7%                 11.8%   36.8%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you have access to the Internet?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                       Adamawa             Cross River              Edo                 Enugu                 FCT                 Kaduna   Lagos
  Yes                                                              77.4%                88.7%                 90.5%                99.0%                97.8%                 94.0%   98.7%
  No                                                               22.6%                11.3%                  9.5%                 1.0%                 2.2%                 6.0%     1.3%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                       Adamawa             Cross River              Edo                 Enugu                 FCT                 Kaduna   Lagos
  Yes                                                              44.8%                45.3%                 55.7%                49.5%                79.9%                 51.0%   53.0%
  No                                                               55.2%                54.7%                 44.3%                50.5%                20.1%                 49.0%   47.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Which do you primarily use?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                       Adamawa             Cross River              Edo                 Enugu                 FCT                 Kaduna   Lagos
  The World Bank's country website                                 64.4%                62.5%                 42.0%                45.8%                27.3%                 29.4%   46.5%
  The World Bank's main website                                    35.6%                37.5%                 58.0%                54.2%                72.7%                 70.6%   53.5%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                                                                        108
The World Bank                                                                                                          Nigeria                                     Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
The Internet connection I mainly use when visiting a World Bank website is:*
  Percentage of Respondents                                     Adamawa               Cross River             Edo                 Enugu    FCT    Kaduna    Lagos
  High speed                                                      40.0%                 44.4%                24.3%                63.2%   50.0%    37.3%    34.3%
  Dial-up                                                         22.2%                 22.2%                 8.1%                14.0%    5.6%    23.5%     8.8%
  3G/4G                                                           37.8%                 33.3%                67.6%                22.8%   44.4%    39.2%    56.9%
*Significantly different between locations

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten-point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations



H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
 Percentage of Respondents                                      Adamawa             Cross River               Edo                 Enugu    FCT    Kaduna    Lagos
 Yes                                                              13.3%                26.8%                 11.0%                14.2%   51.4%    36.6%    23.1%
 No                                                               86.7%                73.2%                 89.0%                85.8%   48.6%    63.4%    76.9%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents
 (Responses Combined)                                           Adamawa             Cross River            Edo                    Enugu    FCT    Kaduna   Lagos
 Observer                                                         80.6%                50.5%             81.3%                    74.1%   27.3%    55.9%   76.4%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                      14.0%                29.1%             18.8%                    23.2%   44.1%    19.4%   29.7%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored
                                                                  34.4%                20.4%             27.1%                    23.2%   40.6%   20.4%    16.2%
 events/activities
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                     8.6%                16.5%             12.5%                    16.1%   25.9%    6.5%    16.2%
 Use World Bank communication tools for information,
                                                                  23.7%                24.3%             25.0%                    11.6%   17.5%   33.3%    29.7%
 data, research, etc.




                                                                                                                        109
The World Bank                                                                      Nigeria                                     Country Survey 2013




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions by Year 1
                            FY ’07 Response Number = 1256  FY ’13 Response Number = 835

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale?




(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
*Significantly different between FY13 and FY07 country surveys


To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Nigeria in terms of each of the following?




(1-To no degree at all, 10- To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between FY13 and FY07 country surveys




1
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’07 and FY ’13 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.



                                                                                     110
The World Bank                                                                   Nigeria                                                     Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Nigeria, on a ten-point scale?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective – FY07 ratings converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison)
*Significantly different between FY13 and FY07 country surveys



D. The World Bank’s Knowledge
In Nigeria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank's knowledge work and activities:




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree – FY07 ratings converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison)
*Significantly different between FY13 and FY07 country surveys



E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten-point scale? (1-Strongly disagree; 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between FY13 and FY07 country surveys




                                                                                   111
The World Bank                                                   Nigeria                    Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing
Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                             FY 2007   FY 2013
  Yes                                                                    18.6%     55.4%
  No                                                                     81.4%     44.6%
*Significantly different between FY13 and FY07 country surveys

Which do you primarily use?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                             FY 2007   FY 2013
  The World Bank's country website                                       60.3%     42.7%
  The World Bank's main website                                          39.7%     57.3%
*Significantly different between FY13 and FY07 country surveys




                                                                  112
The World Bank                                                                                        Nigeria                                                                      Country Survey 2013




Appendix E: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank
                                                 H3. Currently, do you
                                                                              H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              professionally collaborate/
                                              work with the World Bank?             Observer             Use WB reports/data   Engage in WB activities       Collaborate          Use WB website

Indicator Question                             No Mean         Yes Mean     No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean     Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the
World Bank’s effectiveness in Nigeria, on a      6.06            6.46        6.42              5.98       6.19         6.04      6.13          6.21       6.13         6.24     6.03         6.54
ten-point scale.
The World Bank's financial instruments
                                                 5.33            6.09        5.86              5.33       5.55         5.50      5.42          5.86       5.56         5.42     5.40         5.95
meet the needs of Nigeria.
The World Bank meets Nigeria's needs for
                                                 5.56            6.40        6.12              5.60       5.75         5.93      5.68          6.14       5.82         5.66     5.70         6.12
knowledge services.
Overall the World Bank currently plays a
                                                 5.98            6.65        6.63              5.91       6.13         6.35      6.04          6.58       6.13         6.48     6.06         6.58
relevant role in development in Nigeria
The World Bank's work is aligned with
what I consider the development priorities       5.74            6.35        6.24              5.68       5.86         6.02      5.82          6.13       5.87         6.09     5.83         6.15
for Nigeria
Responsiveness                                   5.38            6.42        6.18              5.36       5.67         5.75      5.58          5.98       5.65         5.88     5.57         6.06
Openness (sharing data and other
                                                 5.75            6.67        6.54              5.65       5.83         6.46      5.93          6.18       5.97         6.15     5.89         6.33
information)
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                 5.64            6.39        6.27              5.59       5.84         5.88      5.76          6.10       5.85         5.86     5.75         6.15
Government
Collaboration with the Government                6.83            7.47        7.34              6.81       6.94         7.23      6.89          7.35       7.01         7.05     6.96         7.21
Collaboration with other donors                  6.05            6.80        6.68              6.04       6.24         6.44      6.30          6.27       6.27         6.39     6.09         6.91
To what degree does the World Bank’s
work help achieve development results in         6.38            6.70        6.72              6.32       6.52         6.37      6.38          6.74       6.48         6.47     6.35         6.86
Nigeria, on a ten-point scale?
Are adaptable to Nigeria's specific
development challenges and country               5.56            6.08        6.02              5.51       5.74         5.62      5.67          5.83       5.67         5.91     5.62         6.01
circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do
you believe the World Bank’s knowledge
work and research make to development            6.36            6.81        6.78              6.29       6.43         6.60      6.40          6.70       6.44         6.68     6.39         6.75
results in your country, on a ten-point
scale?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank’s                      6.82            7.35        7.22              6.82       6.89         7.21      6.97          6.99       6.93         7.25     6.90         7.20
knowledge/research, on a ten-point scale?
Where country systems are adequate, the
World Bank makes appropriate use of              6.06            6.68        6.50              6.09       6.21         6.39      6.12          6.60       6.24         6.36     6.21         6.41
them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.




                                                                                                       113
The World Bank                                    Nigeria                               Country Survey 2013



Appendix F: Nigeria FY 2013 Questionnaire




                            World Bank Country Survey FY13 – NIGERIA


The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Nigeria or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The
following survey is meant to give the World Bank’s team that works in Nigeria, greater insight into how
the Bank’s work is perceived. This is one tool the World Bank uses to assess the views of its critical
stakeholders. With this understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies,
outreach and programs that support development in Nigeria. The World Bank commissioned an
independent firm to oversee the logistics of this effort in Nigeria. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that
most accurately reflects your opinion. If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER
OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF
MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING NIGERIA

 A1. In general would you say that Nigeria is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                   114
The World Bank                                            Nigeria                                   Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A2. When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most
 important in Nigeria? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most
 important priority?
                                                               First priority     Second priority        Third priority
 (Choose only ONE for each column)                          (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)      (Choose only ONE)
  1    Rural development                                                                                    
  2    Education                                                                                            
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
  3                                                                                                         
       social assistance)
  4    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                     
  5    Basic infrastructure                                                                                 
  6    Poverty reduction                                                                                    
  7    Public sector reform                                                                                 
  8    Regional integration                                                                                 
 9     Global integration                                                                                   
 10    Gender                                                                                               
 11    Domestic private sector development                                                                  
 12    Foreign direct investment                                                                            
 13    Water and sanitation                                                                                 
 14    Anti-corruption                                                                                      
 15    Monitoring and evaluation                                                                            
       Public financial management (e.g., public
 16                                                                                                         
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 17    Job creation/employment                                                                              
 18    Youth employment                                                                                     
       Governance (e.g., government
 19                                                                                                         
       responsiveness/effectiveness)
 20    Financial markets                                                                                    
 21    Urban development                                                                                    
       Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas,
 22                                                                                                         
       mining)
 23    Environmental sustainability                                                                         
 24    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                               
 25    Health                                                                                               
 26    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                               
 27    Energy                                                                                               
 28    Food security                                                                                        
 29    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                        
 30    Disaster management                                                                                  
 31    Agricultural development                                                                             
 32    Regional trade                                                                                       
 33    International trade                                                                                  
 34    Crime and violence                                                                                   
 35    Economic growth                                                                                      
 36    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                              
 37    Regulatory and institutional framework                                                               
 38    Information and communications technology                                                            


                                                           115
The World Bank                                            Nigeria                                       Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Nigeria? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Water and sanitation                                 19      Anti-corruption
  2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)               20      Domestic private sector development
  3    Economic growth                                      21      Foreign direct investment
  4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)        22      Global integration
  5    Disaster management                                  23      Energy
  6    Regional integration                                 24      Public sector reform
  7    Gender                                               25      Monitoring and evaluation
                                                                    Governance (e.g., government responsiveness and
  8    Rural development                                    26
                                                                    effectiveness)
  9    Urban development                                    27      Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 10    Education                                            28      Environmental sustainability

 11    Regulatory framework                                 29      Health
                                                                    Public financial management (e.g., public
 12    Basic infrastructure                                 30
                                                                    expenditure, fiscal system reform)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 13                                                         31      Agricultural development
       social assistance)
 14    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)              32      Job creation/employment
 15    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)     33      Financial markets
 16    Crime and violence                                   34      Trade and exports (regional/international)
 17    Communicable/non-communicable diseases               35      Food security
 18    Information and communications technology            36      Other (Please specify ________________________)




                                                           116
The World Bank                                        Nigeria                                             Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
 Nigeria? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy                                           19       Domestic private sector development
 2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)           20       Job creation/employment
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 3                                                     21       Agricultural development
      social assistance)
 4    Global integration                               22       Food security
 5    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)    23       Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)
 6    Anti-corruption                                  24       Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 7    Disaster management                              25       Monitoring and evaluation
 8    Rural development                                26       Gender
 9    Foreign direct investment                        27       Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 10   Urban development                                28       Environmental sustainability
 11   Water and sanitation                             29       Health
 12   Education                                        30       Basic infrastructure
 13   Information and communications technology        31       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 14   Regulatory framework                             32       Crime and violence
                                                                Public financial management (e.g., public
 15   Communicable/non-communicable diseases           33
                                                                expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 16   Trade and exports                                34       Financial markets
 17   Public sector reform
                                                       35       Other (please specify ________________________)
 18   Regional integration




                                                       117
The World Bank                                          Nigeria                                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Nigeria, on a ten point scale?
         1              2       3       4       5       6         7       8           9               10

 Not familiar at all                                                                          Extremely familiar




 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in Nigeria, on a
 ten point scale?
          1             2   3       4       5       6    7        8   9                10                  

 Not effective at all                                                               Very effective    Don't know




 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank's staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Nigeria solve its most complicated development challenges, on a ten
 point scale?
          1             2   3       4       5       6    7        8   9                10                  
                                                                              To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                  Don't know
                                                                                           degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER
OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF
MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                         118
The World Bank                                        Nigeria                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK
 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in
 Nigeria, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and
 resources in Nigeria? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Rural development                                         20   Environmental sustainability
 2    Education                                                 21   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 3                                                              22   Health
      assistance)
      Governance (e.g., government responsiveness and
 4                                                              23   Global integration
      effectiveness)
 5    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)          24   Food security
 6    Poverty reduction                                         25   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 7    Public sector reform                                      26   Agricultural development
 8    Regional integration                                      27   International trade
 9    Gender                                                    28   Regional trade
 10   Crime and violence                                        29   Economic growth
 11   Domestic private sector development                       30   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 12   Foreign direct investment                                 31   Regulatory framework
 13   Water and sanitation                                      32   Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 14   Energy                                                    33   Basic infrastructure
 15   Monitoring and evaluation                                 34   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
      Public financial management (e.g., public
 16                                                             35   Anti corruption
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 17   Job creation/employment                                   36   Information and communications technology
 18   Financial markets                                         37   Disaster management
 19   Urban development                                         38   Other (please specify _______________________)




                                                       119
The World Bank                                           Nigeria                                Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and
 which activity is of second greatest value in Nigeria?
                                                                      Greatest Value       Second Greatest Value
                                                                 (Choose only ONE) (Choose only ONE)
 1    Financial resources                                                                         
 2    Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                  
 3    Technical assistance                                                                        
 4    Policy advice                                                                               
 5    Development partner coordination                                                            
 6    Data                                                                                        
 7    Training/capacity building                                                                  
 8    Studies/analyses                                                                            
 9    Convening/facilitating                                                                      
      Linkage to non-Bank expertise (e.g., South-South
 10                                                                                               
      knowledge sharing)
 11   Other (please specify):_______________________                                              



 B6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political and societal realities
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 4    Staff too inaccessible
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not client focused
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12   Not aligned with country priorities
 13   Not aligned with other development partners’ work
 14   Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 15   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Nigeria
 16   Not enough engagement at state levels
 17   Too much engagement at state levels
 18   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________




                                                           120
The World Bank                                           Nigeria                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B7. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8    Don’t know



 B8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce
 poverty in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8    Don’t know



 B9. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the global
 development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate change, communicable
 diseases, international financial systems, trade, statistics, etc.), on a ten point scale?
         1           2       3      4       5       6        7     8       9                10                 
 To no degree at                                                                              To a very
                                                                                                          Don't know
 all                                                                                 significant degree




                                                          121
The World Bank                                       Nigeria                                      Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B10. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor,
 which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your
 country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     NGOs
 2     Local Government
 3     Beneficiaries
 4     Private sector
 5     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 6     Development partner community
 7     Foundations
 8     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 9     Parliament
 10    Media
 11    State governments
 12    Governors’ Forum
 13    Faith based organizations
 14    Youth
 15    Other (please specify): __________________________



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Nigeria, on
 a ten point scale?
                                                               Strongly                                  Strongly   Don't
                                                               disagree                                     agree   know
        Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
 B11                                                            1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        role in development in Nigeria
        The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
 B12                                                            1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        consider the development priorities for Nigeria
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies
 B13                                                            1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        that are realistic for Nigeria
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
 B14                                                            1     2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        Nigeria with respect




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER
OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF
MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                       122
The World Bank                                            Nigeria                                       Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Nigeria, in terms of each of the
 following?
                                                                    To no                                    To a very
                                                                                                                          Don't
                                                                    degree at                               significant
                                                                                                                          know
                                                                    all                                        degree
 B15     Responsiveness                                              1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products
 B16                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       
         and services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B17                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       
         circumstances)
 B18     Being inclusive                                             1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       

 B19     Openness (sharing data and other information)               1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       

 B20     Staff accessibility                                         1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       
 B21     Straightforwardness and honesty                             1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       
         Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B22                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       
         Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B23     Collaboration with the Government                           1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       

 B24     Collaboration with other development partners               1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       

 B25     Follow through over time                                    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9      10       



 B26. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank works too slowly
 2     The Government works inefficiently
 3     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4     Poor development partner coordination
 5     The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 6     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 7     Political pressures and obstacles
 8     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 9     The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                           123
The World Bank                                               Nigeria                                           Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
 development in Nigeria, on a ten point scale?
                                                                       Not effective                                      Very    Don't
                                                                       at all                                         effective   know
  C1    Anti-corruption                                                 1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

  C2    Information and communications technology                       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

  C3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

  C4    Crime and violence                                              1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

  C5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                         1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

  C6    Urban development                                               1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
  C7    Environmental sustainability                                    1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

  C8    Regulatory framework                                            1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

  C9    Basic infrastructure                                            1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C10    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                          1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
 C11    Poverty reduction                                               1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
 C12    Gender                                                          1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
 C13    Domestic private sector development                             1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
 C14    Foreign direct investment                                       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C15    Water and sanitation                                            1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
 C16    Trade and exports (regional/international)                      1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C17    Economic growth                                                 1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C18    Energy                                                          1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C19    Disaster management                                             1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C20    Monitoring and evaluation                                       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
        Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure,
 C21                                                                    1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
        fiscal system reform)
 C22    Job creation/employment                                         1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C23    Financial markets                                               1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C24    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                          1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
 C25    Health                                                          1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C26    Rural development                                               1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C27    Global integration                                              1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
        Governance (e.g., government
 C28                                                                    1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
        responsiveness/effectiveness)
 C29    Food security                                                   1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
 C30    Education                                                       1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
        Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 C31                                                                    1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
        assistance)
 C32    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                   1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C33    Public sector reform                                            1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C34    Regional integration                                            1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
 C35    Agricultural development                                        1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      
 C36    Community development                                           1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      

 C37    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)            1      2       3   4   5   6   7   8      9        10      



                                                               124
The World Bank                                          Nigeria                                           Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C38. To what extent does the World Bank’s work help to achieve development results in Nigeria, on a
 ten point scale?
         1             2       3       4       5        6           7       8       9               10                     
 To no degree at                                                                            To a very significant
                                                                                                                      Don't know
 all                                                                                                     degree




 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Nigeria, on a ten
 point scale?
                                                         Strongly                                               Strongly   Don't
                                                         disagree                                                  agree   know
        The World Bank's financial instruments (i.e.,
        investment lending, Development Policy
 C39                                                        1     2     3       4   5   6      7     8      9       10      
        Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.)
        meet the needs of Nigeria
        The World Bank meets Nigeria’s needs for
 C40    knowledge services (e.g., research, analysis,       1     2     3       4   5   6      7     8      9       10      
        data, technical assistance)




                                                         125
The World Bank                                             Nigeria                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge work and activities (e.g., data,
 analysis, reports) in the work you do?
 1    Weekly
 2    Monthly
 3    A few times a year
 4    Rarely
 5    Never



 D2. When thinking about the development challenges in Nigeria, where do you believe it would be
 most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?
 (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Public sector reform                                           19   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 2    Gender                                                         20   Urban development
 3    Education                                                      21   Crime and violence
 4    Domestic private sector development                            22   Regional integration
 5    Foreign direct investment                                      23   Information and communications technology
 6    Water and sanitation                                           24   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 7    Trade and exports (regional/international)                     25   Agricultural development
 8    Economic growth                                                26   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
                                                                          Public financial management (e.g., public
 9    Energy                                                         27
                                                                          expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 10   Disaster management                                            28   Job creation/employment
 11   Monitoring and evaluation                                      29   Health
 12   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)                    30   Rural development
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 13                                                                  31   Global integration
      assistance)
 14   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                  32   Food security
 15   Poverty reduction                                              33   Environmental sustainability
 16   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                        34   Regulatory framework
 17   Anti-corruption                                                35   Basic infrastructure
 18   Financial markets                                              36   Communicable/non-communicable diseases




                                                            126
The World Bank                                            Nigeria                                           Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 In Nigeria, how effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at:
                                                           Not
                                                                                                                      Very    Don't
                                                           effective
                                                                                                                  effective   know
                                                           at all
 D3    Raising your awareness of the particular topic       1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D4    Stimulating public debate/dialogue                   1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D5    Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills               1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D6    Contributing to good policy making                   1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       Providing support for program
 D7                                                         1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
       implementation



 In Nigeria, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research:
                                                           To no                                                To a very
                                                                                                                              Don't
                                                           degree at                                           significant
                                                                                                                              know
                                                           all                                                    degree
  D8     Are available when needed                          1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D9                                                        1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Nigeria’s development
 D10                                                        1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         priorities
 D11     Provide feasible recommendations                   1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D12                                                        1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         understand)
         A source of relevant information on global
 D13                                                        1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         good practices
 D14     Are adequately disseminated                        1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
 D15     Are appropriately translated                       1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         Are adaptable to Nigeria’s specific
 D16     development challenges and country                 1       2       3   4   5   6      7       8      9        10      
         circumstances



 D17. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank's knowledge and
 research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?
           1              2    3     4      5         6         7       8       9         10                   

 Not significant at all                                                             Very significant       Don't know




                                                           127
The World Bank                                     Nigeria                                Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 D18. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank's knowledge/research,
 on a ten point scale?
         1              2   3    4      5      6             7   8   9          10                 
 Very low                                                                Very high technical
                                                                                               Don't know
 technical quality                                                                   quality




 D19. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise e.g.,
 South-South knowledge sharing, etc.)?
          1             2   3     4      5     6             7   8   9          10                 

 Not effective at all                                                         Very effective   Don't know




                                                    128
The World Bank                                         Nigeria                               Country Survey 2013



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale?
                                                         Strongly                                   Strongly   Don't
                                                         disagree                                      agree   know
  E1    The World Bank disburses funds promptly           1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        The World Bank effectively monitors and
  E2    evaluates the projects and programs it            1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        supports
        The World Bank's approvals and reviews are
  E3                                                      1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        done in a timely fashion
        The World Bank's “Safeguard Policy”
  E4                                                      1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        requirements are reasonable
        The World Bank imposes reasonable
  E5                                                      1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        conditions on its lending
        Working with the World Bank increases
  E6                                                      1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        Nigeria's institutional capacity
        The World Bank ensures consistency and
  E7                                                      1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        continuity through staff changes
        The World Bank's teams and visits are well
  E8                                                      1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        coordinated
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
        financial management, etc.) are adequate,
  E9                                                      1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        the World Bank makes appropriate use of
        them
        The World Bank provides effective
 E10    implementation support (i.e., supervision of      1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9       10      
        projects)




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER
OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF
MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                        129
The World Bank                                          Nigeria                                       Country Survey 2013



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN NIGERIA

 F1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play in Nigeria’s
 development in the near future, on a ten point scale?
         1           2       3       4         5    6      7       8        9            10               
 Not a significant                                                                 Very significant
                                                                                                      Don't know
 role at all                                                                                   role



 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in
 Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Nigeria’s specific challenges
 2    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3    Focus primarily on advocacy issues
      Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, and other
 4
      terms)
 5    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 6    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Nigeria’s economy
 7    Offer more innovative financial products
 8    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9    Increase availability of Fee-Based services
 10   Work faster
 11   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                          130
The World Bank                                         Nigeria                                    Country Survey 2013



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues
 in Nigeria? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?             (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2    Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Public Information Center
 7    World Bank publications and other written materials
 8    Mobile phones
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



       Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will
 G3                                                                                                  Yes         No
       now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 G4                                                                                                  Yes         No
       (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                     Yes         No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                           Yes         No
 G7    Do you use/have you ever used the World Bank website?                                         Yes         No




                                                        131
The World Bank                                          Nigeria                                    Country Survey 2013



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use?
 1     The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/ng)
 2     The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 G9. The Internet connection I mainly use when visiting a World Bank website is:
 1     High speed
 2     Dial-up
 3     3G/4G



 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                                    Strongly                            Strongly    Don't
                                                                    disagree                               agree    know
         I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the
 G10                                                                 1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
         organization's Open Data policy
         I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only
 G11                                                                 1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
         answer if you have used a World Bank website)
         I find the information on the World Bank’s websites
 G12     useful. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank          1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
         website)
         I find information on World Bank Facebook, Twitter,
 G13                                                                 1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
         Youtube or Flickr useful
         When I need information from the World Bank I know
 G14     how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them,    1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
         etc.)
         The World Bank is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                 1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9    10      
         requests and inquiries



PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER
OF RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF
MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                         132
The World Bank                                        Nigeria                                    Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?         (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Office of the President
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   Other (please specify): ________________________




                                                       133
The World Bank                                        Nigeria                                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Agricultural development                          20      Health
 2    Anti corruption                                   21      Information and communications technology
 3    Basic infrastructure                              22      Job creation/employment
 4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)     23      Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 5    Communicable/non-communicable diseases            24      Monitoring and evaluation
 6    Crime and violence                                25      Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 7    Disaster management                               26      Poverty reduction
                                                                Public financial management (e.g., public
 8    Domestic private sector development               27
                                                                expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 9    Economic growth                                   28      Public sector reform
 10   Education                                         29      Regional integration
 11   Energy                                            30      Regulatory framework
 12   Environmental sustainability                      31      Rural development
                                                                Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 13   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)            32
                                                                assistance)
 14   Financial markets                                 33      Trade and exports (regional/international)
 15   Food security                                     34      Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 16   Foreign direct investment                         35      Urban development
 17   Gender                                            36      Water and sanitation
 18   Global integration
                                                        37      Other (please specify): _______________________
 19   Governance (i.e., government effectiveness)




                                                       134
The World Bank                                           Nigeria                                Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No



 H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Nigeria?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
      Use World Bank communication tools (website, Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr) for information,
 5
      data, research, etc.



 H5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Adamawa
 2    Cross River
 3    Edo
 4    Enugu
 5    FCT
 6    Kaduna
 7    Lagos




                            Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                          135
