                                                     88537



Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building




        Report of the eleventh meeting
                     of the
         TFSCB Advisory Panel (AP)
               (February 24-28, 2014)




               The World Bank
             Washington DC, USA



                                               March 14, 2014
                                        Chandrakant A. PATEL
                                           Jean-Louis BODIN
                  ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS



AP        Advisory Panel (TFSCB)
BAPS      Busan Action Plan on Statistics
CAS       Country Assistance Strategy
CG        Consultative Group (TFSCB)
CIS       Commonwealth of Independent States
DFID      Department for International Development (UK Government)
DDG       Development Data Group (DECDG)
DECDG     Development Economics Vice Presidency (World Bank)
ECASTAT   Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building in Countries of Eastern
          Europe and Central Asia (Federation of Russia)
EDGE      Evidence and Data for Gender Equality Initiative
FY13      World Bank’s Fiscal Year finishing on June 30, 2013
GFR       Grant Funding Request
IDA       International Development Agency
IMC       Internal Management Committee (TFSCB)
ISI       International Statistical Institute
IT        Information Technologies
MDG       Millennium Development Goals
NGO       Non-Governmental Organization
NSDS      National Strategy for Statistical Development
NSO       National Statistical Office
ODRA      Open Data Readiness Assessment
PARIS21   Consortium Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21st Century
SRF       Statistics for Results Facility (World Bank)
STATCAP   Lending program to support more efficient and effective statistical
          systems in developing countries (World Bank)
TF        Trust Fund
TFSCB     Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building (World Bank)
TTL       Task Team Leader (World Bank projects)
UNSD      United Nations Statistical Division
WB        The World Bank




                                                                                 2
                                   CONTENTS



Executive Summary                                                   4
I – Background                                                      6
II TFSCB Funding                                                    8
III – TFSCB Future: Mandate and Vision 2015 - 2020                  9
IV – Review of 2013 TFSCB Activities                               13
V – Summary of Recommendations                                     16
ANNEX: Update of the recent project proposals received by the AU   19




                                                                        3
   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


       The Advisory Panel (AP) was created to conduct a yearly technical review of
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building (TFSCB) activities and report its findings
and recommendations to the Consultative Group (CG) during its Annual Meeting. As
decided at the Third Meeting of the Consultative Group (CG) of the TFSCB held in Paris
on October 6, 2002 the AP consists of two “external advisors”.

        The 11th AP meeting was held from February 24 to 28, 2014 at the Headquarters
of the World Bank in Washington, DC. In its report, the AP concentrated its work on the
repositioning of the TFSCB with a vision for 2015 through 2020 , in the context of the
objectives and goals based on the mandate established by the WB President Jim Yong
Kim at the 2012 Annual Meetings and their statistical arm, i.e. the Busan Action Plan on
Statistics (BAPS). The section II deals with the TFSCB funding and the recent
restoration of the Fund by new donations and pledges. The section III discusses the
mandate and the vision for the TFSCB future activities in the light of these new
donations. A review of 2013 activities, including questions regarding the management of
the TFSCB, is presented in the section IV of this report. Finally, the AP
recommendations are summarized in section V. As in the reports of the previous
meetings, an Annex presents and analyzes the project proposals received by the TFSCB
Administration Unit since the 10th AP meeting held in January 2013.

        The AP proposes that the TFSCB focuses its priorities on five growth areas:
i) Preparation and implementation of NSDS; ii) open data; iii) gender statistics; iv)
innovative approaches; v) measuring sustainable development.

        During its 9th meeting, the AP recommended to the IMC to consider the
submission of project proposals in two phases, the GFR being drafted after the
agreement of the IMC on a letter of intention or a concept note explaining the objectives
and expected results of the proposals is received. The AU produced in April 2012 new
guidelines and procedures as a follow-up of this recommendation. With the experience
gained from the proposals presented during the FY 2013, the AP continues to support the
2-stage procedure but recommends that as soon as possible an assessment of the new
guidelines be carried out with the aim of improving its operation so that it remains
efficient, transparent and flexible. The AP also recommends that the AU looks at the
possibility of restoring a second Non NSDS Window.

        The AP was provided with the list of thirteen proposals presented to AU for the
stage 1 and eight GFRs finally proposed to the IMC. The AP was provided with the
eleven proposed GFRs (eight proposals presented through the Non NSDS Window plus
the three presented through the NSDS Window). The three proposals made through the
NSDS Window were accepted by virtual IMC meetings. Three of the eight proposals
presented through the Non NSDS Window were rejected. The total percentage of


                                                                                        4
proposals made through the Non NSDS Window that were not shortlisted after the stage
1 or rejected during the stage 2 is therefore 62 % (compared to around 50 % during the
two previous periods).

       The budget allocated for the sixteen approved or conditionally approved
proposals was $ 2.14 million (compared to $3.92 between March 2012 and February
2013, $ 2.24 between March 2011 and February 2012, and $ 11.78 million for the two-
year period between April 2008 and April 2010). The trend of the total funding has
declined considerably during the past five years.

        In short, based on the mandate for the future of TFSCB and the vision for 2015
through 2020, the AP proposes in the section V sixteen recommendations, the main ones
are as follows:

    The TFSCB should focus its priorities on five growth areas: i) Preparation and
     implementation of NSDS; ii) open data; iii) gender statistics; iv) innovative
     approaches; v) measuring sustainable development.

    An open NSDS Window should continue to reiterate the importance of adopting
     strategies for building statistical capacities and their implementation.

    Building pilot sub-national strategies that can be replicated in large federal
     countries or unions of states should be given careful consideration.

    TFSCB proposals on Open Data Readiness Assessment and action plan would be
     pre-requisites and financing would be provided mostly for implementation. They
     should provide clear guidelines on the coverage of implementation

    For transfer and loading of statistical indicators in Open Data Systems, funding
     could be from domestic sources or elsewhere as they could not be regarded as
     capacity building.

    TFSCB can finance gender statistics project proposals in four areas: i)
     assessments of the range of gender statistics available in administrative sources
     and technical advices on how they can be classified, tabulated and made
     accessible to the users; ii) creation of guidelines and modules on gender statistics
     to be utilized in the design and questionnaires of planned censuses and surveys;
     iii) best use of existing data and facilitation of the use of data by gender
     specialists; iv) building of partnerships.

    TFSCB is encouraged to provide support to small-scale projects that are likely to
     serve as catalysts for wider-scale improvements in the area of measuring
     sustainable development. Proposals may include training and organization of
     workshops by regional organizations.

    An assessment of the new guidelines and procedures produced by the AU in



                                                                                        5
        April, 2012 should be carried out as soon as possible with the aim of improving
        its operation so that it is efficient, transparent and flexible.

      The IMC regional members, as well as the WB country representatives, should
       be more proactive in their respective regions with outreaching on the TFSCB
       program.

      Efforts should continue to be made by PARIS21 and the WB to encourage the
       countries to prepare more comprehensive NSDS really adapted to the situation of
       the statistical system, to tie up with the developmental objectives of the countries
       and to update, or to re-draft the NSDSs of the first generation.

      For the project proposals to be submitted by non-IDA countries, a significant
       contribution from the requesting country comparable to the sum funded by the
       TFSCB should be asked.

      Whenever it is possible, sector specific projects should be financed through
       alternative facilities or by sources external to the World Bank.




    I. BACKGROUND
1.1. Organization of the work of the Advisory Panel (AP)

        The AP was created to conduct a yearly technical review of TFSCB activities and
report its findings and recommendations to the Consultative Group (CG) of the TFSCB
during the PARIS21 Annual Meetings. As decided at the Third Meeting of the CG held in
Paris on October 6, 2002 the AP consists of two “external advisors”1 who meet the
Administrative Unit (AU) in charge of the management of the TFSCB once a year at the
Headquarters of the World Bank. These meetings are organized some weeks before the
meetings of the CG in order to prepare and present report based on the most recent facts
and findings.

        The 11th meeting of the AP was held from February 24 to 28, 2014. The reports of
the previous meetings are available on the World Bank Website.


1
   See the rationale behind this decision and the terms of the reference of the AP in the reports of the
previous AP meetings.



                                                                                                      6
1.2 Acknowledgments

        The AP was provided with documents for review and discussions on .project
proposals submitted to the Internal Management Committee (IMC) of the TFSCB since
the 10th meeting of the AP, in particular2:
    - the minutes of the IMC meeting held on December 2, 2013 for the proposals
        made under the Non NSDS windows;
    - the Grant Funding Requests (GFR) for these proposals (with their Grant
        Financing Plans and Budget Tables) , including the GFR prepared for the three
        proposals made under the NSDS window and submitted for virtual meetings by
        the TFSCB IMC in 2013;;
    - a note for discussion prepared by the AU for an IMC meeting held on February
        18, 2014, to bring its attention on a set of issues linked to scaling up the TFSCB
        and refocusing it for the Post-2015 Data Revolution;
    - some other relevant documents concerning the preparation of the short list at the
        end of the stage 1 of the new procedure according to the new TFSCB Guidelines
        and Procedures3
    - the progress report on the First Round of Open Data Readiness Assessments
        (ODRA) and Action Plans prepared by the Open Data Policy Group at the
        demand of the IMC;
    - a discussion paper on “Open Data Challenges and Opportunities for NSOs”
        prepared for a side event of the meeting of the 45th session of the UN Statistical
        Commission (New York, March 3, 2014).

        The AP had comprehensive discussions with some members of the IMC in the
World Bank: Grant Cameron (Manager, Development Data Group, DECDG, and Head of
the IMC), Grigory Kisunko (Europe and Central Asia Region), John L. Newman (Africa
Region), Ms Barbro Hexeberg and Olivier Dupriez (DDG, DECDG), Ms Amparo
Ballivian (Open Data Unit, DECDG) and Ms Masako Hiraga (Gender Statistics Unit,
DDG, DECDG). The AP also met with Ms Ingrid Ivins and Mustafa Dinc (AU and IMC)
and made a courtesy call on Ms Haishan Fu, recently appointed as Director of the
DECDG. These discussions were fruitful and served to look forward to the future of
TFSCB. More than 13 years of operational knowhow and expertise supported by the
decision-making process which is now well established allows for rapid and efficient
clearance of project proposals.

1.3 Content of the AP Report

       During its 11th meeting, the AP concentrated its work on the repositioning of the
TFSCB in the context of the objectives and goals based on the mandate established by the
WB President Jim Yong Kim at the 2012 Annual Meetings and their statistical arm, i.e.
the Busan Action Plan on Statistics (BAPS) and with recently available resources.


2
    The TFSCB Guidelines and Procedures were provided to the AP during its 10 th meeting in January 2013.
3
    See the section IV of the report and its Annex for the presentation of the new procedures.


                                                                                                        7
        The section II deals with the TFSCB funding. The section III discusses the
mandate and the vision for the TFSCB future activities in the light of the new donations
or pledges recently made to the Trust Fund. A review of 2013 activities, including
questions regarding the management of the TFSCB, is presented in the section IV of this
report. Finally, the AP recommendations are summarized in section V. As in the reports
of the previous meetings, an Annex presents and analyzes the project proposals received
by the TFSCB Administration Unit since the 10th AP meeting held in January 2013.



II. TFSCB FUNDING
         TFSCB has evolved over a period of its operations into a sound financial and
management tool for providing, in cooperation with the development partners, small
grants to developing countries for statistical projects in a flexible manner. It has built up
organization, management, guidelines and procedures for operations with well defined
objectives. For years it was a multi-recipients fund supported by a significant number of
donors. But now the number of donors has drastically decreased and the AP noted during
its 10th meeting that the resources of the Fund have dwindled to a balance of about US $ 2
million of unallocated funds.

       To address this gloomy situation, the AP recommended to the DECDG to develop
a concerted strategy and pursue all the available avenues for funding in 2013. In the Fall
of 2013, the DFID agreed to contribute almost $ 20 million to the TFSCB and transferred
this sum in one single tranche. The Korean government also pledged to contribute $ 3
million over three years. Accordingly, at the TFSCB team request, the DEC Vice
President of the WB approved an extension of the programmes supported by the TFSCB
from the end of the year 2015 to the end of the year 2020. The last two other existing
donors decided to exit from the Fund, as their contributions were mostly spent.

        The AP welcomed this new situation despite its narrow donor base. It will allow
to continue promotion of medium- to long-term system-wide vision, consistent with the
BAPS, on statistical development in developing countries and to contribute to the design
and creation of NSDS in a large number of countries, the implementation of a large
number of smaller country or regional, sector specific and training projects on statistical
capacity building.

        During its 10th meeting in 2013, the AP recommended to explore the possibility of
getting the support of the World Bank’s management for investment in statistical capacity
building and Open Data Initiative, possibility of securing funding for the BAPS and
importance being given to gender, vital and agriculture statistics. It was also informed
that some non-governmental foundations have expressed interest in funding
implementation of Open Government Data Programme in developing countries. Certain
governments who were TFSCB donor partners in the past and some new prospective




                                                                                           8
donor emerging countries4 could also be drawn in as some of the proposed growth areas
could be of interest to them. The AP strongly recommended continuing efforts to enlarge
the list of donors and to approach new categories of donors.

       Moreover the DECDG should periodically examine that the TFSCB remains
closely aligned with Country Assistance Strategies (CASs) as well as with regional and
sector strategies. Such strategic alignment can facilitate fund raising and eventual
delivery of results that are targeted by the developmental objectives.



III. TFSCB FUTURE: MANDATE AND VISION 2015 - 2020
       “Data are crucial to setting priorities, making sound policy and tracking results.
Yet many countries have weak statistical capacity and lack reliable and updated
economic and poverty data.5” To address this imbalance between demand and supply of
timely and quality data, the World Bank President suggested in his speech to:
   a. Invest in data and analytical tools building on the success of the Open Data
       Initiative; and
   b. Work with partners (in building statistical capacity) to ensure virtually all
       developing countries have timely and accurate data.

        Taking into consideration, this broad mandate established by the World Bank
President, the growth areas proposed by TFSCB donors and the priorities resulting from
the Bussan Action Plan for Statistics (BAPS) and from the future MDGs’ framework, and
recent availability of funds, the AU prepared a note for discussion for the IMC meeting
held on February 18, 2014. According to this note, special emphasis should be placed on:

    1. Making government data more accessible by participating actively in the Bank
       policy on Open Data Readiness Assessment (ODRA) and Action Plan6;
    2. Improving the production and use of Gender Statistics
    3. Improving the data foundation for measuring sustainable development
    4. Funding innovative approach
    5. Improving TFSCB’s results focus.



4
 The Russian Government has signed in April, 2012, a US$ 15 million grant with the World Bank to support its
Multi-Donor Programmatic Trust Fund (ECASTAT) that will enhance capacity and address financial constraints
of the statistical systems in Eastern Europe and the CIS, with an emphasis on IDA borrower countries. On
another hand, the TFSCB staff is currently working on drafting the Administration Agreement for the Korean
pledged contribution.
5
 Remarks made by the World Bank President Jim Yong Kim at the Annual Meetings Plenary Sessions,
Tokyo, Japan, October 11, 2012.
6
 Action 2, “A Busan Action Plan for Statistics”, Statistics for Transparency, Accountability and Results, at
http://www.paris21.org/busan-ation-plan.



                                                                                                          9
        The AP welcomes this proposal but nevertheless reiterates the importance of
pursuing its support to the preparation of new or updated NSDS and their
implementation. According to the last PARIS21 progress report, 15% of IDA countries
and 35% of low and lower-middle income countries have no strategy or an expired
strategy. PARIS21 has prepared with the help of a Task Team 7 an update of the NSDS
Guidelines. Producing NSDS or new NSDS will therefore remain an important task.
Efforts should also go on for implementing NSDS.

        So the AP has discussed five growth areas: i) Preparation and implementation of
NSDS; ii) open data; iii) gender statistics; iv)innovative approaches; v) measuring
sustainable development.

        3.1. Preparation and implementation of NSDS

       PARIS21 produces twice a year a progress report presenting NSDS status in IDA
countries and in Low and Lower-Middle Income Countries8. According to these progress
reports, several countries have prepared or updated NSDS under the auspices of the
TFSCB grants or with the support of some donors (e.g. regional development banks).
Some of them have implemented these strategies through STATCAP loans, SFR facility,
with the help of TFSCB grants for specific implementation needs or through their own
funds or the funds granted or loaned by other donors.

        However, the following tasks still need to be addressed:

    a. The NSDS need to be prepared for the countries that have not done yet or have an
       expired strategy.
    b. Prioritized implementation plans need to be prepared for the countries intending
       to commit to their implementation and having ability to line up funding.
    c. Creating awareness and promoting implementation of strategies in remaining
       countries.
    d. Examining the results of the preparation and contents of NSDS and experience
       gained through their implementation and delivery of results and prepare model
       country case studies and recommendations that can be utilized in the
       implementation of revised guidelines as well as for countries planning
       implementation9.

7
  The Task Team was composed of representatives of the following countries or institutions: Canada
(Statistics Canada, chair), Ethiopia, France, Pakistan, Saint-Lucia, UK (DFID), Eurostat, FAO, IMF, WB
(DECDG)
8
 The more recent report was produced in November, 2013. See
http://www.paris21.org/sites/default/files/NSDS-status-nov2013.pdf
9
  During its 7th meeting (May 2010), the AP supported recommendation nr. 8 of the Independent Evaluation
Report made in 2009 which stated that some form of evaluation could help to highlight lessons learned for
the benefit of future projects (expansion of the role of the AP to include ex-post evaluation of sample
projects, thematic evaluations, and end-of-project evaluations of the largest projects). Therefore, the AP
reiterated during its 10th meeting (recommendation #11) its recommendation #5 of its 9 th meeting. Post-


                                                                                                       10
        In order to finance projects associated with these tasks, the TFSCB staff should
have concerted action plan in collaboration with other TF existing within the WB,
PARIS21, other bilateral or multilateral donors and NSOs. TTLs should be appropriately
briefed and encouraged for project proposals in these areas.

        Open NSDS Window should continue to reiterate the importance of strategies and
their implementation.

        Among the current criteria on the selection of projects for financing, there is no
guideline on the consideration of sub-national projects. If any quality proposal on a sub-
national (state/region) project targeting creation of a sub-national strategy of a model
nature that can be replicated in other states or regions is received for TFSCB financing, it
should be given careful consideration, in particular in large federal countries or unions of
states. The AP nevertheless agrees that the TFSCB, with its limited resources, cannot
afford to finance all sub-national projects in all large countries and that the concerned
guideline has consequently to be restrictive and limited to pilots.


        3.2. Open Data:

         The AP was pleased to note that the DECDG has initiated several actions to
promote open data initiatives, enhance preparation of open data assessment and action
plans in selected countries in order to create further awareness on open data and put the
initiative on a sounder methodological and strategic footing. High level as well as
technical consultations have been carried out. In this connection a side event at the
meeting of the UN Statistical Commission has been organized by the World Bank on
March 3, 2014 in New York to get inputs of the NSOs and international and regional
statistical agencies on the Report prepared by the Working Group.

       The AP also noted and accepted that Open Data proposals will be mainstreamed
and will not have a separate Window10 under TFSCB. The BAPS as well as the donors
have given great importance to Open Data and it's a high profile subject in the statistical
world and transparent governance. Therefore in developing vision on allocation of
resources for next five years consideration should be given to number of IDA and low
middle income countries likely to participate and submit proposal on Open Data for
TFSCB financing. The AP learnt from the DECDG Open Data Unit that an average cost
for an initial assessment and implementation per country might be around $150,000,
which allows developing and funding a significant number of pilot countries.




evaluations of countries’ NSDS work are necessary. DECDG and PARIS21 should collate and publish case
studies for selected model countries (at least one for each region).
10
 During its 10th meeting, the AP recommended to submit Open Data proposals through a specific Open
Window (recommendation #3).


                                                                                                 11
       The AP was informed and recommends that for TFSCB proposals on Open Data
readiness assessment and action plan would be pre-requisites and financing would be
provided mostly for implementation. The TSFCB should possibly provide clear guideline
on the coverage of implementation e.g. technical assistance, training, workshops, and
software. For data transfer and loading, funding could be from domestic sources or
elsewhere as they could not be regarded as capacity building.

         The AP commends the IMC decision on not to approve global projects unless
background report including results of the previously approved preceding global project
are submitted together with the proposal. Availability of such results could eventually
facilitate reporting on achievements of the BAPS.

       3.3. Gender statistics

        A steady flow of gender statistics may come out from administrative sources.
They need to be meaningfully classified and aggregated regularly to be analytically
useful. Some countries may need assessment of the range of gender statistics available in
administrative sources and technical advice on how they can be classified, tabulated and
made accessible to the users. TFSCB can finance proposals on such assessment requiring
technical assistance and training.

        The second important source of gender statistics is censuses and surveys. The
gender specialists should be involved during their planning and design. The
questionnaires to be utilized for censuses and surveys should carry analytically
meaningful questions on gender so that when answers are tabulated they can yield
required data. Therefore TFSCB could finance creation of guidelines and modules on
gender statistics to be utilized in the design and questionnaires of planned censuses and
surveys. Sometimes collected census and survey data are not appropriately classified and
tabulated in time for compiling gender statistics. TFSCB could consider financing
provision of technical assistance and training to IDA and low middle income countries on
gender statics in the context of censuses and surveys.

       The AP found that gender specialists at the World Bank are interested in the
analysis of gender statistics, Analytically useful gender statistics cannot be derived
unless basic data are collected or available and appropriately classified and aggregated.
These specialists should therefore be convinced to contribute to the improvement of data
sources and statistics on gender. They can also provide their input on guidelines and
modules on gender for censuses and surveys.

        Finally, TFSCB may also support proposals aiming at best use of the existing data
that are often already disaggregated by sex and facilitating the use of these data by gender
specialists.

       The AP in the Report of its 9th Meeting (March 2, 2012) pitched for collaboration
with other institutions on several domains, in particular in gender statistics. In fact the
BAPS endorsed the support for gender statistics. The launch of initiatives such as the



                                                                                         12
Evidence and Data for Gender Equality Initiative (EDGE) and the World Bank Umbrella
Trust Funds will help fill some gaps in Gender Statistics. DECDG should continue to
play an active role in building up partnerships in these areas and examine how the
TFSCB could contribute to these efforts in a complementary way.

        3.4. Innovative approaches

       In the note for discussion prepared by the AU for an IMC meeting held on
February 18, 2014, the TFSCB staff noted that the IT revolution over the last decade has
provided an unprecedented opportunity not only to strengthen statistical data collection
and production, but also for helping the users and decision-makers. An example of
innovative activities can be found in the use of mobile phones for collecting and
disseminating data11.

       The AP agrees that TFSCB can help bridge the gap in these activities by
supporting pilot exercises on small-scale innovations based on IT.

        3.5. Measuring Sustainable Development

        The BAPS also encourages countries to adopt the System of Environmental
Economic Accounting (SEEA) in order to enable governments and businesses to be more
accountable for their impact and sustainable development. It’s not up to TFSCB to fund
the development and implementation of such system, which would be a long and costly
activity exceeding the ceiling established by the Fund for each project.

       However, taking into account the availability and the weak quality of
environmental accounts in most developing countries, the AP may agree to encourage
support in this area in the form of small-scale projects likely to serve as a catalyst for
wider-scale improvements. TFSCB should approach UNSD to encourage regional
organizations to submit proposals on training and workshops on environmental
accounting for their regions for funding. The UNSD could suggest experts who could
provide technical expertise for these events. Thus the Trust Fund could contribute to
capacity building in this area.



IV. REVIEW OF 2013 TFSCB ACTIVITIES
4.1. Management of the TFSCB

       As noted in the previous reports of the AP meetings, the TFSCB has successfully
operated, since its inception in 1999, in promoting medium- to long-term system-wide
vision on statistical development in developing countries. Its financing has also
contributed to the design and creation of NSDS in a large number of countries. These

11
  The use of mobile phones was included in the NSDS implementation proposed by Togo and approved by
the IMC during the FY 13.


                                                                                                13
NSDS have provided the basis for STATCAP projects of the World Bank or for country
projects that are being implemented with financing from the SFR Catalytic Fund. In
addition, TFSCB financing has contributed to the implementation of a large number of
smaller country or regional, sector specific, and training projects on statistical capacity
building..

       Improved communication media created through World Bank and PARIS 21
websites led to a better understanding of TF goals and resulted in a greater percentage of
proposals in line with the main objective of statistical capacity building. The mechanism
for making decisions within the IMC is now well established and runs efficiently and
allows NSDS proposals to be immediately reviewed as they are received under the
“NSDS Window”. The AP has found that all decisions made during the meetings of the
IMC were generally decided according to the guidelines after a well-informed thinking
and debate.

        Following one recommendation made by the AP during its 9th meeting12, the AU
introduced in April 2012 new guidelines and procedures. The new procedure consists of
two-stages: during the stage 1, TTLs submit, in consultation with the agency who has
expressed interest, a short proposal (2 pages following a template recommended in the
guidelines). After review, a short list is established by the IMC and shortlisted proposals
are notified to the TTLs. During the stage 2, for each proposal the prospective grant
recipient and the TTL complete the GFR that is sent to the IMC for review and decision
making. Decisions were made by the IMC during a face-to-face meeting (held on
December 2, 2013). There was only one window in 2013 as well as in 2012.

        During its 10th meeting, the AP noted that some IMC members were not
completely satisfied with the way in which this new procedure was implemented mainly
as concerns the lack of flexibility and transparency. The limitation to a single window has
considerably delayed the consideration of proposals submitted in 2012 and 2013. On the
other hand, according to some IMC members, they were only asked to endorse in a very
short time a list of shortlisted proposals prepared by the AU13, without any opportunity of
having an in-depth discussion through a face-to-face IMC meeting.

        The AP was not in position to assess the merits of these comments. It continues to
support the 2-stage procedure but recommended during its 10th meeting that as soon as
possible an assessment of the new guidelines be carried out with the aim of improving its
operation so that it is efficient, flexible and transparent. The AP noted that, in 2013, the
AU specified more clearly the criteria taken into account for shortlisting proposals for the
stage 2. These criteria are the following:

      a. linkage with NSDS and evidence of demand from the recipient;

12
     Recommendation #11
13
   The AU sent to all IMC members by e-mail on September 10, 2013, a list of pre-selected proposals
along with the criteria used to assess them. The IMC members were asked to endorse this list within a 10-
days delay but had the option to ask the AU to reconsider its recommendations.


                                                                                                      14
     b.   fit with priorities of the TFSCB and the BAPS;
     c.   likelihood of follow-up and sustainability;
     d.   innovative approaches and replicability;
     e.   measurable outcomes;
     f.   policy relevance;
     g.   absorption capacity, feasibility and implementation risks;
     h.   availability of alternative/additional financing sources; and
     i.   overall quality of the application.

The AP also recommended that the AU looks at the possibility of preparing the list of
shortlisted proposals through a face-to-face IMC meeting and restoring the second non-
NSDS Window14.

        Finally, the AP recalls its recommendation made during its 9th meeting: since the
TTLs have generally very little time to really manage the projects, because of their small
size that usually generates a problem for the cost/effectiveness of all the tasks to be done
by TTL, it would be advisable to propose in the GFR some “tracking indicators” that
could be used by the TTL to follow up easily the progress of each project.

4.2. Highlights of 2013

        The AP was provided with the list of thirteen proposals presented to AU for the
stage 1 and eight GFRs finally proposed to the IMC for final decision during its meeting
of December 2, 2013. At the end of the stage 1, nine out of thirteen proposals were
shortlisted, but one shortlisted proposal was not followed by the preparation and
submission of a GFR, The AP was provided with the eleven proposed GFRs (eight
proposals presented through the Non NSDS Window plus the three presented through the
NSDS Window). The three proposals made through the NSDS Window were accepted by
virtual IMC meetings. Three of the eight proposals presented through the Non NSDS
Window were rejected. The total percentage of proposals made through the Non NSDS
Window that were not shortlisted after the stage 1 or rejected during the stage 2 is
therefore 62 % (compared to around 50 % during the two previous periods).

       The budget allocated for the sixteen approved or conditionally approved proposals
was $ 2.14 million (compared to $3.92 between March 2012 and February 2013, $ 2.24
between March 2011 and February 2012, and $ 11.78 million for the two-year period
between April 2008 and April 2010). The trend of the total funding has considerably
decreased during the past five years.




4.3. Outreach

14
  In 2013, since few proposals were received because of the lack of financial resources, it would have been
impossible to organize two non-NSDS Windows.



                                                                                                        15
       The AP supports the comments made by the AU in the note it prepared for the
IMC meeting of February 18, 2014, about the role of the IMC regional members: it would
be very helpful that the IMC regional members, as well as the WB country
representatives, be more proactive in their respective regions with outreaching on the
TFSCB programme. The recent decision to extend the TFSCB programme to the end of
the year 2020 makes it even more necessary an increased commitment of these officials.

4.4. Post-evaluation of Projects

        During its 7th meeting (May 2010), the AP supported recommendation #8 of the
Independent Evaluation Report made in 2009 which stated that some form of evaluation
could help to highlight lessons learned for the benefit of future projects (expansion of the
role of the AP to include ex-post evaluation of sample projects, thematic evaluations,
end-of-project evaluations of the largest projects). Therefore, the AP reiterates its
recommendation #5 of its 9th meeting. Post-evaluations of countries’ NSDS work are
necessary. DECDG and PARIS21 should collate and publish case studies for selected
model countries (at least one for each region).


VI. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS15

     1. The TFSCB should focus its priorities on five growth areas: i) Preparation and
        implementation of NSDS; ii) open data; iii) gender statistics; iv)innovative
        approaches; v) measuring sustainable development.

     2. An open NSDS Window should continue to reiterate the importance of adopting
        strategies for building statistical capacities and their implementation.

     3. Building pilot sub-national strategies that can be replicated in large federal
        countries or unions of states should be given careful consideration.

     4. TFSCB proposals on Open Data Readiness Assessment and action plan would be
        pre-requisites and financing would be provided mostly for implementation. They
        should provide clear guidelines on the coverage of implementation

     5. For transfer and loading of statistical indicators in Open Data Systems, funding
        could be from domestic sources or elsewhere as they could not be regarded as
        capacity building.

     6. TFSCB can finance gender statistics project proposals in four areas: i)
        assessments of the range of gender statistics available in administrative sources

15
   This section includes some recommendations reiterated from the reports of the previous AP meetings.
Several recommendations from the reports of the previous AP meetings are not reiterated but nevertheless
still actual issues..



                                                                                                     16
           and technical advices on how they can be classified, tabulated and made
           accessible to the users; ii) creation of guidelines and modules on gender statistics
           to be utilized in the design and questionnaires of planned censuses and surveys;
           iii) best use of existing data and facilitation of the use of data by gender
           specialists; iv) building of partnerships.

       7. TFSCB can finance pilot exercises on small-scale IT innovations that can improve
          statistical production and dissemination.

       8. TFSCB is encouraged to provide support to small-scale projects that are likely to
          serve as catalysts for wider-scale improvements in the area of measuring
          sustainable development. Proposals may include training and organization of
          workshops by regional organizations.

       9. An assessment of the new guidelines and procedures produced by the AU in
          April, 2012 should be carried out as soon as possible with the aim of improving
          its operation so that it is efficient, transparent and flexible16.

       10. The IMC regional members, but also the WB country representatives, should be
           more proactive in their respective regions with outreaching on the TFSCB
           programme.

       11. The AU should look at the possibility of preparing the list of shortlisted proposals
           through a face-to-face IMC meeting and restoring a second Non NSDS
           Window17.

       12. “Tracking indicators” should be included in each GFR. They could be used by the
           TTL to follow up easily the progress of the projects18.

       13. Post-evaluations of countries’ NSDS work and implementation are necessary for
           future work.. DECDG and PARIS21 should collate and publish case studies for
           selected model countries (at least one for each region)19.

       14. Efforts should continue to be made by PARIS21 and the WB to encourage the
           countries to prepare more comprehensive NSDS really adapted to the situation of

16
     Reiteration of the recommendation #7 of the report of the 10 th meeting.
17
   Reiteration of the recommendation #9 of the report of the 10 th meeting. Restoring a second Non NSDS
Window may be necessary if the number of proposals become again important, due to the new financial
situation of the Fund.
18
  Reiteration of the recommendations #7 of the report of the 10th meeting and #12 of the report of the 9th
meeting.
19
  Reiteration of the recommendation s #7 of the report of the 10th meeting and #5 of the report of the 9th
meeting.



                                                                                                             17
           the statistical system, to tie up with the developmental objectives of the countries
           and to update, or to re-draft the NSDSs of the first generation20.

       15. For the project proposals to be submitted by non-IDA countries, a significant
           contribution from the requesting country comparable to the sum funded by the
           TFSCB should be asked21.

       16. Whenever it is possible, sector specific projects should be financed through
           alternative facilities (e.g. the TF ECASTAT) or by sources external to the World
           Bank (e.g. FAO)22.




20
     Reiteration of the recommendation #12 of the report of the 10 th meeting.
21
     Reiteration of the recommendation #14 of the report of the 10th meeting
22
     Reiteration of the recommendation #15of the report of the 10 th meeting


                                                                                            18
ANNEX

UPDATE OF THE SURVEY OF THE RECENT PROJECT PROPOSALS RECEIVED
BY THE TFSCB ADMINISTRATION UNIT (AU)




       Since the 9th AP meeting held in February, 2012, and as mentioned in the section
4 of the report, new guidelines and procedures were proposed by the TFSCB
Administration Unit in April 2012 to prepare TFSCB funding proposals. The new
procedure consists of Two-Stage procedure.

        During the Stage 1, TTLs submit, in consultation with the agency who has
expressed interest, a short proposal (2 pages following a template proposed in the
guidelines). After review, a short list is established by the IMC23 and shortlisted proposals
are notified to the TTLs. During the Stage 2, the recipients and the TTLs complete the
Grant Funding Request (GFR) that is sent to the IMC for review and decision taking.
Decisions were taken by the IMC during a face-to-face meeting (held on December 2,
2013).

       The proposals presented through the NSDS Window are not affected by these new
procedures.

Results of the Stage 1

        Thirteen proposals were received by IMC and nine were shortlisted. One
shortlisted proposal (Support of ODRA and Action Plan in Peru) was not followed by the
preparation of a GFR.

Results of the Stage 2

        Three proposals were submitted through the NSDS Window and approved. Two
proposals were related to the design of strategies in Myanmar and Sierra Leone on a no-
objection basis (renewal of an expired strategy for Sierra Leone). The third proposal
approved through the NSDS Window was related to support to the implementation of the
NSDS 2011 – 2015 prepared by Mauritania. This proposal were presented in 2012 but
was formally submitted after the deadline; during its meeting of September 19, 2012, the
IMC decided that this proposal will be submitted in 2013 through the NSDS Window; the
rationale for this approach was that the GFR was actually received before the deadline
but not the formal Country Director approval. As such, the AU recommended treating


23
  A list of shortlisted proposals was prepared by the Administrative Unit and sent to the IMC members for
endorsement.



                                                                                                      19
this proposal as an exceptional case and requested the IMC approval during a virtual
NSDS Window meeting24.

        The AP was provided with the eleven GFR proposals (eight proposals presented
for decision to the December 2013, IMC meeting plus the three approved through the
NSDS Window). Three of the eight proposals discussed during the IMC meeting were
rejected. The total percentage of proposals made through the Non NSDS Window that
were not shortlisted after the stage 1 or rejected during the stage 2 is therefore 62 %
(larger than for the two previous periods where it was around 50 %).

       The geographical distribution of the thirteen proposals presented during the stage
1 was as follows:

           Region            Number of Number of     Number of GFR       Number of
                             proposals shortlisted   received during     accepted
                                       proposals     the Stage 2         proposals
           Africa                5           2                2                1
           LAC                   2           2                1                1
           MENA                  0           -                -                -
           South Asia            2           1                1                1
           East Asia &           1           1                1                0
           Pacific
           Eastern Europe            2       2               2                  1
           & Central Asia
           World                      1      1               1                  1
                   TOTAL             13      9               8                  5

       If we include the three proposals presented through the NSDS Window, the
geographical distribution is as follows:

           Region                   Number of Number of
                                    proposals accepted
                                              proposals
           Africa                        7         3
           LAC                           2         1
           MENA                          0         0
           South Asia                    2         1
           East Asia & Pacific           2         1
           Eastern Europe & Central      2         1
           Asia
           World                         1         1
           TOTAL                        16         8



24
     The AP welcomed this approach


                                                                                      20
        The budget allocated for the 8 approved or conditionally approved proposals was
$ 2.14 million (compared to $ 3.92 million between March 2012 and February 2013, $
2.24 between March 2011 and February 2012, $ 11.78 million between April 2008 and
April 2010, and $ 5.52 million between April 2010 and March 2011). The average
funding was $ 2.77 million during the past three years, much below the funding observed
in the previous periods that was over $ 5 million every year.

       During its 7th meeting, the AP supported the 4th recommendation of the evaluation
report and proposed to adjust the ceiling of the grants from $ 400,000 to $ 500,000
(corresponding to an inflation rate of 2.25 % per year since 2000). Half of the proposals
presented a request above the former ceiling of $ 400,000 but only one proposal was
accepted over the former ceiling of $ 400,000.

     Since the report of its 6th meeting, the AP classifies the proposals received by the
TFSCB Administration Unit into six non-homogeneous25 categories:

     1. NSDS proposals (1 new proposal identified in this category)
     2. Country proposals concerning the implementation of NSDS (3 new proposals
        identified in this category)
     3. Country proposals concerning sector specific activities (3 new proposals
        identified in this category)
     4. Regional proposals made by multilateral institutions (3 new proposals identified
        in this category)
     5. Proposals made by NGOs (no new proposal identified in this category)
     6. Proposals aiming at facilitating the participation of statisticians from developing
        countries in international conferences, seminars or workshops (no new proposal
        identified in this category).

       The statistics at the end of each section are presented with a reminder summary of
the comparable ones presented in the reports of the previous meetings. In the column
“Budget allocated”, the figures are presented in US dollars.

1. NSDS proposals (2 new proposals)

       Proposals presented in this section concern not only new NSDS proposals, but
also updates of former NSDS (or Statistical Master Plans), or NSDS replacing “first
generation” NSDS that did not comply with the guidelines proposed by PARIS21 after
some years of experience.

        The limited number of new proposals is due to the fact that a very large majority
of developing or transition countries have now prepared SNDS or Statistical Master
Plans. During its 6th meeting, the AP welcomed the initiative taken by PARIS21 to
distribute a brochure on “NSDS Status in IDA and Lower and Middle Income Countries”

25
  The three first categories are depending on the content of the proposals; the three last ones are depending
on the different institutions (other than bilateral) having made the proposal.



                                                                                                          21
in May 2009. This brochure was updated at several times. According to the last updated
brochure (November, 2013), only 3.7 % of the IDA and low and middle income countries
have no strategy or with strategy expired and not planning one (against 25.6 % five years
ago) and 14.8 % have an expired strategy but currently planning a new one. But these
percentages are somewhat misleading insofar as they confuse NSDS of the first and
second generations. Efforts should continue to be made by PARIS21 and the WB to
encourage the countries to prepare more comprehensive NSDS really adapted to the
situation of the statistical system and to update, or re-draft the NSDSs of the first
generation.


  Window                Proposal                  Region            Decision            Budget
                                                                                     allocated in $
 NSDS             Sierra Leone –              Africa              Approved                      135,930
 Window           Developing a
                  National Statistics
                  Strategy
                  Myanmar –                   South Asia          Approved                      202,400
                  Developing a
                  National Strategy for
                  Statistics
                                                                       TOTAL                    338,330
 12.5 % of the presented proposals
 25. 0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 15.8 % of the budget allocated
 Reminder: Statistics 10th AP meeting)
 3.7 % of the presented proposals
 6.7 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 1.5 % of the budget allocated
 Consolidated statistics (8th and 9th AP meetings)     Consolidated statistics (6th and 7th AP meetings)
 16.3 % of the presented proposals                      13.5 % of the presented proposals
 23.5 % of the proposals approved or conditionally      17.0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally
 approved                                              approved
 17.0 % of the budget allocated                         14.4 % of the budget allocated

        The NSDS proposed by Myanmar is the first one in the history of this country that
has started a transition process towards more democracy and transparency.



2. Country proposals concerning the implementation of NSDS (3 new proposals)

     Proposals presented in this section concern methods on implementing validated
NSDS but also focusing on the enhancement of NSDS through advocacy, evaluation, etc.




                                                                                                     22
        The ODRA proposals are included in this section since the Open Data Policy may
be considered as one of the ways for strengthening statistical capacities in a country26.
Funding ODRA proposals enlarges the recommendation made by the AP during its 8th
and 9th meetings concerning the improvement of the dissemination of national statistics.

     Window             Proposal                Region            Decision                Budget
                                                                                       allocated in $
 NSDS              Mauritania –               Africa           Approved                            451,259
 Window            Implementation of
                   the NSDS 2011-
                   2015
 Non NSDS          Sudan – NSDS               Africa           Rejected, but
 Window            Implementation by                           invited to
                   strengthening key                           resubmit for             (requested 500,000)
                   statistics                                  virtual review
                   Russia –                   Eastern          Rejected
                   Ulyanovsk ODRA             Europe and
                   Action Plan                Central                                   (requested 100,000)
                                              Asia
                                                                       TOTAL                       451,259

                                                                                      (requested 1,051,259)
 18,7 % of the presented proposals
 12.5 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 21.1 % of the budget allocated
  Reminder: Statistics10th meeting)
 22.2 % of the presented proposals
 40.0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 53.0 % of the budget allocated
 Consolidated statistics (8th and 9thAP meetings)    Consolidated statistics (6th and 7th AP meetings)
 28.6 % of the presented proposals                   20.3 % of the presented proposals
 32.4 % of the proposals approved or conditionally 20.8 % of the proposals approved or conditionally
 approved                                            approved
 31.7 % of the budget allocated                      26.5 % of the budget allocated

        The percentage of proposals concerning the implementation of NSDS that have
been approved or conditionally approved and of budget allocated to these proposals
varies greatly from one period to another. The AP as well as the 2009 evaluation of the
TFSCB drew the attention of the AU to the importance of such proposals, in particular in
poor or fragile countries.



26
  Three ODRA proposals were received by the AU: LAC region of the WB (regional implementation of
Caribbean ODRA Action Plans), Peru (support of ODRA and Action Plan) and Russia (open data action
plan in Ulyanosk oblast). Only the last proposal is present in this section. The LAC is presented in the 4th
section (proposals made by inter-governmental institutions. proposal. The proposal from Peru was
shortlisted during the phase 1, but no GFR produced.


                                                                                                           23
      The IMC rejected the Russian proposal on the basis that Russia is a middle-
income country and a donor27 to the WB.


3. Country proposals concerning sector specific activities (3 new proposals)

      Proposals presented in this section relate to specific statistical topics
complementing the preparation or the implementation of NSDS:


 Window              Proposal               Region          Decision          Budget allocated
                                                                                   in $
 Non            Bangladesh –              South           Conditionally                      300,000
 SNDS           Enhancing Capacity        Asia            approved
 Window         for Urban Poverty
                Statistics
                Djibouti – SCB for        Africa          Approved                           270,000
                Macroeconomic
                and Poverty Work
                Belarus – Business        Eastern         Conditionally                      229,000
                and Enterprises           Europe          approved
                Surveys                   and
                                          Central
                                          Asia
                                                                 TOTAL                       799,000

 18.7 % of the presented proposals
 37.5 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 37.4 % of the budget allocated
 Reminder: Statistics (10th meeting)
 22.2 % of the presented proposals
 40.0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
  26.4 % of the budget allocated
 Consolidated statistics (8th and 9th AP meetings)   Consolidated statistics (6th and 7th AP meetings)
 26.6 % of the presented proposals                   20.3 % of the presented proposals
 17.6 % of the proposals approved or conditionally 13.2 % of the proposals approved or
 approved                                            conditionally approved
  19,6 % of the budget allocated                      15.7 % of the budget allocated

        During its previous meetings, the AP noted that financing sector specific activities
may be an interesting and valuable complement to the NSDS, provided that such
proposals have been made in countries having adopted and validated a NSDS, which is
the case for these three proposals.



27
  The Russian Federation is funding the ECASTAT TF for strengthening statistical capacities in the CIS
countries.


                                                                                                         24
       The TTL for one of the proposal (Belarus) has requested an execution by the
Bank; in conditionally approving the proposal; the IMC suggested a Recipient execution.
The AP approves this condition. The AP has also noted that it would now have become
possible to finance this proposal through the TF ECASTAT funded by the Russian
Federation. For the project proposals presented by non-IDA countries, one
recommendation presented by the AP in some of its past reports was to ask a significant
contribution (say 50%) from the country comparable to the sum funded by the TFSCB.

4. Regional /international proposals made by inter-governmental institutions (3 new
proposals)

        Proposals presented in this section refer to regional or multilateral proposals made
by inter-governmental institutions.

 Window              Proposal               Region            Decision          Budget allocated
                                                                                     in $
 Non             WB – Second              World            Conditionally                          350,000
 NSDS            Round of Open                             approved,
 Window          Data Readiness                            then approved
                 Assessment and                            through a
                 Action Plans                              virtual
                 (ODRA)                                    meeting28
                 LAC – Caribbean          Latin            Approved                             200,000
                 ODRA Action              American
                 Plan                     and
                                          Caribbean
                 UNESCAP –                South Asia       Rejected
                 Regional Program
                 for Improvement          Eastern
                 of Economic              Asia and
                 Statistics               Pacific                                     (requested 484,770)
                                                                  TOTAL                         550,000

                                                                                    (requested 1,034,770)
 18.7 % of the presented proposals
 25.0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 25.7 % of the budget allocated
 Reminder: Statistics10th meeting)
 11.1 % of the presented proposals
 20.0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 12.8 % of the budget allocated

28
  During its meeting of December 2, 2013, the IMC decided to conditionally approve this proposal until
the project team provides more background information (outcomes, outputs, country selection criteria, etc.)
on the first Open Data TFSCB Grant. See the report of the AP 10th meeting. The AP was provided with a
Progress Report, dated January 30, 2014, produced by the Open Data Policy Group. The IMC has
consequently accepted this proposal for the amount requested ( $ 350,000) through a virtual meeting on a
no-objection basis.


                                                                                                        25
 Consolidated statistics (8thand 9th AP meetings)     Consolidated statistics (6th and 7th AP meetings)
 20.7 % of the presented proposals                    25.0 % of the presented proposals
 16.7 % of the proposals approved or conditionally    27.4 % of the proposals approved or conditionally
 approved                                             approved
 20.3 % of the budget allocated                        34.5 % of the budget allocated

       Two proposals were presented to the IMC by units in charge of Open Data policy
within the World Bank, respectively DECDG (SIOD) and the TWICT Unit (Capacity
Building for Open Government Statistics and Data Analytics in Developing Countries).
       However, the AP recalls that, during its 6th meeting, it recommended that specific
rules for making decisions on proposals submitted by World Bank units have to be
prepared and submitted to the Donor’s Committee.



5. Proposals made by NGOs (no new proposal)

 Window                Proposal                      Region         Decision           Budget
                                                                                    allocated in $
                                                                       TOTAL 0
 0 % of the presented proposals
 0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 0 % of the budget allocated
 Reminder: Statistics10th meeting)
 0 % of the presented proposals
 0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 0 % of the budget allocated
 Consolidated statistics (8th and 9th AP meetings)   Consolidated statistics (6th and 7th AP meetings)
 0 % of the presented proposals                      5.4 % of the presented proposals
 0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally      0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally
 approved                                            approved
 0 % of the budget allocated                          0 % of the budget allocated

       No proposal has been made by NGOs for more than two years. The last proposals
received by the Administrative Unit were not approved and no budget was allocated.
However, during its 7th meeting, the AP noted that NGOs’ proposals conducive to
promote national statistical capacity building and generation of demand for statistics
should be considered carefully if any.


6. Facilitating participation in international conferences (no new proposal)

         Requests submitted by organizers of international conferences or seminars to
facilitate developing countries’ participation in these events are discussed in this section:




                                                                                                     26
     Window               Proposal                  Region            Decision            Budget
                                                                                       allocated in $
                                                                        TOTAL                             0
 0 % of the presented proposals
 0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 0 % of the budget allocated
 Reminder: Statistics (10th meeting)
 3.7 % of the presented proposals
 6.7 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 6.3 % of the budget allocated
 Consolidated statistics (8th and 9th AP meetings)   Consolidated statistics (6th and 7th AP meetings)
 4.1 % of the presented proposals                    15.5 % of the presented proposals
 5.9 % of the proposals approved or conditionally    21.7 % of the proposals approved or conditionally
 approved                                            approved
 5.8 % of the budget allocated                       9.0 % of the budget allocated

         During its previous sessions, the AP recognized that funding participation of
statisticians from developing countries to international conferences or seminars through
the TFSCB can contribute to international co-operation by encouraging the participation
of developing countries in the dialogue on the development of policy, framework,
standards and methodologies on statistics. There is merit in funding such participation
provided there is an effective contribution by the sponsored participants in the
development of standards, methodologies and innovations in statistics and they become
vehicles for knowledge transfer to the developing countries. During its 2010 Fall
meeting, the IMC took decisions on the principles, the budget allocation, the event
selection process and the administrative process29. The TFSCB Guidelines and
Procedures will be revised to reflect the changes.

       In 2012, the ISI presented a project proposal presented that was consistent with
these decisions. But ISI has presented a global plan covering the two calendar years 2013
– 2014. It is the reason why it did not make a new request also in 2013.




Additional remark:

       As regards the proposals that were not shortlisted at the end of the stage 1 or not
followed by a GFR presented to the IMC meeting of September 19, 2012, these proposals
might be classified as follows:


29
   The details of these decisions could be found in the report of the 8 th meeting of the AP (March 28, 2011
– page 20).



                                                                                                          27
       1. NSDS proposals & Update of NSDS:
           India: SCB for sub-national and local governments in selected lagging States30 of
       India

       2. Country proposals concerning the implementation of NSDS:
          AFRISTAT: Institutional and technical capacity building for AFRISTAT and the
       NSSs of its member states
          Peru31: Support of ODRA and Action Plan

       3. Country proposals concerning sector specific activities:
          South Africa: Getting sect oral Carbon Pricing Right: an Open Source Marginal
          Abatement Cost Curve and Data
          Indian Ocean Commission: Improving fisheries statistics in the South-West Indian
       Ocean




30
     namely Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal
31
     This proposal was shortlisted but the AU has not received the GFR.


                                                                                         28
