                            88558




Sri Lanka Country Opinion
      Survey Report

  (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                        Sri Lanka                                   Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. The General Environment in Sri Lanka .........................................9
          V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank in Sri Lanka ............14
         VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank .....................................25
        VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Sri Lanka.........................38
       VIII. Communication and Outreach ..................................................41
         IX. Appendices ................................................................................48




                                                          2
The World Bank                                 Sri Lanka                             Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in Sri Lanka
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Sri Lanka regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Sri Lanka;
            Their perceived overall value of the World Bank in Sri Lanka;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank as related to programs, poverty reduction,
               personal relationships, effectiveness, knowledge base, collaboration, and its
               day-to-day operation; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s communication and outreach in Sri Lanka.

       Use data to help inform the Sri Lanka country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In December 2011 and January 2012, 550 stakeholders of the World Bank in Sri Lanka were
invited to provide their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a
country survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President,
Prime Minister, or Minister; employees of a ministry or ministerial department; the office of a
Parliamentarian; Project Implementation Units (PIUs) or Project Management Units (PMUs);
local government officials or staff; bilateral or multilateral agencies; private sector organizations;
NGOs (including CBOs); the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-
based groups; academia or research institutes; and the judiciary. A total of 296 stakeholders
participated in the country survey (54%).

Respondents received the questionnaire in the mail and completed questionnaires were collected
by hand. Respondents were asked to indicate: their overall attitudes toward the Bank; the
importance of specific areas of the Bank’s work and the Bank’s effectiveness in those areas; and
their level of agreement with a series of statements about the way the World Bank does business.
Respondents were also asked about general issues facing Sri Lanka, the Bank’s future role in Sri
Lanka, and the Bank’s communication and outreach efforts in Sri Lanka.




                                                  3
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)
The questionnaire was broken into eight sections:
    1. Background Information: The first section asked respondents for their current position;
       specialization; familiarity and involvement with the Bank; and geographic location.
    2. General Issues facing Sri Lanka: Respondents were asked to indicate what they thought
       were the most important development priorities, and which areas would contribute most
       to poverty reduction and economic growth in Sri Lanka, as well as rating their
       perspective on the next generation in Sri Lanka.
    3. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate the Bank’s
       overall effectiveness in Sri Lanka and their agreement with various statements regarding
       the Bank’s programs, poverty mission, relationships, and collaboration. Respondents
       were also asked to indicate the areas which they perceived as the Bank’s top priorities,
       the areas it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its resources and research,
       what the Bank’s level of involvement should be, the instrument most and least effective
       at reducing poverty in Sri Lanka, what they felt were the Bank’s greatest values and
       greatest weaknesses in its work, and with which groups the Bank should work more.
    4. The Work of the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of importance
       and the Bank’s level of effectiveness across twenty-two areas in which the Bank was
       involved, such as helping to reduce poverty and encouraging greater transparency in
       governance.
    5. The Way the World Bank does Business: Respondents were asked to rate the Bank’s
       level of effectiveness in the way it does business, including the Bank’s knowledge,
       personal relationships, collaborations, and poverty mission.
    6. Project/Program Related Issues: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement
       with a series of statements regarding the Bank’s programs, day-to-day operations, and
       collaborations in Sri Lanka.
    7. The Future of the World Bank in Sri Lanka: Respondents were asked to rate how
       significant a role the Bank should play in Sri Lanka’s development and to indicate what
       the Bank could to make itself of greater value and to what reasons respondents attributed
       failed or slow reform efforts.
    8. Communication and Outreach: Respondents were asked to indicate where they get
       information about development issues and the Bank’s development activities in Sri
       Lanka, as well as how they prefer to receive information from the Bank. Respondents
       were also asked to indicate their awareness of the Bank’s Access to Information policy,
       their past experience requesting information, their access to the Internet, and their usage
       of the Bank’s website.

    In addition, where possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country
    survey were compared to responses from the 301 respondents (59% response rate) who
    completed the country survey in FY 2007. Notations and/or charts are included when these
    comparisons were possible.




                                                 4
The World Bank                                        Sri Lanka                                   Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position

        Employees of ministries were the largest group of respondents. Because of the small
         number of respondents from Project Implementation Units (PIUs)/ Project Management
         Units (PMUs), the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister1, and the office of a
         Parliamentarian, responses from these stakeholder groups should be considered
         suggestive at best. Because there was just one respondent from a faith-based group, this
         respondent was included in the “Other” category for all further analyses. Note there were
         no respondents from trade unions or the judiciary.




1
  This stakeholder group will be labeled “Office of the President” in all graphs and discussed as respondents from
“the office of the President/Prime Minister” in the text of this report.


                                                          5
The World Bank                   Sri Lanka    Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                    6
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Geographic Location

       Nearly three-quarters of all respondents indicated that they were located in the Western
        Province. Because of the small number of respondents from other locations, these
        respondents were combined into one category, “Other Areas”, for all further analyses.




Involvement with the World Bank

       Two-thirds of all respondents indicated that they have been involved with or a close
        observer of World Bank activities for more than three years.




                                                 7
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank

   Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 6.2 on a
    10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar. This was
    significantly higher than the FY ’07 survey, in which familiarity with the Bank received a
    mean rating of 5.7 across all respondents.
         Respondents from the media and PIUs/PMUs indicated the highest levels of
          familiarity with the Bank whereas respondents from NGOs, other organizations, and
          the office of a Parliamentarian had significantly lower levels of familiarity.
         Respondents from the Western Province indicated significantly higher levels of
          familiarity with the Bank compared to respondents from other areas.




                                                8
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Sri Lanka

Optimism

       When asked about perceptions of the future for the next generation in Sri Lanka, across
        all respondents, the overall mean rating was 6.9 on a 10-point scale of 1 being extremely
        pessimistic and 10 being extremely optimistic. This was significantly higher compared to
        the FY ’07 survey, in which optimism for the next generation received a mean rating of
        4.8 across all respondents.
             Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, independent government
              institutions, the office of the President/Prime Minister, employees of ministries,
              local government, and PIUs/PMUs had significantly higher ratings of optimism
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from the Western Province and other areas had statistically similar
              ratings of optimism for the next generation in Sri Lanka.




                                                 9
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Sri Lanka (continued)

Development Priority

       Respondents indicated that economic growth and government effectiveness were the
        most important development priorities in Sri Lanka. Reducing corruption was also
        considered a top priority. In the FY ’07 country survey, respondents indicated that the
        most important development priorities were promoting economic growth (41%) and
        addressing conflict resolution (32%).




                                                 10
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Sri Lanka (continued)
Poverty Reduction
       Respondents indicated that increasing employment would contribute most to poverty
        reduction in Sri Lanka. Similarly, respondents in the FY ’07 country survey indicated that
        increasing employment (55%) would contribute most to poverty reduction.
             Respondents across most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
                indicated that increasing employment would contribute most to poverty reduction,
                except respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and PIUs/PMUs who
                were split between multiple development areas.




                                                11
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Sri Lanka (continued)
Economic Growth
       Respondents indicated that reducing corruption, increasing foreign direct investment,
        improving governance, improving labor force skills, private sector growth, and increasing
        agricultural productivity would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in
        Sri Lanka.
            Respondents across most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated that these would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in
              Sri Lanka, except respondents from PIUs/PMUs who were more likely to say that
              access to education would contribute most to economic growth.




                                                12
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



IV. The General Environment in Sri Lanka (continued)

Government Support of Development Efforts

   Across all respondents, agreement that the government supports and takes responsibility for
    development efforts in Sri Lanka received a mean rating of 6.9 on a 10-point scale, with 1
    being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree. This was significantly higher than the
    mean rating received in the FY ’07 country survey (6.1).
         Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and PIUs/PMUs had the highest
          levels of agreement that the government supports and takes responsibility for
          development efforts in Sri Lanka whereas respondents from the media had
          significantly lower levels of agreement.
         Respondents from the Western Province and other areas had statistically similar
          levels of agreement that the government supports and takes responsibility for
          development efforts in Sri Lanka.




                                                13
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank

Perceived Bank Priorities

       Respondents indicated that they considered the Bank’s top priorities in Sri Lanka to be
        economic growth, reducing poverty, improving basic infrastructure, government
        effectiveness/governance, and increasing access to quality education.




                                                 14
The World Bank                              Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Focusing Bank Resources
    Respondents indicated that it would be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its
       resources on economic growth, improving basic infrastructure, government effectiveness,
       and increasing employment. Developing the SME sector, reducing poverty, agriculture
       development, developing a skilled labor force, reducing corruption, and increasing access
       to quality education were also seen as key. In FY ’07, respondents indicated that the
       Bank should focus on promoting economic growth (37%), improving basic infrastructure
       (32%), increasing employment (20%), improving government effectiveness (20%), and
       reducing poverty (20%).




                                               15
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Focusing Bank Research
       Respondents indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
        efforts on education. Research on governance, poverty, private sector development, anti-
        corruption, rural development, Public-Private Partnerships, and public sector
        performance was also considered valuable. Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey
        indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on
        education (25%), poverty (25%), and governance (22%).




                                                16
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Bank Instruments

   When asked which Bank instrument was most effective at reducing poverty in Sri Lanka
    respondents indicated that the Bank’s results-based lending, investment lending, technical
    assistance, and policy-based lending were most effective.




   When asked which Bank instrument was least effective at reducing poverty in Sri Lanka
    respondents indicated that the Bank’s analytical work and policy-based lending were least
    effective, although 19% of respondents indicated that they didn’t know.




                                                17
The World Bank                              Sri Lanka                          Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Level of Bank Involvement

   Over two-thirds of all respondents indicated that the Bank should be more involved in Sri
    Lanka’s development strategies; 17% indicated that the Bank is currently involved at an
    optimum level. Similarly, in the FY ’07 country survey, 68% of respondents indicated that
    the Bank should be more involved; 17% indicated that the Bank was currently involved at an
    optimum level.
             A majority of respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic
              locations indicated that the Bank should be more involved in Sri Lanka’s
              development strategies




                                               18
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Collaborating in Sri Lanka

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely
        with local government to ensure better development results in Sri Lanka. Respondents
        also indicated that the Bank should work more closely with private sector, beneficiaries,
        CBOs, and youth.
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated that the Bank should work more closely with local government, private
              sector, or beneficiaries, except respondents from NGOs who were more likely to
              indicate that the Bank should work more closely with NGOs and respondents
              from the media who were more likely to indicate that the Bank should work more
              closely with the media.




                                                 19
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest value to Sri Lanka was its
        financial resources. In the FY ’07 country survey, respondents also indicated that the
        Bank’s greatest value was its financial resources (62%).
             Respondents from most stakeholder groups and both geographic locations
              indicated that the Bank’s greatest value was its financial resources, except
              respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies who indicated that the Bank’s
              ability to mobilize resources was its greatest value.




                                                 20
The World Bank                                  Sri Lanka                             Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weakness in its work in Sri Lanka was
        being inadequately aligned with country priorities. The Bank not willing to honestly
        criticize politics and reform efforts, imposing technocratic solution without regard to
        political realities, not exploring alternative policy options, being too bureaucratic in its
        operational policies and procedures, and not providing enough public disclosure of its
        work were also considered weaknesses.




                                                   21
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance
   Respondents indicated that it was most important for the Bank to help strengthen the
    education and health sectors, both receiving mean ratings of 8.8 on a 10-point scale with
    1 being not at all and 10 being very important.




                                                22
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance (continued)

   There were four instances in which there were significant differences between stakeholder
    groups across these twenty-two areas. Those areas that had significant stakeholder group
    differences were:
         Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and NGOs had the highest
          importance ratings for “Encouraging greater transparency in governance” whereas
          employees of a ministry and respondents from academia had significantly lower
          importance ratings.
         Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, private sector, and the media had
          the highest importance ratings for “Safeguarding against corruption in projects/
          programs that it funds with its procurement rules” whereas employees of a ministry
          and respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister, independent
          government institutions, and academia had significantly lower importance ratings.
         Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and NGOs had the highest
          importance ratings for “Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources
          management” whereas employees of a ministry and respondents from the office of the
          President/Prime Minister, local government, and academia had significantly lower
          importance ratings.
         Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, private sector, and NGOs had the
          highest importance ratings for “Helping to reduce corruption in the country with its
          advice and support” whereas employees of a ministry and respondents from the office
          of the President/Prime Minister and academia had significantly lower importance
          ratings.


   Respondents from the Western Province and other areas had statistically similar ratings of
    importance across all twenty-two areas.




                                                23
The World Bank                              Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



V. Perceived Overall Value of the World Bank (continued)
Importance (continued)
       Respondents in this year’s survey tended to have lower importance ratings compared to
        respondents from the FY ’07 country survey across most areas. Those areas with
        significantly different importance ratings are indicated in the graph.




                                               24
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank

The Bank’s Overall Effectiveness in Sri Lanka

   Across all respondents, the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Sri Lanka received a mean rating
    of 6.5 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10 being very effective. This
    was significantly higher than the mean rating received in the FY ’07 country survey (6.1).
             Respondents from local government and the office of the President/Prime
              Minister had the highest ratings for the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Sri Lanka
              whereas respondents from the media and other organizations had significantly
              lower ratings for the Bank’s overall effectiveness.
             Respondents from the Western Province and other areas had statistically similar
              ratings for the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Sri Lanka.




                                                 25
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness

       Respondents saw the Bank as most effective in helping to strengthen the health and
        education sectors, both receiving a mean rating of 7.6, across all respondents, on a 10-
        point scale with 1 being not effective at all and 10 being very effective.




                                                 26
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

   There were significant stakeholder group differences in their ratings of the Bank’s
    effectiveness across half of these twenty-two areas. For the most part, respondents from the
    office of a Parliamentarian, PIUs/PMUs, and local government tended to give the highest
    ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness in these areas whereas respondents from private sector
    and the media tended to give significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness. Those
    areas for which there were significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Helping to bring about economic growth”;
             “Encouraging greater transparency in governance”;
             “Helping to strengthen the regulatory framework”;
             “Helping to strengthen the judicial system”;
             “Helping to strengthen the public sector”;
             “Helping to strengthen the education sector”;
             “Helping to strengthen the health sector”;
             “Safeguarding against corruption in projects/ programs that it funds with its
              procurement rules”;
             “Helping to strengthen agricultural development”;
             “Helping to reduce corruption in the country with its advice and support”; and
             “Helping Sri Lanka adapt to/avert risk of climate change”.


   Respondents from other areas had higher ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness across all but
    one of these areas compared to respondents from the Western Province, significantly so for:
             “Helping to reduce poverty”;
             “Helping to bring about economic growth”;
             “Encouraging greater transparency in governance”;
             “Helping to strengthen the financial system”;
             “Helping to strengthen the public sector”;
             “Helping to strengthen the education sector”;
             “Helping to strengthen the health sector”;
             “Helping to strengthen agricultural development”;
             “Helping to strengthen the social protection sector”; and
             “Helping to reduce corruption in the country with its advice and support”.



                                                 27
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)
Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)
       Ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness in this year’s survey were significantly higher than in
        the FY ’07 country survey for all areas except “Helping to strengthen the private sector”
        and “Helping to strengthen the regulatory framework”.




                                                 28
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Importance versus Effectiveness – Sector Analysis

By plotting respondents’ ratings of importance versus effectiveness, one can assess where
respondents perceived the Bank to be performing well on priority issues in Sri Lanka, as well as
areas in which respondents perceived the Bank to not be performing so well on priority issues,
areas in which respondents perceived the Bank was performing well, but on lower priority issues,
and areas in which respondents perceived the Bank to not be performing so well on lower
priority issues.

   Bank relatively good and issue is a priority: Areas in this quadrant are those that
    respondents indicated a high level of importance and gave the Bank a relatively high rating
    of effectiveness (although it should be noted that ratings of effectiveness were more than a
    point lower than ratings of importance). It is important that the Bank continue to do well in
    these areas (in order of mean importance):
             Helping to strengthen the education sector;
             Helping to strengthen the health sector;
             Safeguard against corruption in projects that it funds with its procurement rules
                (although this is on the borderline of the Bank being not so good);
             Helping to reduce poverty;
             Helping to bring about economic growth;
             Helping to strengthen the infrastructure development;
             Helping to strengthen agricultural development;




                                                 29
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Importance versus Effectiveness – Sector Analysis (continued)

       Bank relatively good and issue is a priority: (continued)
            Ensuring that attention is paid to the environmental impact of Bank supported
               programs (although this is on the borderline of the Bank being not so good);
            Helping to strengthen environment and natural resources management; and
            Helping to strengthen the financial system.

       Bank not so good on priority issues: Areas in this quadrant were those for which
        respondents indicated a high level of importance, but gave the Bank a relatively low
        rating of effectiveness. There were just two areas in this quadrant (in order of mean
        importance):
             Encouraging greater transparency in governance and
             Helping to empower communities to participate in their own development
                (although this is on the borderline of being less of a priority).

       Bank not so good, but issue not perceived to be a priority: Areas in this quadrant were
        those for which respondents gave the Bank a relatively low rating of effectiveness and a
        moderate level of importance. These areas were (in order of mean importance):
             Helping to reduce corruption in the country with its advice and support (although
                this is on the borderline of becoming more of a priority);
             Helping to strengthen the public sector;
             Helping Sri Lanka adapt to/avert risk of climate change;
             Helping to strengthen the private sector;
             Helping to strengthen the social protection sector;
             Helping to improve the quality of life in urban areas;
             Helping to strengthen the regulatory framework;
             Ensuring that attention is paid to gender disparities; and
             Helping to strengthen the judicial system.

       Bank good, but issue not perceived to be a priority: Areas in this quadrant were those
        for which respondents indicated a moderate level of importance, but gave the Bank a
        relatively high rating of effectiveness. There was just one area in this quadrant:
             Helping to integrate Sri Lanka into the global economy (although this is on the
                borderline of the Bank being not so good).




                                                 30
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Respondents were asked a variety of questions regarding the Bank’s programs, poverty mission,
personal relationships, collaborations/partnerships, knowledge, and day-to-day operations.

   Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement that
    “The Bank and partners in government collaborate well together on Bank supported
    programs and projects in Sri Lanka” compared to respondents from the FY ’07 survey.

   In contrast, respondents from the FY ’07 country survey had significantly higher levels of
    agreement that “The World Bank collaborates well with other donors here” compared to
    respondents from this year’s survey. Respondents from the FY ’07 country survey also had
    significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness, compared to respondents from this
    year’s survey, for:
         “Technical competence”;
         “Producing knowledge and research that are useful”;
         “Making the results of studies and analyses readily available”;
         “Straightforwardness in its dealings with you”;
         “Maintaining consistent messages”; and
         “Promoting the inclusion of private sector in the development of strategies”.

   There were significant stakeholder differences in their ratings of the Bank across four of
    these areas.
         Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and local government had the
            highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at “Providing sound policy and economic
            advice” whereas respondents from private sector, NGOs, and academia had
            significantly lower ratings.
         Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and PIUs/PMUs had the highest
          ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at “Promoting the inclusion of private sector in
          the development of strategies” whereas respondents from private sector and academia
          had significantly lower ratings.
         Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, PIUs/PMUs, and bilateral or
          multilateral agencies had the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at “Lending
          in a way that promotes effective development” whereas respondents from private
          sector and academia had significantly lower ratings.
         Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, local government, bilateral or
          multilateral agencies, and NGOs had the highest levels of agreement that “The Bank
          works efficiently” whereas respondents from the media and other organizations had
          significantly lower levels of agreement.

   Ratings for all stakeholder groups, both geographic locations, and across both country
    surveys can be found in the Appendix.




                                                31
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Bank Programs in Sri Lanka

       In terms of the Bank’s programs in Sri Lanka, the Bank’s procurement requirements
        being reasonable received the highest mean level of agreement, 6.6, across all
        respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly
        agree.

       The Bank’s effectiveness at lending in a way that promotes effective development
        received a mean rating of 6.8 across all respondents on a 10-point scale with 1 being not
        at all effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                 32
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Poverty Mission

       In terms of the Bank’s poverty mission in Sri Lanka, the Bank being an effective catalyst
        for discussion on critical issues related to poverty received the highest mean level of
        agreement, 6.7, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree
        and 10 being strongly agree.

       The Bank’s effectiveness at giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction received a
        mean rating of 6.9 across all respondents on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all
        effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                 33
The World Bank                                 Sri Lanka                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Personal Relationships

       In terms of the Bank’s personal relationships in Sri Lanka, respondents liking to
        work/interact with Bank staff received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.5, across
        all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly
        agree.

       In terms of maintaining relationships with clients and stakeholders in Sri Lanka, the
        Bank’s effectiveness at being straightforward in its dealings received the highest mean
        rating, 6.7, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and
        10 being very effective.




                                                  34
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)
Collaboration/Partnerships
       In terms of the Bank’s collaborations in Sri Lanka, the Bank and partners in government
        collaborating well together on Bank supported programs and projects in Sri Lanka
        received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point
        scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
       The Bank’s effectiveness at promoting the inclusion of local communities and local
        project experts in strategy development both received the highest mean rating of 6.4 on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very effective.




                                                35
The World Bank                                 Sri Lanka                             Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Knowledge

       In terms of the Bank’s effectiveness at being a knowledge base in Sri Lanka, the Bank’s
        ability to produce knowledge and research that are useful received the highest mean
        rating, 7.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and
        10 being very effective.




                                                  36
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



VI. Overall Impressions of the World Bank (continued)

Day-to-Day Operations

       In terms of the Bank’s day-to-day operations in Sri Lanka, the Bank effectively
        monitoring and evaluating its projects received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.0,
        across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being
        strongly agree.




                                                37
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Sri Lanka

Role Significance

       The Bank was expected to play a quite significant role in Sri Lanka’s development over
        the medium term, receiving a mean rating of 8.2 across all respondents on a 10-point
        scale with 1 being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role.
             Respondents from other areas gave significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s role
              significance compared to respondents from the Western Province.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for the
              Bank’s role significance.




                                                 38
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Sri Lanka (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should offer more products and services that
        reflect Sri Lanka’s status as a middle income country, reduce the complexity of obtaining
        Bank financing, improve the quality of its experts as related to Sri Lanka’s specific
        challenges, and build capacity to make itself of greater value in Sri Lanka.




                                                39
The World Bank                                 Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



VII. The Future Role of the World Bank in Sri Lanka (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, respondents
        indicated that they most often attribute this to reforms not being well thought out in light
        of country challenges. Respondents also indicated that political pressures/obstacles, an
        inadequate level of citizen/civil society participation, and the government working
        inefficiently or too slowly can also lead to Bank assisted reform efforts failing or taking
        place slowly.




                                                  40
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach

Information Sources

       Two-thirds of all respondents indicated that they got most of their information about
        economic and social development issues in Sri Lanka from local newspapers. The
        Internet was also a popular information source. In the FY ’07 country survey,
        respondents indicated that they got most of their information about economic and social
        development issues from local newspapers (76%).




                                                41
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       Respondents were again most likely to utilize local newspapers for information about the
        Bank’s development activities in Sri Lanka. World Bank publications/materials, the
        Internet, and the Bank’s website were also popular information sources.




                                                42
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank,
        over half of all respondents indicated that they preferred the World Bank website.
        E-newsletters, workshops/conferences, and face-to-face meetings/discussions were
        also popular preferred information sources.




                                                43
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                             Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Internet Access

       The vast majority of all respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet.
             Respondents from the Western Province had significantly higher rates of Internet
              access compared to those from other areas.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of
              Internet access.




Website Usage

       Nearly three-quarters of all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website,
        significantly more than respondents in the FY ’07 country survey.
             Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister, the office of a
              Parliamentarian, and local government had significantly lower rates of usage for
              the World Bank’s website compared to those from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from the Western Province were significantly more likely to have
              used the Bank’s website compared to respondents from other areas.




                                                 44
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                          Country Survey 2012




VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Website Usage (continued)

       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, the majority indicated that they used
        the World Bank’s country website. This is statistically similar to the website usage
        reported by respondents in the FY ’07 country survey.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of usage for the World Bank’s main and country
              websites.




                                                45
The World Bank                               Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Access to Information

       Less than a third of all respondents indicated that they were aware of the Bank’s Access
        to Information Policy.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of awareness for the Bank’s Access to Information
              Policy.




       Nearly a quarter of all respondents indicated that they had requested information from the
        Bank in the past year.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and both geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of requesting information.




                                                46
The World Bank                                Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012



VIII. Communication and Outreach (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Of those who had requested information from the Bank in the past year, over half
        indicated that they were able to obtain this information.

             Respondents from the Western Province were significantly more likely to indicate
              that they were able to obtain this information from the Bank compared to
              respondents from other areas.

             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of being
              able to obtain this information from the Bank.




                                                 47
The World Bank                                 Sri Lanka                             Country Survey 2012



IX. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 49


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 62


          C. Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location .................... 76


          D. Responses to All Questions by Year.............................................. 87


          E. World Bank Client Survey 2012 – Sri Lanka Questionnaire .......... 94




                                             SRI LANKA




                                                  48
The World Bank                                        Sri Lanka                                    Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents
                                          Total Response Number = 296
A. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                      Percentage of Respondents
Employee of a Ministry                                                                         27.5%
Private Sector                                                                                 16.5%
Media                                                                                          10.7%
Other                                                                                          9.3%
Local Government                                                                               8.6%
NGOs                                                                                           6.5%
Academia                                                                                       6.2%
Bilateral or Multilateral Agency                                                               4.1%
Independent Government Institution                                                             4.1%
Project Implementation Unit (PIU)/ Project Management Unit (PMU)                               3.1%
Office of the President, Prime Minister, Minister                                              2.1%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                      1.0%
Faith-Based Groups                                                                             0.3%

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                          Percentage of Respondents
Social Services                                                                                22.8%
Other                                                                                          22.1%
Communications, Information Services                                                           9.8%
Economic Management                                                                            8.1%
Commerce, Trade and Manufacturing                                                              7.7%
Infrastructure                                                                                 7.7%
Finance, Banking, Insurance                                                                    7.0%
Legislature, Politics                                                                          4.6%
Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry                                                            3.9%
Environment, Natural Resource Management                                                       2.5%
SME sector development                                                                         1.8%
Tourism                                                                                        1.4%
Law, Justice                                                                                   0.7%

Familiarity with the World Bank                                                               N      Mean        SD
3. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Sri Lanka on a scale of
                                                                                             276      6.20     2.13
   1-10, 1 meaning “not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “extremely familiar” ?

4. How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the
   World Bank's activities?                                                          Percentage of Respondents
Less than one year                                                                             15.7%
One to three years                                                                             18.0%
More than three years                                                                          66.3%




                                                         49
The World Bank                                        Sri Lanka                                 Country Survey 2012


A. Background Information (continued)

5. Which best represents your geographic location?                                Percentage of Respondents
Western Province                                                                            69.7%
Central Province                                                                            7.7%
Southern Province                                                                           4.4%
Uwa Province                                                                                4.4%
Eastern Province                                                                            4.0%
Northern Province                                                                           2.9%
Sabaragamuwa Province                                                                       2.9%
North Western Province                                                                      2.9%
North Central Province                                                                      1.1%



B. General Issues facing Sri Lanka

Perspective on the Next Generation                                                         N      Mean        SD
1. On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “extremely pessimistic”, 10 meaning “extremely
   optimistic”, please indicate your perspective on the future of the next generation     257      6.93     1.96
   in Sri Lanka.

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
                                                                                           nd
2. Please identify which one of these you consider the first (second)           Most       2 Most
   most important development priority.                                       Important   Important    Combined
Economic growth                                                                 30.4%       10.3%        40.7%
Government effectiveness/governance                                             27.2%       12.5%        39.7%
Reducing corruption                                                             11.2%       15.8%        27.0%
Reducing poverty                                                                4.3%        10.3%        14.6%
Increasing access to quality education                                          6.2%        7.4%         13.5%
Improving basic infrastructure                                                  5.1%        7.4%         12.4%
Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                          2.5%        5.1%         7.7%
Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                         0.4%        6.6%         7.0%
Developing the SME sector                                                       1.8%        4.8%         6.6%
Increasing access to quality health services                                    1.8%        4.4%         6.2%
Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                  2.2%        3.7%         5.9%
Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                           1.4%        4.0%         5.5%
Protecting natural resources and environment                                    1.1%        2.2%         3.3%
Agriculture development                                                         1.1%        1.5%         2.6%
Strengthening regulatory framework                                              0.4%        1.1%         1.5%
HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                        0.4%        0.7%         1.1%
Tourism                                                                         0.7%        0.4%         1.1%
Other                                                                           0.7%        0.4%         1.1%
Improving environmental quality                                                 0.0%        0.7%         0.7%
Food security                                                                   0.4%        0.4%         0.7%
Improving trade and exports                                                     0.0%        0.4%         0.4%
Climate change                                                                  0.4%        0.0%         0.4%
Access to finance                                                               0.0%        0.0%         0.0%




                                                         50
The World Bank                                    Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012


B. General Issues facing Sri Lanka (continued)

16. Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would      Percentage of Respondents
    contribute most to reducing poverty in Sri Lanka? (Choose only TWO)     (Responses Combined)
Increasing income generating activities/ employment                                 46.4%
Increasing economic growth                                                          22.0%
Agriculture development                                                             20.3%
Education                                                                           16.5%
Developing the SME sector                                                           16.5%
Infrastructure development                                                          15.1%
Improving governance                                                                14.8%
Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                      13.7%
Reducing corruption                                                                 12.0%
Increasing foreign direct investment                                                 4.5%
Food security                                                                        3.8%
Protecting the environment and natural resources                                     2.4%
Other                                                                                2.4%
Health                                                                               2.1%

4. Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to          Percentage of Respondents
   generating faster economic growth in Sri Lanka? (Choose only TWO)        (Responses Combined)
Reducing corruption                                                                 17.8%
Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment                   17.1%
Improving governance                                                                15.3%
Improving the skills of the labor force                                             14.3%
Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                      13.9%
Increasing agricultural productivity                                                13.6%
Promoting and supporting the SME sector                                             10.5%
Improving access to and/or quality of education                                      9.4%
Increasing the role of private sector in development and production                  8.7%
Improved transportation infrastructure                                               8.4%
Increase efficiency of public spending                                               8.4%
Encouraging Public Private Partnerships                                              7.7%
Improving trade and exports                                                          7.3%
Ethnic reconciliation                                                                7.3%
Improve environment for doing business and private sector growth                     7.0%
Access to education                                                                  6.3%
Access to finance                                                                    4.9%
Better managing State Owned Enterprise sector                                        4.2%
Improving access to and/or quality of health care                                    3.1%
Invest in tourism products and services                                              3.1%
Quality of education                                                                 3.1%
Improved power generation infrastructure                                             1.7%
Strengthening the regulatory framework                                               1.7%
Other                                                                                1.0%
Enhancing Colombo as an International city                                           0.7%




                                                     51
The World Bank                                         Sri Lanka                                 Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Overall Effectiveness                                                                       N      Mean       SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in Sri Lanka ,
                                                                                           260      6.54     1.81
on a scale of 1-10, 1 being “Not effective at all”, 10 being “Very effective”?


2a. Based on your observations of the World Bank in Sri Lanka, what do
   you think the Bank considers its top priorities in Sri Lanka?                    Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than TWO)                                                          (Responses Combined)
Economic growth                                                                               26.9%
Reducing poverty                                                                              24.7%
Improving basic infrastructure                                                                23.6%
Government effectiveness/governance                                                           21.5%
Increasing access to quality education                                                        16.0%
Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                                         8.0%
Increasing access to quality health services                                                   6.9%
Developing the SME sector                                                                      6.9%
Reducing corruption                                                                            6.5%
Access to finance                                                                              6.5%
Promote policies and stimulate foreign direct investment                                       4.7%
Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                                 4.4%
Developing a skilled labor force                                                               4.0%
Agriculture development                                                                        3.6%
Promoting entrepreneurship                                                                     3.3%
Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                          2.9%
Strengthening regulatory framework                                                             2.5%
Improving environmental quality                                                                1.8%
Reducing non communicable diseases                                                             1.8%
Improving trade and exports                                                                    1.8%
Tourism                                                                                        1.5%
Food security                                                                                  1.1%
Protecting natural resources and environment                                                   1.1%
Managing HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                              1.1%
Other                                                                                          0.7%
Climate change                                                                                 0.0%




                                                          52
The World Bank                                      Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
2b. Based on your observations of the World Bank in Sri Lanka, where
   would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources   Percentage of Respondents
   in its support of country priorities? (Choose no more than TWO)             (Responses Combined)
Economic growth                                                                        19.9%
Improving basic infrastructure                                                         16.9%
Government effectiveness/governance                                                    16.2%
Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                                 14.0%
Developing the SME sector                                                              12.1%
Reducing poverty                                                                       11.8%
Agriculture development                                                                11.8%
Developing a skilled labor force                                                       11.0%
Reducing corruption                                                                    10.3%
Increasing access to quality education                                                 10.3%
Promoting entrepreneurship                                                              7.4%
Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                          7.4%
Access to finance                                                                       6.6%
Improving trade and exports                                                             5.1%
Strengthening regulatory framework                                                      4.4%
Promote policies and stimulate foreign direct investment                                4.0%
Increasing access to quality health services                                            4.0%
Protecting natural resources and environment                                            2.6%
Food security                                                                           2.2%
Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                   2.2%
Improving environmental quality                                                         1.5%
Climate change                                                                          1.5%
Managing HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                       1.1%
Other                                                                                   1.1%
Tourism                                                                                 0.7%
Reducing non communicable diseases                                                      0.7%

3. In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World
   Bank in Sri Lanka's development strategies?                               Percentage of Respondents
The Bank should be more involved                                                       68.6%
The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                                     17.4%
The Bank should be less involved                                                        5.9%
The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                                                   1.7%
Don't know                                                                              6.3%

3a. Which World Bank instrument do you believe is the most effective in
   reducing poverty in Sri Lanka? (Choose only ONE)                          Percentage of Respondents
Results based lending                                                                  31.6%
Investment lending                                                                     26.2%
Technical assistance                                                                   20.6%
Policy based lending                                                                   14.9%
Analytical work                                                                         4.3%
Don't know                                                                              2.5%




                                                       53
The World Bank                                          Sri Lanka                                 Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

3b. Which World Bank instrument do you believe is the least effective in
  reducing poverty in Sri Lanka? (Choose only ONE)                                    Percentage of Respondents
Analytical work                                                                                 22.0%
Policy based lending                                                                            20.6%
Don't know                                                                                      19.5%
Results based lending                                                                           14.8%
Investment lending                                                                              12.3%
Technical assistance                                                                            10.8%

                                                                                Percentage of Respondents
4. In broad terms of economic and social development, what is
                                                                                          nd
   the “greatest value” brought by the World Bank to Sri Lanka?            Greatest      2 Greatest
   What is the “second greatest” value?                                     Value          Value       Combined
Financial resources                                                         29.3%          24.0%         53.4%
Policy and economic advice                                                  16.5%          14.5%         31.0%
Lending when others won’t                                                   14.7%          7.6%          22.3%
Technical advice                                                            6.4%           14.5%         20.9%
The Bank's knowledge                                                        12.4%          5.7%          18.1%
Donor coordination                                                          6.0%           11.5%         17.5%
Ability to build implementation capacity                                    4.9%           10.7%         15.6%
Ability to mobilize resources                                               5.3%           7.6%          12.9%
Convener/facilitator                                                        3.4%           3.8%          7.2%
Other                                                                       1.5%           0.4%          1.9%

5. Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest                      Percentage of Respondents
   weaknesses in its work in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO only)                               (Combined Responses)
Inadequately aligned with country priorities                                                    26.5%
Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country                    18.2%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                           16.7%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                        16.7%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                     16.7%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                        16.7%
Too influenced by the US                                                                        13.8%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                       13.8%
Too theoretical                                                                                  7.6%
Not client focused                                                                               6.5%
Too political                                                                                    4.7%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                           4.0%
Is arrogant in its approach                                                                      2.9%
Too detailed                                                                                     2.9%
Other                                                                                            2.9%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                            1.1%




                                                           54
The World Bank                                       Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

6. Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most
   valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the next few     Percentage of Respondents
   years in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO)                                (Responses Combined)
Education                                                                               24.2%
Governance                                                                              17.7%
Poverty                                                                                 17.0%
Enhanced business environment for private sector development                            16.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                         14.6%
Rural development                                                                       13.5%
Promote Public Private Partnerships                                                     12.5%
Public sector performance                                                               11.1%
Health                                                                                   9.0%
Agricultural development                                                                 8.4%
Environmental sustainability/ natural resources management                               6.3%
Transport                                                                                5.6%
Social protection                                                                        5.2%
Help restructure SOE's for better results                                                5.2%
Labor markets/job creation                                                               4.9%
Urban/metropolitan development                                                           3.8%
Public expenditure                                                                       3.5%
Improving equality of opportunity                                                        3.5%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                                2.8%
Energy                                                                                   2.4%
Financial markets                                                                        2.4%
Food security                                                                            2.4%
Other                                                                                    1.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                     1.4%
Climate change                                                                           1.4%

7. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
   main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
   Bank work with more in your country to ensure better development           Percentage of Respondents
   results there? (Choose TWO only)                                             (Combined Responses)
Local Government                                                                        44.0%
Private sector                                                                          33.7%
Beneficiaries                                                                           28.7%
Community based organizations (CBOs)                                                    25.2%
Youth                                                                                   18.1%
Self-employed women’s groups                                                             8.5%
NGOs                                                                                     8.2%
Donor community                                                                          7.1%
Parliament                                                                               6.7%
Media                                                                                    6.4%
Other                                                                                    4.3%
Faith-based organizations                                                                2.8%




                                                        55
The World Bank                                         Sri Lanka                                 Country Survey 2012


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                                           Level of Agreement
On a scale of 1-10, with 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly
agree, please respond to the following statements about the World Bank in Sri Lanka.       N       Mean       SD
8.   Overall the Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Sri Lanka          277      6.04     2.16
9.   The Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities for this
                                                                                           268      5.82     2.04
     country
10. The Bank’s work reflects its own mission of poverty reduction                          259      5.81     2.19
11. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Sri Lanka       264      5.86     2.04
12. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Sri Lanka with respect               253      6.66     2.07
13. The World Bank collaborates well with other donors here                                224      6.36     2.05
14. The World Bank is responsive                                                           252      6.04     2.14
15. Overall, I like to work/interact with Bank staff                                       268      7.47     2.13
16. The Bank is an effective catalyst for discussion on issues related to poverty          258      6.73     2.15
17. In general, the strategies that the Bank supports are sustainable over time            258      6.31     2.05
18. The World Bank's work promotes country ownership of development strategies             256      6.32     2.01
19. The Bank's work promotes the empowerment of poor people to participate in
                                                                                           263      5.85     2.28
    development
20. The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                            242      5.51     2.45
21. The Bank gives appropriate priority to growth issues                                   261      6.21     2.04




                                                           56
The World Bank                                         Sri Lanka                               Country Survey 2012


D. The Work of the World Bank
How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in                 Importance                Effectiveness
that particular area of work in Sri Lanka? How effective do
you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a
positive impact on that area of development in Sri Lanka?
(Asked on a 10-point importance/effectiveness scale,
1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)                                 N      Mean        SD     N       Mean      SD
 1.   Helping to reduce poverty                                    281     8.66       1.60   261      6.97     2.00
 2.   Helping to bring about economic growth                       274     8.61       1.58   262      7.20     1.90
 3.   Encouraging greater transparency in governance               258     8.26       2.05   242      6.12     2.41
 4.   Helping to strengthen the private sector                     261     7.98       2.01   240      6.56     2.26
 5.   Helping to strengthen the financial system                   263     8.27       1.72   242      6.99     2.17
 6.   Helping to strengthen the regulatory framework               254     7.61       2.26   230      6.30     2.23
 7.   Helping to strengthen the judicial system                    241     7.36       2.63   213      5.60     2.69
 8.   Helping to strengthen the public sector                      266     8.11       2.11   242      6.54     2.48
 9.   Helping to strengthen the education sector                   268     8.84       1.48   248      7.55     2.08
 10. Helping to strengthen the health sector                       269     8.79       1.49   252      7.63     2.02
 11. Safeguarding against corruption in projects/ programs
                                                                   256     8.68       1.84   222      6.70     2.46
     that it funds with its procurement rules
 12. Helping to integrate Sri Lanka into the global economy        260     8.18       1.84   231      6.71     2.18
 13. Ensuring that attention is paid to the environmental
                                                                   256     8.34       1.83   236      6.72     2.27
     impact of Bank supported programs and strategies
 14. Ensuring that attention is paid to gender disparities         252     7.46       2.33   226      6.51     2.30
 15. Helping to strengthen agricultural development                256     8.57       1.60   235      7.03     2.17
 16. Helping to strengthen infrastructure development              252     8.59       1.69   232      7.48     1.90
 17. Helping to strengthen environment and natural
                                                                   260     8.28       1.87   235      6.78     2.22
     resources management
 18. Helping to strengthen the social protection sector            258     7.91       2.06   230      6.52     2.27
 19. Helping to improve the quality of life in urban areas         252     7.83       1.95   223      6.50     2.15
 20. Helping to reduce corruption in the country with its
                                                                   256     8.18       2.44   231      5.75     2.92
     advice and support
 21. Helping to empower communities to participate in their
                                                                   262     8.22       1.92   240      6.61     2.34
     own development
 22. Helping Sri Lanka adapt to/avert risk of climate change       253     8.10       2.05   227      6.24     2.60




                                                          57
The World Bank                                         Sri Lanka                               Country Survey 2012


E. The Way the World Bank does Business

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular       Level of Effectiveness
attribute/activity listed below using a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”,
10 meaning “Very effective”.                                                             N      Mean       SD
1. Technical competence                                                                 262     6.99      2.03
2.   Producing knowledge and research that are useful                                   263     7.14      1.89
3.   Making the results of studies and analyses readily available                       263     6.82      2.12
4.   Sharing knowledge about international best practices                               260     6.91      2.22
5.   Ability to adapt its knowledge to your country’s needs                             256     6.36      2.28
6.   Ensuring its staff is accessible                                                   243     6.28      2.39
7.   Providing sound policy and economic advice                                         256     6.55      2.08
8.   Straightforwardness in its dealings with you                                       240     6.66      2.40
9.   Maintaining consistent messages                                                    240     6.33      2.29
10. Promoting the inclusion of local communities in the development of strategies       243     6.42      2.31
11. Promoting the inclusion of civil society in the development of strategies           239     6.18      2.36
12. Promoting the inclusion of local project experts in the development of strategies   238     6.36      2.21
13. Promoting the inclusion of private sector in the development of strategies          236     6.29      2.24
14. Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction                                    256     6.91      2.10
15. Lending in a way that promotes effective development                                256     6.79      2.24



F. Project/Program Related Issues

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale,           Level of Agreement
1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.                     N      Mean       SD
1.   The Bank is flexible in terms of adjusting to changing circumstances               153     5.82     2.11
2.   The Bank disburses funds promptly                                                  155     6.48     2.34
3.   The Bank works efficiently                                                         151     6.90     2.08
4.   The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                        150     6.98     1.96
     supports
5.   The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level                            145     6.51     2.09
6.   The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials                           146     6.68     2.16
7.   The Bank and partners in government collaborate well together on Bank
                                                                                        152     7.13     1.94
     supported programs and projects in Sri Lanka
8.   The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity                                148     7.03     2.10
9.   The Government supports and takes responsibility for development efforts in
                                                                                        147     6.88     2.16
     Sri Lanka
10. The Bank’s procurement requirements are reasonable                                  137     6.61     2.24




                                                           58
The World Bank                                                Sri Lanka                                      Country Survey 2012


G. The Future Role of the World Bank in Sri Lanka

The Bank’s Role                                                                                         N      Mean       SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank should play in Sri Lanka’s
development over the medium term in the near future? (1 meaning that the Bank should                   259       8.24    1.93
not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should play a very significant role)

2. Which of the following should the Bank do to make itself of greater
    value in Sri Lanka?                                                                         Percentage of Respondents
Offer more products and services that reflect Sri Lanka's status as a middle
                                                                                                         36.1%
income country
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                                  33.2%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Sri Lanka’s specific
                                                                                                         30.7%
challenges
Build capacity                                                                                           30.7%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                         13.6%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                                 13.2%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Sri Lanka's
                                                                                                         10.7%
economy
Greater selectivity in its work                                                                          10.0%
Other                                                                                                     5.0%
Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                                             4.6%

3. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place,
    which TWO of the following would you attribute this to?
    (Choose up to TWO)                                                                          Percentage of Respondents
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                           50.2%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                         38.6%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                     32.3%
Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                                                 28.8%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in government                                                       16.9%
Poor donor coordination                                                                                   10.5%
The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                                                              7.9%
Other                                                                                                      3.7%




                                                                 59
The World Bank                                   Sri Lanka                           Country Survey 2012


H. Communication and Outreach

1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social     Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO at most)                      (Combined Responses)
Local newspapers                                                                     65.9%
Internet                                                                             31.9%
Local television                                                                     16.8%
Consultations/Conferences/Fora                                                       16.8%
Workshops/Seminars                                                                   15.4%
Periodicals                                                                          15.1%
Social media                                                                         11.8%
Local radio                                                                          6.5%
International television                                                             4.7%
Other                                                                                4.7%
International newspapers                                                             2.2%
Word of mouth                                                                        2.2%
International radio                                                                  1.1%

2. From where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s   Percentage of Respondents
    development activities in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO at most)                (Combined Responses)
Local newspapers                                                                     49.1%
World Bank publications, materials                                                   25.3%
Internet                                                                             24.2%
World Bank website                                                                   23.1%
Local television                                                                     17.3%
World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                                          16.6%
Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff                                     10.5%
Periodicals                                                                          6.9%
Local radio                                                                          4.7%
Other                                                                                4.7%
Social media                                                                         4.0%
International television                                                             2.5%
International newspapers                                                             2.2%
International radio                                                                  1.4%
Blogs                                                                                0.7%

3. How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank?        Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                  (Combined Responses)
World Bank website                                                                   51.1%
Face to face meetings/discussions                                                    34.3%
Workshops/conferences                                                                26.0%
Social media                                                                         15.6%
e-newsletters                                                                        14.0%
Mobile phones                                                                        9.2%
Blogs                                                                                3.8%
Other                                                                                0.0%




                                                    60
The World Bank                                       Sri Lanka                             Country Survey 2012


H. Communication and Outreach (continued)

4. Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to information Policy under
    which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is   Percentage of Respondents
    not on a list of exceptions?
Yes                                                                                       30.7%
No                                                                                        69.3%

5. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in
                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
    the past year?
Yes                                                                                       21.7%
No                                                                                        78.3%

6. Were you able to obtain this information?                                     Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                        57.3%
No                                                                                         42.7%

7. Do you have access to the Internet?                                           Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                        96.3%
No                                                                                         3.7%

8. I use/have used the World Bank website:                                       Percentage of Respondents
Yes                                                                                        73.4%
No                                                                                         26.6%

9. I primarily use:                                                              Percentage of Respondents
The World Bank’s country website                                                           56.1%
The World Bank’s main website                                                              43.9%




                                                        61
The World Bank                                                                                              Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

A. Background Information




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “Extremely familiar”)

B. General Issues facing Sri Lanka




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Extremely pessimistic”, 10 meaning “Extremely optimistic”)

Please identify which one of these you consider the first most important development priority.
                                                                      Office     Employee                                                    Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                        of          of a           Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                          President     Ministry     Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                  16.7%        26.0%            33.3%               33.3%     13.0%         18.2%       20.0%     52.6%   40.7%      27.3%           17.6%    33.3%
 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           5.9%      0.0%
 Economic growth                                                      50.0%        41.1%            33.3%               0.0%      30.4%         45.5%       33.3%     21.1%   22.2%      27.3%           11.8%    29.6%
 Reducing corruption                                                  0.0%         5.5%             33.3%               11.1%      0.0%          0.0%       11.1%     15.8%   29.6%       9.1%           23.5%    14.8%
 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment              0.0%         1.4%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Increasing access to quality education                               16.7%        5.5%              0.0%               11.1%      8.7%          0.0%       11.1%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           23.5%     0.0%
 Increasing access to quality health services                         0.0%         1.4%              0.0%               11.1%      4.3%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           11.8%     0.0%
 Reducing poverty                                                     0.0%         5.5%              0.0%               22.2%      4.3%          0.0%        4.4%      0.0%    3.7%       9.1%           0.0%      3.7%
 Developing the SME sector                                            0.0%         1.4%              0.0%               11.1%      0.0%          0.0%        4.4%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%         18.2%        2.2%      0.0%    3.7%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                       0.0%         5.5%              0.0%               0.0%      21.7%          0.0%        2.2%      0.0%    0.0%       9.1%           0.0%     11.1%
 Improving environmental quality                                      0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Protecting natural resources and environment                         0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          9.1%        2.2%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities               0.0%         1.4%              0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        0.0%      5.3%    0.0%       0.0%           5.9%      3.7%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment       0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        8.9%      0.0%    0.0%       9.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Agriculture development                                              0.0%         2.7%              0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Tourism                                                              0.0%         1.4%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       9.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Access to finance                                                    0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                   0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      3.7%
 Improving trade and exports                                          0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Climate change                                                       0.0%         0.0%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      5.3%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Food security                                                        16.7%        0.0%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                                0.0%         1.4%              0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%




                                                                                                                 62
The World Bank                                                                                         Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing Sri Lanka (continued)

Then identify which one you consider the second most important development priority.
                                                                    Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                        President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                16.7%       12.7%           0.0%               0.0%      13.6%         27.3%       12.8%     11.1%   23.1%       0.0%           17.6%     3.7%
 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                           0.0%        1.4%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    3.8%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Economic growth                                                    0.0%        9.9%            0.0%               22.2%     13.6%          0.0%        8.5%     11.1%   11.5%      10.0%           11.8%    14.8%
 Reducing corruption                                                0.0%        11.3%          66.7%               22.2%     31.8%          0.0%       17.0%     16.7%   15.4%       0.0%           11.8%    22.2%
 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment            0.0%        2.8%            0.0%               0.0%       4.5%          9.1%       14.9%      5.6%    3.8%      20.0%           0.0%     11.1%
 Increasing access to quality education                             0.0%        8.5%            0.0%               11.1%      9.1%          9.1%        4.3%      5.6%   11.5%      10.0%           17.6%     0.0%
 Increasing access to quality health services                       0.0%        5.6%            0.0%               0.0%       9.1%          0.0%        4.3%      0.0%    3.8%       0.0%           11.8%     3.7%
 Reducing poverty                                                   16.7%       15.5%           0.0%               11.1%      0.0%         18.2%        8.5%     16.7%    0.0%      10.0%           5.9%     11.1%
 Developing the SME sector                                          0.0%        8.5%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        6.4%      0.0%    3.8%       0.0%           0.0%      7.4%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system              0.0%        0.0%           33.3%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        4.3%      5.6%   11.5%      20.0%           5.9%      3.7%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                     16.7%       8.5%            0.0%               22.2%      4.5%          0.0%        4.3%      5.6%    7.7%      20.0%           0.0%     11.1%
 Improving environmental quality                                    0.0%        1.4%            0.0%               11.1%      0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Protecting natural resources and environment                       0.0%        1.4%            0.0%               0.0%       4.5%          0.0%        0.0%     11.1%    0.0%       0.0%           5.9%      0.0%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities             16.7%       9.9%            0.0%               0.0%       4.5%          9.1%        4.3%      5.6%    0.0%       0.0%           5.9%      0.0%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment     16.7%       2.8%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        6.4%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           5.9%      0.0%
 Agriculture development                                            0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.1%      0.0%    0.0%      10.0%           0.0%      7.4%
 Tourism                                                            0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       4.5%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Access to finance                                                  0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                 0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        0.0%      0.0%    3.8%       0.0%           0.0%      3.7%
 Improving trade and exports                                        0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.1%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Climate change                                                     0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Food security                                                      0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      5.6%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                              16.7%       0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%

Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                    Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                        President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Agriculture development                                            0.0%        21.8%          33.3%               33.3%     16.0%         25.0%       17.0%     21.1%   13.3%      25.0%           35.3%    17.9%
 Improving governance                                               0.0%        14.1%          33.3%               11.1%     20.0%         16.7%       10.6%     21.1%   26.7%       8.3%           0.0%     14.3%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment     33.3%       16.7%           0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          8.3%       23.4%     21.1%   10.0%      16.7%           5.9%     10.7%
 Infrastructure development                                         16.7%       14.1%          33.3%               22.2%     36.0%         33.3%        6.4%      5.3%   16.7%      25.0%           5.9%     10.7%
 Education                                                          33.3%       14.1%           0.0%               33.3%      8.0%         16.7%       17.0%     10.5%   13.3%       8.3%           35.3%    25.0%
 Increasing economic growth                                         33.3%       21.8%           0.0%               33.3%     32.0%          8.3%       21.3%     10.5%   10.0%      33.3%           29.4%    28.6%
 Developing the SME sector                                          0.0%        14.1%          33.3%               22.2%      8.0%         16.7%       31.9%     10.5%   20.0%       0.0%           5.9%     17.9%
 Reducing corruption                                                0.0%        10.3%          33.3%               11.1%      8.0%          0.0%        6.4%     15.8%   26.7%       0.0%           11.8%    25.0%
 Health                                                             0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          8.3%        0.0%      5.3%    6.7%       0.0%           11.8%     0.0%
 Protecting the environment and natural resources                   0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        4.3%     15.8%    3.3%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Increasing income generating activities/ employment                66.7%       59.0%           0.0%               22.2%     56.0%         41.7%       44.7%     42.1%   33.3%      58.3%           35.3%    32.1%
 Increasing foreign direct investment                               0.0%        2.6%            0.0%               11.1%      0.0%          8.3%        6.4%      0.0%   10.0%       0.0%           0.0%      7.1%
 Food security                                                      0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.1%     15.8%    3.3%      16.7%           11.8%     0.0%
 Other                                                              0.0%        2.6%            0.0%               0.0%       8.0%          0.0%        4.3%      0.0%    3.3%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%




                                                                                                            63
The World Bank                                                                                              Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

B. General Issues facing Sri Lanka (continued)

Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                         Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                           of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                             President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Access to education                                                     0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               33.3%      0.0%          9.1%        8.3%     15.8%    3.4%       0.0%           31.3%     0.0%
 Access to finance                                                       0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               22.2%      4.3%          0.0%        4.2%     15.8%    6.9%       0.0%           0.0%     10.7%
 Enhancing Colombo as an International city                              0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               11.1%      0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    3.4%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment       0.0%        27.8%           0.0%               11.1%     17.4%          0.0%       18.8%     10.5%   20.7%       9.1%           12.5%     7.1%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment          16.7%       16.5%           0.0%               0.0%      13.0%         18.2%       25.0%     10.5%    3.4%      18.2%           0.0%     10.7%
 Improving governance                                                    16.7%       16.5%          33.3%               11.1%     13.0%         18.2%       14.6%     10.5%   17.2%      18.2%           18.8%    14.3%
 Improve environment for doing business and private sector growth        16.7%       3.8%            0.0%               11.1%      0.0%          0.0%       14.6%      0.0%   13.8%       9.1%           6.3%      7.1%
 Improved power generation infrastructure                                0.0%        2.5%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        0.0%      0.0%    3.4%       9.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Improved transportation infrastructure                                  0.0%        8.9%           33.3%               22.2%     13.0%          9.1%        4.2%      0.0%   10.3%      18.2%           0.0%     10.7%
 Promoting and supporting the SME sector                                 33.3%       8.9%            0.0%               11.1%      8.7%          9.1%       12.5%     10.5%    6.9%       9.1%           12.5%    14.3%
 Reducing corruption                                                     0.0%        12.7%          66.7%               11.1%     13.0%          0.0%       18.8%     36.8%   27.6%       9.1%           12.5%    28.6%
 Improving access to and/or quality of education                         0.0%        11.4%           0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          9.1%        8.3%      0.0%   10.3%       9.1%           18.8%    10.7%
 Improving access to and/or quality of health care                       16.7%       2.5%            0.0%               0.0%       8.7%          9.1%        2.1%      0.0%    6.9%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Improving the skills of the labor force                                 66.7%       12.7%           0.0%               0.0%      39.1%          9.1%        2.1%     21.1%    3.4%      18.2%           31.3%    10.7%
 Improving trade and exports                                             0.0%        5.1%           33.3%               11.1%      4.3%         27.3%        4.2%     10.5%    6.9%      27.3%           6.3%      0.0%
 Better managing State Owned Enterprise sector                           16.7%       5.1%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        4.2%      5.3%    6.9%       0.0%           0.0%      3.6%
 Increase efficiency of public spending                                  0.0%        7.6%            0.0%               11.1%      0.0%         18.2%        8.3%      5.3%    3.4%       9.1%           6.3%     21.4%
 Increasing agricultural productivity                                    0.0%        19.0%           0.0%               22.2%     21.7%          9.1%       12.5%     15.8%   10.3%       0.0%           12.5%     3.6%
 Invest in tourism products and services                                 0.0%        5.1%           33.3%               0.0%       8.7%          9.1%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       9.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Encouraging Public Private Partnerships                                 0.0%        10.1%           0.0%               0.0%       8.7%          9.1%        6.3%      5.3%    6.9%       9.1%           6.3%     10.7%
 Quality of education                                                    0.0%        2.5%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        6.3%      5.3%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      7.1%
 Ethnic reconciliation                                                   0.0%        6.3%            0.0%               11.1%      8.7%          9.1%        6.3%     10.5%    3.4%       0.0%           25.0%     7.1%
 Increasing the role of private sector in development and production     0.0%        5.1%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%       16.7%     10.5%   13.8%       9.1%           0.0%     10.7%
 Strengthening the regulatory framework                                  0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%   10.3%       0.0%           0.0%      3.6%
 Other                                                                   16.7%       1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”)




                                                                                                                 64
The World Bank                                                                                         Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Based on your observations of the World Bank in Sri Lanka, what do you think the Bank considers its top priorities in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                    Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                        President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                16.7%       16.0%           0.0%               12.5%     21.7%         18.2%       32.6%     11.8%   27.6%      50.0%           13.3%    19.2%
 Food security                                                      0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      5.9%    3.4%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Reducing corruption                                                0.0%        5.3%           33.3%               0.0%       8.7%          0.0%        2.2%     11.8%   10.3%       0.0%           13.3%    11.5%
 Reducing poverty                                                   16.7%       26.7%           0.0%               37.5%     26.1%          9.1%       28.3%     29.4%   24.1%      16.7%           13.3%    26.9%
 Economic growth                                                    33.3%       24.0%          66.7%               25.0%     21.7%         63.6%       26.1%     35.3%   20.7%      25.0%           26.7%    19.2%
 Promote policies and stimulate foreign direct investment           16.7%       2.7%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%         18.2%       10.9%      5.9%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      3.8%
 Increasing access to quality education                             33.3%       18.7%           0.0%               62.5%     17.4%          0.0%       13.0%      5.9%    6.9%      16.7%           26.7%    15.4%
 Increasing access to quality health services                       16.7%       16.0%           0.0%               12.5%      8.7%          0.0%        0.0%      5.9%    0.0%       0.0%           6.7%      3.8%
 Access to finance                                                  16.7%       5.3%           33.3%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        2.2%      5.9%   13.8%      16.7%           0.0%      7.7%
 Developing the SME sector                                          16.7%       6.7%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%       13.0%      5.9%    3.4%       8.3%           6.7%      0.0%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system              0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        4.3%      0.0%    6.9%       8.3%           0.0%      7.7%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                     16.7%       26.7%          33.3%               12.5%     21.7%         45.5%       23.9%     11.8%   24.1%      25.0%           20.0%    19.2%
 Improving environmental quality                                    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               12.5%      8.7%          0.0%        2.2%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      3.8%
 Agriculture development                                            0.0%        2.7%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        8.7%      0.0%    3.4%       0.0%           6.7%      0.0%
 Tourism                                                            0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    3.4%       8.3%           0.0%      3.8%
 Protecting natural resources and environment                       0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        2.2%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      3.8%
 Managing HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                  0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               12.5%      0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      3.8%
 Promoting entrepreneurship                                         0.0%        4.0%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        4.3%      5.9%    0.0%       0.0%           6.7%      3.8%
 Reducing non communicable diseases                                 0.0%        4.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    3.4%       0.0%           6.7%      0.0%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities             0.0%        6.7%            0.0%               12.5%     21.7%          0.0%        6.5%     17.6%    6.9%       0.0%           6.7%      7.7%
 Improving trade and exports                                        0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        2.2%      5.9%    0.0%       8.3%           0.0%      0.0%
 Climate change                                                     0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Developing a skilled labor force                                   0.0%        2.7%            0.0%               0.0%      13.0%          9.1%        0.0%      5.9%    6.9%       0.0%           13.3%     0.0%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                 0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        6.5%      5.9%    0.0%       0.0%           6.7%      3.8%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment     16.7%       4.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%     17.6%   13.8%       0.0%           0.0%      3.8%
 Other                                                              0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    6.9%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%




                                                                                                            65
The World Bank                                                                                          Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Based on your observations of the World Bank in Sri Lanka, where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in its support of country priorities?
(Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                     Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Government effectiveness/governance                                 0.0%        15.3%          66.7%               12.5%      8.7%         54.5%        8.3%     27.8%   21.4%       0.0%           13.3%    16.0%
 Food security                                                       0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        6.3%      5.6%    3.6%      10.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Reducing corruption                                                 0.0%        4.2%            0.0%               12.5%     17.4%          0.0%       12.5%     22.2%   17.9%      10.0%           20.0%     4.0%
 Reducing poverty                                                    16.7%       13.9%           0.0%               12.5%     17.4%         27.3%        8.3%     11.1%    7.1%      10.0%           13.3%     8.0%
 Economic growth                                                     0.0%        22.2%           0.0%               12.5%     21.7%         18.2%       18.8%     16.7%   10.7%      30.0%           33.3%    20.0%
 Promote policies and stimulate foreign direct investment            0.0%        5.6%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%         18.2%        6.3%      0.0%    0.0%      10.0%           0.0%      4.0%
 Increasing access to quality education                              0.0%        9.7%            0.0%               37.5%     13.0%          0.0%       12.5%      0.0%    7.1%      10.0%           6.7%     12.0%
 Increasing access to quality health services                        16.7%       4.2%           33.3%               12.5%      8.7%          0.0%        2.1%      0.0%    3.6%       0.0%           0.0%      4.0%
 Access to finance                                                   16.7%       2.8%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%       14.6%      0.0%    3.6%      10.0%           13.3%     8.0%
 Developing the SME sector                                           16.7%       9.7%            0.0%               0.0%      13.0%          9.1%       16.7%     11.1%   17.9%       0.0%           13.3%    16.0%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system               0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        4.2%      5.6%    7.1%      10.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                      16.7%       19.4%          33.3%               50.0%     17.4%          9.1%       12.5%      0.0%   25.0%      40.0%           6.7%     12.0%
 Improving environmental quality                                     0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               12.5%      4.3%          0.0%        0.0%      5.6%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      4.0%
 Agriculture development                                             0.0%        11.1%           0.0%               12.5%     17.4%          9.1%       10.4%     11.1%   14.3%      20.0%           13.3%    12.0%
 Tourism                                                             0.0%        1.4%           33.3%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Protecting natural resources and environment                        0.0%        1.4%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        0.0%     11.1%    7.1%      10.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Managing HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                   0.0%        1.4%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    3.6%       0.0%           6.7%      0.0%
 Promoting entrepreneurship                                          16.7%       2.8%            0.0%               0.0%      13.0%         18.2%        8.3%     16.7%    0.0%       0.0%           13.3%     8.0%
 Reducing non communicable diseases                                  0.0%        2.8%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities              33.3%       20.8%           0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          9.1%       12.5%     11.1%   10.7%       0.0%           6.7%     20.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                         0.0%        5.6%            0.0%               0.0%       8.7%          0.0%        4.2%      5.6%    0.0%      20.0%           0.0%     12.0%
 Climate change                                                      0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.1%      5.6%    0.0%       0.0%           6.7%      4.0%
 Developing a skilled labor force                                    33.3%       16.7%           0.0%               12.5%      8.7%          0.0%        4.2%     22.2%   17.9%       0.0%           6.7%      0.0%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                  0.0%        5.6%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        8.3%      5.6%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      8.0%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment      16.7%       6.9%            0.0%               12.5%      8.7%          0.0%       14.6%      0.0%    3.6%       0.0%           13.3%     4.0%
 Other                                                               16.7%       0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        0.0%      0.0%    3.6%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in Sri Lanka’s development strategies?
                                                                     Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The Bank should be more involved                                   100.0%       75.3%          66.7%               77.8%     80.0%         58.3%       60.9%     68.4%   60.0%      66.7%           56.3%    59.3%
 The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                  0.0%        15.6%          33.3%               11.1%      8.0%         25.0%       23.9%     21.1%   16.7%      16.7%           18.8%    22.2%
 The Bank should be less involved                                    0.0%        5.2%            0.0%               0.0%       8.0%          8.3%        6.5%      5.3%    6.7%      16.7%           6.3%      3.7%
 The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                               0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      5.3%    6.7%       0.0%           6.3%      3.7%
 Don't know                                                          0.0%        3.9%            0.0%               11.1%      4.0%          8.3%        8.7%      0.0%   10.0%       0.0%           12.5%    11.1%
Which World Bank instrument do you believe is the most effective in reducing poverty in Sri Lanka?
                                                                     Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Investment lending                                                  20.0%       26.3%           0.0%               33.3%     33.3%         25.0%       31.3%     22.2%   16.7%      36.4%           6.3%     38.5%
 Policy based lending                                                20.0%       15.8%          33.3%               11.1%     20.8%         25.0%       12.5%     16.7%   20.0%      18.2%           0.0%      7.7%
 Analytical work                                                     0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               11.1%      0.0%          0.0%        4.2%      5.6%   10.0%       9.1%           18.8%     0.0%
 Technical assistance                                                20.0%       17.1%           0.0%               11.1%     20.8%         25.0%       22.9%     27.8%   20.0%      27.3%           37.5%    11.5%
 Results based lending                                               40.0%       35.5%          66.7%               33.3%     25.0%         25.0%       27.1%     27.8%   33.3%       9.1%           31.3%    34.6%
 Don't know                                                          0.0%        3.9%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.1%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           6.3%      7.7%




                                                                                                             66
The World Bank                                                                                         Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Which World Bank instrument do you believe is the least effective in reducing poverty in Sri Lanka?
                                                                    Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                        President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Investment lending                                                 16.7%       8.1%            0.0%               11.1%     21.7%          9.1%       13.0%     17.6%    6.7%      16.7%           21.4%    14.8%
 Policy based lending                                               16.7%       14.9%          66.7%               11.1%     21.7%         36.4%       21.7%     23.5%   30.0%      16.7%           21.4%    14.8%
 Analytical work                                                    16.7%       23.0%           0.0%               33.3%      8.7%          9.1%       21.7%     17.6%   20.0%      33.3%           35.7%    29.6%
 Technical assistance                                               16.7%       14.9%           0.0%               11.1%      8.7%          9.1%       13.0%      0.0%    3.3%       8.3%           7.1%     14.8%
 Results based lending                                              16.7%       20.3%           0.0%               11.1%     30.4%          0.0%        8.7%     23.5%   20.0%       0.0%           0.0%      3.7%
 Don't know                                                         16.7%       18.9%          33.3%               22.2%      8.7%         36.4%       21.7%     17.6%   20.0%      25.0%           14.3%    22.2%

In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest value” brought by the World Bank to Sri Lanka?
                                                                    Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                        President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The Bank's knowledge                                               0.0%        10.1%           0.0%               28.6%      4.5%         16.7%        6.5%     17.6%   21.4%       8.3%           31.3%     8.0%
 Technical advice                                                   0.0%        5.9%            0.0%               0.0%       9.1%          0.0%        4.3%     11.8%   10.7%       8.3%           6.3%      8.0%
 Policy and economic advice                                         0.0%        15.9%           0.0%               14.3%     13.6%          8.3%       23.9%     23.5%   21.4%      16.7%           12.5%     8.0%
 Lending when others won’t                                          0.0%        15.9%          33.3%               0.0%      31.8%         16.7%       13.0%     11.8%   17.9%       8.3%           6.3%     12.0%
 Convener/facilitator                                               0.0%        2.9%            0.0%               0.0%       9.1%          0.0%        2.2%      5.9%    3.6%       0.0%           0.0%      8.0%
 Donor coordination                                                 0.0%        7.2%            0.0%               0.0%       4.5%         16.7%        6.5%      0.0%    3.6%       8.3%           6.3%      8.0%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                      0.0%        2.9%            0.0%               0.0%       4.5%          0.0%        6.5%      5.9%   10.7%      16.7%           0.0%      8.0%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                           20.0%       8.7%            0.0%               14.3%      0.0%          0.0%        4.3%      0.0%    0.0%       8.3%           6.3%      4.0%
 Financial resources                                                80.0%       30.4%          66.7%               28.6%     22.7%         33.3%       30.4%     23.5%   10.7%      25.0%           31.3%    36.0%
 Other                                                              0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               14.3%      0.0%          8.3%        4.3%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%

What is the “second greatest” value?
                                                                    Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                        President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The Bank's knowledge                                               0.0%        5.8%            0.0%               0.0%       4.5%          9.1%        8.9%     11.8%    3.7%       9.1%           6.3%      0.0%
 Technical advice                                                   20.0%       21.7%          33.3%               57.1%     18.2%          9.1%        0.0%     17.6%    3.7%       9.1%           6.3%     16.0%
 Policy and economic advice                                         0.0%        13.0%          33.3%               0.0%      13.6%         27.3%       11.1%     23.5%    7.4%      18.2%           31.3%    12.0%
 Lending when others won’t                                          20.0%       8.7%            0.0%               0.0%       4.5%          0.0%       13.3%      0.0%    3.7%       9.1%           0.0%     16.0%
 Convener/facilitator                                               20.0%       0.0%            0.0%               0.0%      13.6%          0.0%        6.7%      0.0%    3.7%       0.0%           12.5%     0.0%
 Donor coordination                                                 20.0%       7.2%            0.0%               14.3%      9.1%          0.0%       13.3%      5.9%   29.6%      18.2%           12.5%     8.0%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                      0.0%        5.8%            0.0%               0.0%       9.1%         45.5%        8.9%      5.9%    3.7%       0.0%           6.3%      8.0%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                           0.0%        11.6%           0.0%               0.0%       9.1%          0.0%       13.3%     11.8%   14.8%      18.2%           6.3%      8.0%
 Financial resources                                                20.0%       26.1%          33.3%               28.6%     18.2%          9.1%       24.4%     23.5%   29.6%      18.2%           18.8%    32.0%
 Other                                                              0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%




                                                                                                            67
The World Bank                                                                                                       Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO only) (Combined Responses)
                                                                                  Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                                    of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities            16.7%       12.2%          33.3%               0.0%      24.0%         20.0%       19.1%     21.1%   14.3%      25.0%           25.0%    11.5%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                         33.3%       18.9%           0.0%               0.0%      36.0%         20.0%       14.9%     15.8%   14.3%       0.0%           18.8%     7.7%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                      50.0%       17.6%           0.0%               55.6%      4.0%         10.0%       19.1%     10.5%   10.7%      25.0%           12.5%    15.4%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                           0.0%        1.4%            0.0%               0.0%       8.0%          0.0%        6.4%      5.3%    7.1%       0.0%           6.3%      0.0%
 Is arrogant in its approach                                                      0.0%        1.4%            0.0%               11.1%      0.0%         10.0%        0.0%      0.0%    7.1%      12.5%           0.0%      3.8%
 Not client focused                                                               0.0%        9.5%           33.3%               0.0%       8.0%          0.0%        4.3%      5.3%    0.0%      12.5%           6.3%      7.7%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                            0.0%        1.4%            0.0%               0.0%       4.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      3.8%
 Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country     0.0%        8.1%            0.0%               22.2%      4.0%         40.0%       25.5%     21.1%   35.7%       0.0%           25.0%    26.9%
 Too influenced by the US                                                         16.7%       16.2%           0.0%               11.1%     12.0%         20.0%       19.1%      5.3%   10.7%       0.0%           12.5%    15.4%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                         33.3%       12.2%           0.0%               22.2%     20.0%         20.0%        8.5%     21.1%   25.0%       0.0%           18.8%    23.1%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                        0.0%        13.5%           0.0%               33.3%     12.0%          0.0%       23.4%     15.8%   10.7%      37.5%           6.3%      3.8%
 Inadequately aligned with country priorities                                     33.3%       43.2%          33.3%               11.1%     28.0%         10.0%       17.0%     15.8%   17.9%      37.5%           6.3%     30.8%
 Too political                                                                    0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       4.0%         10.0%       10.6%      0.0%    7.1%       0.0%           18.8%     3.8%
 Too theoretical                                                                  0.0%        14.9%           0.0%               11.1%      4.0%          0.0%        6.4%      0.0%    0.0%      25.0%           6.3%      7.7%
 Too detailed                                                                     0.0%        5.4%           33.3%               11.1%      0.0%          0.0%        2.1%      5.3%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                                            0.0%        2.7%           33.3%               0.0%       0.0%         10.0%        2.1%     15.8%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%

Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the next few years in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                                  Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                                    of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Education                                                                        33.3%       21.5%           0.0%               25.0%     28.0%          9.1%       27.1%      5.3%   34.5%       9.1%           41.2%    32.1%
 Health                                                                           0.0%        12.8%           0.0%               0.0%      20.0%          0.0%        8.3%      5.3%   10.3%       9.1%           5.9%      3.6%
 Social protection                                                                16.7%       6.4%            0.0%               12.5%      0.0%          0.0%        0.0%     21.1%    0.0%       9.1%           11.8%     0.0%
 Transport                                                                        0.0%        9.0%           33.3%               25.0%      4.0%          0.0%        2.1%      0.0%    3.4%      18.2%           0.0%      3.6%
 Poverty                                                                          0.0%        15.4%           0.0%               25.0%     12.0%          9.1%       12.5%     15.8%   13.8%      45.5%           11.8%    32.1%
 Governance                                                                       0.0%        12.8%          33.3%               12.5%     20.0%         18.2%       18.8%     21.1%   24.1%       9.1%           23.5%    17.9%
 Anti-corruption                                                                  0.0%        5.1%           66.7%               0.0%      12.0%          9.1%       16.7%     26.3%   41.4%       9.1%           11.8%    10.7%
 Enhanced business environment for private sector development                     16.7%       16.7%           0.0%               12.5%     16.0%         27.3%       22.9%     10.5%   13.8%      27.3%           5.9%     10.7%
 Energy                                                                           0.0%        3.8%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        4.2%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      7.1%
 Promote Public Private Partnerships                                              16.7%       12.8%          33.3%               25.0%      4.0%         18.2%       20.8%     10.5%    6.9%       0.0%           5.9%     14.3%
 Agricultural development                                                         16.7%       7.7%            0.0%               0.0%      16.0%          9.1%       12.5%      0.0%    3.6%       9.1%           11.8%     7.1%
 Water and sanitation                                                             0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               12.5%      4.0%          0.0%        2.1%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                        16.7%       1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       4.0%          0.0%        2.1%     15.8%    0.0%       9.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Help restructure SOE's for better results                                        16.7%       7.7%            0.0%               0.0%       8.0%          0.0%        4.2%      5.3%    6.9%       0.0%           5.9%      0.0%
 Public expenditure                                                               33.3%       3.8%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        2.1%      0.0%    3.4%       9.1%           0.0%      3.6%
 Public sector performance                                                        0.0%        12.8%           0.0%               0.0%       4.0%         27.3%       16.7%      5.3%   10.3%       9.1%           11.8%    10.7%
 Labor markets/job creation                                                       0.0%        6.4%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          9.1%        4.2%      5.3%    0.0%       0.0%           17.6%     0.0%
 Financial markets                                                                0.0%        3.8%            0.0%               0.0%       8.0%          9.1%        2.1%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Urban/metropolitan development                                                   16.7%       6.4%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%         27.3%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           5.9%      3.6%
 Environmental sustainability/ natural resources management                       0.0%        6.4%            0.0%               0.0%      12.0%          0.0%        4.2%     21.1%    6.9%       0.0%           5.9%      0.0%
 Improving equality of opportunity                                                0.0%        3.8%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.1%      5.3%    3.4%       9.1%           5.9%      7.1%
 Rural development                                                                16.7%       14.1%          33.3%               25.0%     16.0%          0.0%        8.3%      5.3%   13.8%       9.1%           17.6%    25.0%
 Food security                                                                    0.0%        2.6%            0.0%               0.0%       8.0%          0.0%        4.2%      0.0%    0.0%       9.1%           0.0%      0.0%
 Climate change                                                                   0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               12.5%      0.0%          0.0%        0.0%     10.5%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                                            0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               12.5%      4.0%          9.1%        0.0%      5.3%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%




                                                                                                                          68
The World Bank                                                                                         Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank work with more in your country to ensure better development
results there? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
                                                                    Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                      of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                        President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 NGOs                                                               0.0%        2.6%            0.0%               0.0%       4.0%          0.0%        4.3%     57.9%    3.6%       0.0%           25.0%     3.6%
 Local Government                                                   50.0%       53.9%          66.7%               55.6%     88.0%         40.0%       23.9%     21.1%   21.4%      45.5%           25.0%    50.0%
 Beneficiaries                                                      16.7%       39.5%           0.0%               22.2%      8.0%         30.0%       21.7%     26.3%   17.9%      27.3%           43.8%    35.7%
 Private sector                                                     16.7%       21.1%          33.3%               33.3%     28.0%         20.0%       71.7%      5.3%   32.1%      36.4%           31.3%    46.4%
 Youth                                                              16.7%       13.2%          33.3%               22.2%     12.0%         10.0%       32.6%     10.5%   17.9%      18.2%           18.8%    17.9%
 Self-employed women's groups                                       16.7%       7.9%            0.0%               11.1%      8.0%          0.0%        8.7%      5.3%   10.7%       9.1%           12.5%     7.1%
 Community based organizations (CBOs)                               33.3%       34.2%           0.0%               11.1%     32.0%         30.0%       10.9%     36.8%   25.0%      27.3%           18.8%    17.9%
 Donor community                                                    0.0%        7.9%            0.0%               22.2%      0.0%         30.0%        6.5%     10.5%    3.6%       0.0%           0.0%     10.7%
 Parliament                                                         33.3%       5.3%           66.7%               11.1%      0.0%         10.0%        4.3%      5.3%    7.1%      18.2%           6.3%      3.6%
 Media                                                              0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               11.1%      4.0%          0.0%        4.3%      5.3%   42.9%       0.0%           0.0%      3.6%
 Faith-based organizations                                          0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               0.0%      12.0%          0.0%        2.2%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           12.5%     3.6%
 Other                                                              0.0%        5.3%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%         20.0%        6.5%      5.3%    3.6%       9.1%           0.0%      0.0%


On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following statements about the World Bank in Sri Lanka.




                                                                                                            69
The World Bank                                                                                            Sri Lanka                                                              Country Survey 2012

D. The Work of the World Bank

How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in Sri Lanka? (Asked on a 10-point importance scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




                                                                                                             70
The World Bank                                                                                           Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

D. The Work of the World Bank (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of development in Sri Lanka? (Asked on a 10-point effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




                                                                                                            71
The World Bank                                                                                             Sri Lanka                                                                                   Country Survey 2012

E. The Way the World Bank does Business

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below using a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”.




                                                                                                             72
The World Bank                                                                                                 Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

F. Project/Program Related Issues
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.




G. The Future Role of the World Bank in Sri Lanka




(Asked on a 10-pt. scale, 1 meaning that the Bank should not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should play a very significant role)
Which one of the following should the Bank do to make itself of greater value in Sri Lanka?
                                                                            Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                              of        of a          Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                                President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Sri Lanka’s specific
                                                                           16.7%       29.9%          100.0%              55.6%      31.8%        16.7%        21.3%     23.5%   42.9%      16.7%           37.5%    37.0%
 challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                   33.3%       39.0%          0.0%                33.3%      31.8%        16.7%        36.2%     29.4%   35.7%       8.3%           25.0%    44.4%
 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                             0.0%        5.2%           0.0%                0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        8.5%       0.0%    3.6%       0.0%           6.3%     11.1%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets          16.7%       7.8%           0.0%                33.3%      18.2%         8.3%        19.1%     23.5%    3.6%      41.7%           12.5%     3.7%
 Build capacity                                                            50.0%       29.9%          50.0%               11.1%      13.6%        33.3%        23.4%     35.3%   46.4%      33.3%           31.3%    33.3%
 Greater selectivity in its work                                           16.7%       7.8%           0.0%                0.0%       13.6%        16.7%        4.3%      11.8%   14.3%       8.3%           12.5%    11.1%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Sri Lanka's
                                                                            0.0%       13.0%           0.0%               11.1%      18.2%        16.7%        10.6%     11.8%   7.1%       8.3%            6.3%      7.4%
 economy
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                  33.3%       11.7%           0.0%               22.2%       9.1%        16.7%        12.8%     11.8%   10.7%      8.3%            18.8%    18.5%
 Offer more products and services that reflect Sri Lanka's status as a
                                                                           33.3%       45.5%          50.0%               11.1%      45.5%        33.3%        40.4%     29.4%   21.4%      41.7%           31.3%    25.9%
 middle income country
 Other                                                                      0.0%        1.3%           0.0%               0.0%        0.0%         8.3%        12.8%     5.9%    0.0%       16.7%           6.3%      3.7%
                                                                                                                    73
The World Bank                                                                                                Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

G. The Future Role of the World Bank in Sri Lanka (continued)

When Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose up to TWO)
                                                                           Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                             of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                               President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                             0.0%        8.1%            0.0%               22.2%      4.3%          0.0%       11.9%      5.3%   10.7%       0.0%           6.3%      8.7%
 Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                 0.0%        20.3%          50.0%               44.4%     13.0%         36.4%       50.0%     21.1%   42.9%      10.0%           37.5%    21.7%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation     33.3%       32.4%          50.0%               33.3%     34.8%         36.4%       21.4%     63.2%   25.9%      20.0%           25.0%    30.4%
 Poor donor coordination                                                   16.7%       8.1%            0.0%               22.2%     17.4%          9.1%        4.8%     10.5%   10.7%      20.0%           12.5%    13.0%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in government                       50.0%       17.6%           0.0%               0.0%       0.0%         36.4%       23.8%     10.5%   10.7%      20.0%           18.7%    13.0%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                         33.3%       31.1%          50.0%               33.3%     47.8%          9.1%       45.2%     47.4%   46.4%      30.0%           43.8%    47.8%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges           66.7%       59.5%          50.0%               22.2%     73.9%         63.6%       38.1%     36.8%   35.7%      60.0%           50.0%    47.8%
 Other                                                                     0.0%        6.8%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    3.6%       0.0%           6.3%      8.7%




H. Communication and Outreach
From where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO at most) (Combined Responses)
                                                                           Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                             of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                               President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Local newspapers                                                          50.0%       59.0%          100.0%              55.6%     73.9%         58.3%       75.6%     55.6%   74.1%      72.7%           62.5%    74.1%
 International newspapers                                                  0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        4.4%      0.0%    7.4%       0.0%           0.0%      3.7%
 Local radio                                                               0.0%        7.7%            0.0%               11.1%      8.7%          0.0%        6.7%      5.6%    7.4%       0.0%           6.3%      7.4%
 International radio                                                       0.0%        2.6%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Local television                                                          33.3%       12.8%           33.3%              22.2%     30.4%          0.0%       13.3%     33.3%   14.8%       9.1%           6.3%     22.2%
 International television                                                  16.7%       3.8%            0.0%               0.0%       4.3%          8.3%        6.7%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           12.5%     7.4%
 Periodicals                                                               16.7%       21.8%           0.0%               11.1%     13.0%         16.7%       11.1%     11.1%   11.1%       9.1%           18.8%    11.1%
 Internet                                                                  33.3%       24.4%           66.7%              44.4%     13.0%         58.3%       35.6%     22.2%   33.3%      54.5%           43.8%    29.6%
 Social media                                                              0.0%        12.8%           0.0%               11.1%     26.1%          0.0%        4.4%     22.2%   22.2%       0.0%           6.3%      7.4%
 Word of mouth                                                             0.0%        1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          8.3%        4.4%      5.6%    3.7%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Consultations/Conferences/Fora                                            16.7%       19.2%           0.0%               33.3%      8.7%         33.3%       20.0%     16.7%   11.1%      18.2%           12.5%    11.1%
 Workshops/Seminars                                                        33.3%       17.9%           0.0%               0.0%       4.3%         16.7%       13.3%      5.6%   11.1%      27.3%           31.3%    18.5%
 Other                                                                     0.0%        7.7%            0.0%               11.1%      4.3%          0.0%        0.0%     11.1%    3.7%      18.2%           0.0%      0.0%

From where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development activities in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO at most) (Combined Responses)
                                                                           Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                             of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                               President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Local newspapers                                                          50.0%       35.1%          100.0%              44.4%     66.7%         33.3%       65.1%     38.9%   65.4%      41.7%           31.3%    57.7%
 International newspapers                                                  0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       4.2%          0.0%        4.7%      0.0%    3.8%       0.0%           0.0%      7.7%
 Local radio                                                               0.0%        5.2%            0.0%               0.0%      12.5%          0.0%       11.6%      0.0%    3.8%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 International radio                                                       0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       4.2%          0.0%        2.3%      0.0%    3.8%       0.0%           6.3%      0.0%
 Local television                                                          16.7%       16.9%           33.3%              0.0%      25.0%          0.0%       16.3%     22.2%   19.2%      16.7%           12.5%    26.9%
 International television                                                  0.0%        2.6%            0.0%               0.0%       8.3%          8.3%        2.3%      0.0%    0.0%       0.0%           6.3%      0.0%
 Periodicals                                                               33.3%       6.5%            0.0%               11.1%      4.2%          0.0%        9.3%      5.6%    3.8%       0.0%           6.3%      7.7%
 Blogs                                                                     0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       4.2%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%    0.0%       8.3%           0.0%      0.0%
 Internet                                                                  0.0%        18.2%           0.0%               11.1%     12.5%         33.3%       27.9%     38.9%   26.9%      25.0%           43.8%    30.8%
 World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                               50.0%       14.3%           0.0%               22.2%     16.7%          8.3%       20.9%     11.1%   15.4%      41.7%           6.3%     15.4%
 World Bank publications, materials                                        33.3%       33.8%           33.3%              44.4%     20.8%         33.3%        7.0%     44.4%   19.2%       8.3%           31.3%    19.2%
 World Bank website                                                        0.0%        28.6%           33.3%              22.2%      4.2%         16.7%       18.6%     27.8%   19.2%      25.0%           50.0%    15.4%
 Social media                                                              0.0%        9.1%            0.0%               0.0%       4.2%          0.0%        4.7%      5.6%    0.0%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff                          16.7%       14.3%           0.0%               44.4%      0.0%         41.7%        4.7%      0.0%    7.7%      16.7%           0.0%      7.7%
 Other                                                                     0.0%        6.5%            0.0%               0.0%       4.2%         16.7%        2.3%      0.0%    7.7%       0.0%           6.3%      0.0%
                                                                                                                   74
The World Bank                                                                                          Sri Lanka                                                                                Country Survey 2012

H. Communication and Outreach (continued)
How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose TWO only) (Combined Responses)
                                                                     Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 World Bank website                                                  0.0%        64.1%          66.7%               55.6%     66.7%         45.5%       47.8%     63.2%   53.6%      66.7%           83.3%    55.6%
 Face to face meetings/discussions                                   66.7%       33.3%           0.0%               33.3%     41.7%         54.5%       26.1%     31.6%   32.1%      33.3%           11.1%    18.5%
 E-newsletters                                                       16.7%       34.6%           0.0%               55.6%     25.0%         45.5%       58.7%     47.4%   46.4%      16.7%           44.4%    51.9%
 Workshops/conferences                                               66.7%       41.0%          66.7%               44.4%     33.3%         45.5%       26.1%     15.8%   28.6%      66.7%           38.9%    37.0%
 Blogs                                                               0.0%        0.0%            0.0%               0.0%       8.3%          0.0%        4.3%      0.0%    7.1%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Mobile phones                                                       16.7%       7.7%            0.0%               11.1%      8.3%          0.0%        6.5%     10.5%    0.0%       8.3%           0.0%      7.4%
 Social media                                                        0.0%        2.6%            0.0%               0.0%       4.2%          0.0%       13.0%      5.3%    3.6%       0.0%           11.1%     3.7%
 Traditional media                                                   16.7%       1.3%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        2.2%      5.3%    7.1%       0.0%           0.0%      0.0%
 Other                                                               0.0%        2.6%            0.0%               0.0%       0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      5.3%    7.1%       0.0%           0.0%      7.4%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
                                                                     Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Yes                                                                 33.3%       26.1%           0.0%               33.3%     33.3%         45.5%       29.3%     38.9%   40.7%      25.0%           27.8%    28.0%
 No                                                                  66.7%       73.9%          100.0%              66.7%     66.7%         54.5%       70.7%     61.1%   59.3%      75.0%           72.2%    72.0%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
                                                                     Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Yes                                                                 0.0%        23.3%           0.0%               28.6%     28.6%         27.3%        7.1%     38.9%   35.7%      40.0%           12.5%    12.0%
 No                                                                 100.0%       76.7%          100.0%              71.4%     71.4%         72.7%       92.9%     61.1%   64.3%      60.0%           87.5%    88.0%

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                                     Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Yes                                                                 0.0%        57.7%             -                66.7%     41.7%        100.0%       50.0%     62.5%   50.0%      71.4%           50.0%    66.7%
 No                                                                 100.0%       42.3%             -                33.3%     58.3%          0.0%       50.0%     37.5%   50.0%      28.6%           50.0%    33.3%

Do you have access to the Internet:
                                                                     Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of        of a          Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Yes                                                                100.0%      100.0%          66.7%              100.0%     85.0%        100.0%       95.0%     94.7%   95.7%      100.0%          94.1%    100%
 No                                                                  0.0%        0.0%           33.3%               0.0%      15.0%          0.0%        5.0%      5.3%    4.3%       0.0%           5.9%     0.0%

I use/have used the World Bank website:
                                                                     Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 Yes                                                                 50.0%       76.2%          33.3%              100.0%     45.0%         66.7%       67.5%     89.5%   78.3%      75.0%           93.8%    71.4%
 No                                                                  50.0%       23.8%          66.7%               0.0%      55.0%         33.3%       32.5%     10.5%   21.7%      25.0%           6.3%     28.6%

I primarily use:
                                                                     Office    Employee                                                  Bilateral or                             Independent
                                                                       of         of a         Office of                       Local     Multilateral   Private                   Government
 Percentage of Respondents                                         President    Ministry   Parliamentarian        PIU/PMU   Government     Agency       Sector    NGO     Media    Institution     Academia   Other
 The World Bank’s country website                                    50.0%       56.5%           0.0%               22.2%     83.3%         85.7%       65.0%     80.0%   50.0%      50.0%           33.3%    40.0%
 The World Bank’s main website                                       50.0%       43.5%          100.0%              77.8%     16.7%         14.3%       35.0%     20.0%   50.0%      50.0%           66.7%    60.0%

                                                                                                             75
The World Bank                                                           Sri Lanka                             Country Survey 2012



Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location

A. Background Information




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “Extremely familiar”)



B. General Issues facing Sri Lanka




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Extremely pessimistic”, 10 meaning “Extremely optimistic”)

Please identify which one of these you consider the first most important development priority.
 Percentage of Respondents                                                            Western Province   Other Areas
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                       28.2%           28.4%
 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                   0.0%            1.4%
 Economic growth                                                                           32.6%           24.3%
 Reducing corruption                                                                       12.2%            6.8%
 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                                    0.6%            0.0%
 Increasing access to quality education                                                     5.5%            9.5%
 Increasing access to quality health services                                               1.7%            2.7%
 Reducing poverty                                                                           3.3%            5.4%
 Developing the SME sector                                                                  2.2%            1.4%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                      2.2%            0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                                             2.8%           10.8%
 Improving environmental quality                                                            0.0%            0.0%
 Protecting natural resources and environment                                               0.6%            2.7%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                                     2.2%            4.1%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                             2.2%            0.0%
 Agriculture development                                                                    1.1%            1.4%
 Tourism                                                                                    0.6%            1.4%
 Access to finance                                                                          0.0%            0.0%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                                         0.6%            0.0%
 Improving trade and exports                                                                0.0%            0.0%
 Climate change                                                                             0.6%            0.0%
 Food security                                                                              0.6%            0.0%
 Other                                                                                      0.6%            0.0%




                                                                       76
The World Bank                                                     Sri Lanka                                   Country Survey 2012



B. General Issues facing Sri Lanka (continued)

Then identify which one you consider the second most important development priority.
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Western Province         Other Areas
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                 12.4%                 10.8%
 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                             0.6%                  1.4%
 Economic growth                                                                      9.6%                 12.2%
 Reducing corruption                                                                 16.4%                 18.9%
 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                              8.5%                  2.7%
 Increasing access to quality education                                               7.9%                  5.4%
 Increasing access to quality health services                                         3.4%                  8.1%
 Reducing poverty                                                                    10.2%                  8.1%
 Developing the SME sector                                                            5.1%                  2.7%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                5.6%                  1.4%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                                       5.6%                  9.5%
 Improving environmental quality                                                      0.6%                  1.4%
 Protecting natural resources and environment                                         1.7%                  4.1%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                               4.5%                  5.4%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                       3.4%                  4.1%
 Agriculture development                                                              1.7%                  1.4%
 Tourism                                                                              0.0%                  1.4%
 Access to finance                                                                    0.0%                  0.0%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                                   1.1%                  1.4%
 Improving trade and exports                                                          0.6%                  0.0%
 Climate change                                                                       0.0%                  0.0%
 Food security                                                                        0.6%                  0.0%
 Other                                                                                0.6%                  0.0%

Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more
than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      Western Province         Other Areas
 Agriculture development                                                             18.9%                 27.8%
 Improving governance                                                                13.7%                 17.7%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                      15.3%                  8.9%
 Infrastructure development                                                          13.2%                 19.0%
 Education                                                                           17.4%                 16.5%
 Increasing economic growth                                                          22.1%                 21.5%
 Developing the SME sector                                                           17.4%                 13.9%
 Reducing corruption                                                                 12.6%                 11.4%
 Health                                                                               2.1%                  2.5%
 Protecting the environment and natural resources                                     3.2%                  1.3%
 Increasing income generating activities/ employment                                 48.4%                 39.2%
 Increasing foreign direct investment                                                 5.3%                  2.5%
 Food security                                                                        2.6%                  5.1%
 Other                                                                                1.6%                  3.8%




                                                                  77
The World Bank                                                           Sri Lanka                                    Country Survey 2012



B. General Issues facing Sri Lanka (continued)
Which TWO areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating faster economic growth in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than
TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                             Western Province         Other Areas
 Access to education                                                                         6.0%                  7.3%
 Access to finance                                                                           5.4%                  1.2%
 Enhancing Colombo as an International city                                                  1.1%                  0.0%
 Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment                          17.4%                 17.3%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                             13.6%                 14.8%
 Improving governance                                                                       17.9%                 13.6%
 Improve environment for doing business and private sector growth                            8.7%                  3.7%
 Improved power generation infrastructure                                                    2.7%                  0.0%
 Improved transportation infrastructure                                                      7.1%                  9.9%
 Promoting and supporting the SME sector                                                    12.5%                  7.4%
 Reducing corruption                                                                        16.8%                 19.8%
 Improving access to and/or quality of education                                            10.3%                  7.4%
 Improving access to and/or quality of health care                                           2.2%                  4.9%
 Improving the skills of the labor force                                                    11.4%                 23.5%
 Improving trade and exports                                                                 9.2%                  3.7%
 Better managing State Owned Enterprise sector                                               2.2%                  7.4%
 Increase efficiency of public spending                                                     10.9%                  2.5%
 Increasing agricultural productivity                                                       10.9%                 18.5%
 Invest in tourism products and services                                                     1.6%                  6.2%
 Encouraging Public Private Partnerships                                                     6.5%                  9.9%
 Quality of education                                                                        3.3%                  3.7%
 Ethnic reconciliation                                                                       6.0%                  8.6%
 Increasing the role of private sector in development and production                         9.8%                  6.2%
 Strengthening the regulatory framework                                                      2.2%                  1.2%
 Other                                                                                       0.5%                  0.0%


C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”)
Based on your observations of the World Bank in Sri Lanka, what do you think the Bank considers its top priorities in Sri Lanka?
(Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                             Western Province         Other Areas
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                        23.2%                 18.9%
 Food security                                                                               1.1%                  1.4%
 Reducing corruption                                                                         6.6%                  6.8%
 Reducing poverty                                                                           26.5%                 20.3%
 Economic growth                                                                            28.2%                 21.6%
 Promote policies and stimulate foreign direct investment                                    4.4%                  5.4%
 Increasing access to quality education                                                     14.9%                 20.3%
 Increasing access to quality health services                                                5.5%                 10.8%
 Access to finance                                                                           7.7%                  4.1%
 Developing the SME sector                                                                   8.3%                  2.7%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                       3.9%                  0.0%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                                             18.8%                 29.7%
 Improving environmental quality                                                             1.1%                  1.4%
 Agriculture development                                                                     3.3%                  5.4%
 Tourism                                                                                     0.6%                  4.1%
 Protecting natural resources and environment                                                0.6%                  2.7%
 Managing HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                           0.6%                  1.4%
 Promoting entrepreneurship                                                                  3.3%                  4.1%
 Reducing non communicable diseases                                                          0.0%                  5.4%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                                      8.3%                  9.5%
 Improving trade and exports                                                                 2.2%                  1.4%
 Climate change                                                                              0.0%                  0.0%
 Developing a skilled labor force                                                            4.4%                  4.1%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                                          3.3%                  0.0%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                              5.5%                  2.7%
 Other                                                                                       0.6%                  1.4%




                                                                       78
The World Bank                                                        Sri Lanka                                      Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Based on your observations of the World Bank in Sri Lanka, where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in
its support of country priorities? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Western Province            Other Areas
 Government effectiveness/governance                                                    15.7%                    17.6%
 Food security                                                                           2.2%                     2.7%
 Reducing corruption                                                                    10.1%                    10.8%
 Reducing poverty                                                                        8.4%                    17.6%
 Economic growth                                                                        20.8%                    16.2%
 Promote policies and stimulate foreign direct investment                                5.1%                     0.0%
 Increasing access to quality education                                                  9.6%                    14.9%
 Increasing access to quality health services                                            4.5%                     4.1%
 Access to finance                                                                       6.7%                     6.8%
 Developing the SME sector                                                              13.5%                     9.5%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                   2.8%                     1.4%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                                         16.3%                    17.6%
 Improving environmental quality                                                         1.1%                     1.4%
 Agriculture development                                                                 9.0%                    17.6%
 Tourism                                                                                 0.6%                     1.4%
 Protecting natural resources and environment                                            3.4%                     1.4%
 Managing HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                       1.1%                     1.4%
 Promoting entrepreneurship                                                              6.2%                     5.4%
 Reducing non communicable diseases                                                      0.6%                     1.4%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                                 14.0%                    10.8%
 Improving trade and exports                                                             6.2%                     4.1%
 Climate change                                                                          1.7%                     1.4%
 Developing a skilled labor force                                                       11.2%                    12.2%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                                      5.6%                     2.7%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                          7.3%                     8.1%
 Other                                                                                   1.7%                     0.0%

In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in Sri Lanka’s development strategies?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Western Province            Other Areas
 The Bank should be more involved                                                       65.6%                    70.0%
 The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                                     19.9%                    13.8%
 The Bank should be less involved                                                        5.4%                     8.8%
 The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                                                   1.6%                     2.5%
 Don't know                                                                              7.5%                     5.0%

Which World Bank instrument do you believe is the most effective in reducing poverty in Sri Lanka?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Western Province            Other Areas
 Investment lending                                                                     25.8%                    22.8%
 Policy based lending                                                                   13.2%                    19.0%
 Analytical work                                                                         5.5%                     2.5%
 Technical assistance                                                                   18.7%                    27.8%
 Results based lending                                                                  34.6%                    26.6%
 Don't know                                                                              2.2%                     1.3%

Which World Bank instrument do you believe is the least effective in reducing poverty in Sri Lanka?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Western Province            Other Areas
 Investment lending                                                                     12.7%                    13.3%
 Policy based lending                                                                   22.1%                    18.7%
 Analytical work                                                                        23.2%                    17.3%
 Technical assistance                                                                   11.6%                     9.3%
 Results based lending                                                                  11.6%                    24.0%
 Don't know                                                                             18.8%                    17.3%

In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest value” brought by the World Bank to Sri Lanka?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Western Province            Other Areas
 The Bank's knowledge                                                                   15.6%                     5.4%
 Technical advice                                                                        6.4%                     8.1%
 Policy and economic advice                                                             16.2%                    16.2%
 Lending when others won’t                                                              14.5%                    14.9%
 Convener/facilitator                                                                    1.2%                     8.1%
 Donor coordination                                                                      6.4%                     6.8%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                           5.8%                     5.4%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                                                4.6%                     5.4%
 Financial resources                                                                    28.3%                    29.7%
 Other                                                                                   1.2%                     1.4%




                                                                    79
The World Bank                                                                   Sri Lanka                            Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

What is the “second greatest” value?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                   Western Province   Other Areas
 The Bank's knowledge                                                                              7.1%            2.7%
 Technical advice                                                                                 12.4%           16.4%
 Policy and economic advice                                                                       13.5%           19.2%
 Lending when others won’t                                                                         7.6%            9.6%
 Convener/facilitator                                                                              3.5%            5.5%
 Donor coordination                                                                               11.8%            9.6%
 Ability to mobilize resources                                                                     7.6%            8.2%
 Ability to build implementation capacity                                                         11.2%            8.2%
 Financial resources                                                                              25.3%           20.5%
 Other                                                                                             0.6%            0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO only) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                   Western Province   Other Areas
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                            17.5%           14.1%
 Not exploring alternative policy options                                                         14.7%           20.5%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                      19.2%            9.0%
 Staff too inaccessible                                                                            4.0%            5.1%
 Is arrogant in its approach                                                                       4.5%            0.0%
 Not client focused                                                                                6.2%            6.4%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                             0.6%            2.6%
 Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country                     20.9%           12.8%
 Too influenced by the US                                                                         14.7%           14.1%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                         15.8%           20.5%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                        14.7%            7.7%
 Inadequately aligned with country priorities                                                     26.0%           29.5%
 Too political                                                                                     4.5%            6.4%
 Too theoretical                                                                                   5.6%           11.5%
 Too detailed                                                                                      3.4%            2.6%
 Other                                                                                             2.3%            5.1%

Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the next few years in
Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                   Western Province   Other Areas
 Education                                                                                        21.0%           35.4%
 Health                                                                                            7.5%           13.4%
 Social protection                                                                                 4.3%            7.3%
 Transport                                                                                         6.5%            3.7%
 Poverty                                                                                          17.2%           14.6%
 Governance                                                                                       18.3%           17.1%
 Anti-corruption                                                                                  16.1%           11.0%
 Enhanced business environment for private sector development                                     16.1%           12.2%
 Energy                                                                                            2.2%            2.4%
 Promote Public Private Partnerships                                                              13.4%            8.5%
 Agricultural development                                                                          8.1%            9.9%
 Water and sanitation                                                                              1.1%            2.4%
 Monitoring and evaluation                                                                         3.2%            2.4%
 Help restructure SOE's for better results                                                         3.8%            8.5%
 Public expenditure                                                                                4.3%            2.4%
 Public sector performance                                                                        11.8%           11.0%
 Labor markets/job creation                                                                        5.9%            2.4%
 Financial markets                                                                                 2.2%            2.4%
 Urban/metropolitan development                                                                    5.4%            0.0%
 Environmental sustainability/ natural resources management                                        6.5%            6.1%
 Improving equality of opportunity                                                                 3.8%            2.4%
 Rural development                                                                                11.3%           17.1%
 Food security                                                                                     2.7%            2.4%
 Climate change                                                                                    2.2%            0.0%
 Other                                                                                             1.6%            2.4%




                                                                                80
The World Bank                                                        Sri Lanka                                      Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the
World Bank work with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined
Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         Western Province            Other Areas
 NGOs                                                                                    7.7%                     8.8%
 Local Government                                                                       34.8%                    57.5%
 Beneficiaries                                                                          32.0%                    26.3%
 Private sector                                                                         37.6%                    23.8%
 Youth                                                                                  19.9%                    13.8%
 Self-employed women's groups                                                           10.5%                     5.0%
 Community based organizations (CBOs)                                                   23.8%                    27.5%
 Donor community                                                                         9.4%                     3.8%
 Parliament                                                                              7.7%                     6.3%
 Media                                                                                   6.1%                     7.5%
 Faith-based organizations                                                               1.1%                     7.5%
 Other                                                                                   4.4%                     2.5%


On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following statements about the
World Bank in Sri Lanka.




                                                                    81
The World Bank                                                          Sri Lanka                     Country Survey 2012



D. The Work of the World Bank

How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in Sri Lanka?
(Asked on a 10-point importance scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




                                                                      82
The World Bank                                                        Sri Lanka                                      Country Survey 2012



D. The Work of the World Bank (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of development in Sri Lanka?
(Asked on a 10-point effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




                                                                    83
The World Bank                                                           Sri Lanka                                       Country Survey 2012



E. The Way the World Bank does Business

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below using a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning
“Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”.




F. Project/Program Related Issues
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you “Strongly
Agree”.




                                                                       84
The World Bank                                                                    Sri Lanka                               Country Survey 2012



G. The Future Role of the World Bank in Sri Lanka




(Asked on a 10-pt. scale, 1 meaning that the Bank should not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank should play a very
significant role)
Which one of the following should the Bank do to make itself of greater value in Sri Lanka?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                    Western Province      Other Areas
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Sri Lanka’s specific challenges                  27.1%              44.2%
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                           36.5%              24.7%
 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues                                                      5.5%               2.6%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                  13.3%              13.0%
 Build capacity                                                                                    32.0%              31.2%
 Greater selectivity in its work                                                                    9.9%               9.1%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Sri Lanka's economy                    11.6%               7.8%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                          12.2%              13.0%
 Offer more products and services that reflect Sri Lanka's status as a middle income
                                                                                                   35.4%               36.4%
 country
 Other                                                                                             5.5%                2.6%

When Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose up to TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                    Western Province      Other Areas
 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly                                                      7.6%               6.4%
 Government works inefficiently/too slowly                                                         32.7%              19.2%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                             29.4%              38.5%
 Poor donor coordination                                                                           10.5%              12.8%
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in government                                               18.7%              12.8%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                                                 40.9%              33.3%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                   46.8%              60.3%
 Other                                                                                              2.3%               6.4%




H. Communication and Outreach
From where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO at most)
(Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                                    Western Province      Other Areas
 Local newspapers                                                                                  67.2%              64.1%
 International newspapers                                                                           2.2%               1.3%
 Local radio                                                                                        4.4%              10.3%
 International radio                                                                                0.6%               1.3%
 Local television                                                                                  13.9%              23.1%
 International television                                                                           3.9%               7.7%
 Periodicals                                                                                       15.6%              12.8%
 Internet                                                                                          32.8%              34.6%
 Social media                                                                                      11.1%              11.5%
 Word of mouth                                                                                      1.7%               1.3%
 Consultations/Conferences/Fora                                                                    18.3%              14.1%
 Workshops/Seminars                                                                                16.7%              10.3%
 Other                                                                                              6.1%               2.6%




                                                                                85
The World Bank                                                        Sri Lanka                                     Country Survey 2012



H. Communication and Outreach (continued)
From where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development activities in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO at most)
(Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Western Province            Other Areas
 Local newspapers                                                                      51.9%                    50.0%
 International newspapers                                                               2.8%                     1.4%
 Local radio                                                                            2.8%                    10.8%
 International radio                                                                    1.7%                     1.4%
 Local television                                                                      14.4%                    28.4%
 International television                                                               1.7%                     2.7%
 Periodicals                                                                            7.7%                     6.8%
 Blogs                                                                                  0.6%                     1.4%
 Internet                                                                              24.9%                    20.3%
 World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops                                           16.0%                    16.2%
 World Bank publications, materials                                                    22.1%                    28.4%
 World Bank website                                                                    26.5%                    13.5%
 Social media                                                                           4.4%                     4.1%
 Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff                                      12.2%                     1.4%
 Other                                                                                  5.0%                     4.1%

How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose TWO only) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Western Province            Other Areas
 World Bank website                                                                    58.1%                    58.2%
 Face to face meetings/discussions                                                     28.5%                    35.4%
 E-newsletters                                                                         47.8%                    30.4%
 Workshops/conferences                                                                 34.4%                    41.8%
 Blogs                                                                                  2.2%                     2.5%
 Mobile phones                                                                          4.3%                     8.9%
 Social media                                                                           4.3%                     6.3%
 Traditional media                                                                      2.7%                     1.3%
 Other                                                                                  3.8%                     1.3%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession
that is not on a list of exceptions?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Western Province            Other Areas
 Yes                                                                                   33.1%                    24.0%
 No                                                                                    66.9%                    76.0%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Western Province            Other Areas
 Yes                                                                                   23.7%                    16.2%
 No                                                                                    76.3%                    83.8%

Were you able to obtain this information?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Western Province            Other Areas
 Yes                                                                                   66.7%                    30.8%
 No                                                                                    33.3%                    69.2%

Do you have access to the Internet:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Western Province            Other Areas
 Yes                                                                                   98.1%                    91.2%
 No                                                                                     1.9%                     8.8%

I use/have used the World Bank website:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Western Province            Other Areas
 Yes                                                                                   80.9%                    54.4%
 No                                                                                    19.1%                    45.6%

I primarily use:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        Western Province            Other Areas
 Yes                                                                                   56.8%                    53.8%
 No                                                                                    43.2%                    46.2%




                                                                    86
The World Bank                                                             Sri Lanka                                       Country Survey 2012



Appendix D: Responses to All Questions by Year2
                           FY ’07 Response Number = 306  FY ’11 Response Number = 312

A. Background Information

Which best represents your geographic location?
    Percentage of Respondents                                                          FY 2007          FY 2012
    Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry                                                 4.4%             3.9%
    Commerce, Trade and Manufacturing                                                   12.2%            7.7%
    Communications, Information Services                                                12.9%            9.8%
    Economic Management                                                                 5.1%             8.1%
    Environment, Natural Resource Management                                            4.4%             2.5%
    Finance, Banking, Insurance                                                         4.4%             7.0%
    Infrastructure                                                                      7.1%             7.7%
    Law, Justice                                                                        2.0%              .7%
    Legislature, Politics                                                               2.7%             4.6%
    Social Services (e.g., Education, Health)                                           18.6%            22.8%
    Tourism*                                                                            26.1%            1.4%
    SME sector development*                                                                -             1.8%
    Other                                                                                  -             22.1%




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Not familiar at all”, 10 meaning “Extremely familiar”)

How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the World Bank's activities?
    Percentage of Respondents                                                          FY 2007          FY 2012
    Less than one year                                                                  14.0%            15.7%
    One to three years                                                                  26.9%            18.0%
    More than three years                                                               59.0%            66.3%




B. General Issues facing Sri Lanka




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Extremely pessimistic”, 10 meaning “Extremely optimistic”)




2
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’07 and FY ’12 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.




                                                                         87
The World Bank                                                        Sri Lanka                                 Country Survey 2012



B. General Issues facing Sri Lanka (continued)
Please identify which one of these you consider the first most important development priority.
 Percentage of Respondents                                                        FY 2007        FY 2012
 Government effectiveness/governance                                               9.1%           27.2%
 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                          0.0%           0.4%
 Economic growth                                                                   26.8%          30.4%
 Reducing corruption                                                               8.4%           11.2%
 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                           0.3%           0.4%
 Increasing access to quality education                                            4.0%           6.2%
 Increasing access to quality health services                                      0.7%           1.8%
 Reducing poverty                                                                  8.1%           4.3%
 Developing the SME sector*                                                           -           1.8%
 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                             2.3%           1.4%
 Improving basic infrastructure                                                    6.4%           5.1%
 Improving environmental quality                                                   1.3%           0.0%
 Protecting natural resources and environment                                      0.0%           1.1%
 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                            4.0%           2.5%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                    0.7%           2.2%
 Agriculture development                                                           1.3%           1.1%
 Tourism*                                                                             -           0.7%
 Access to finance*                                                                   -           0.0%
 Strengthening regulatory framework                                                0.7%           0.4%
 Improving trade and exports                                                       0.3%           0.0%
 Climate change*                                                                      -           0.4%
 Food security*                                                                       -           0.4%
 Other                                                                             25.2%          0.7%

Then identify which one you consider the second most important development priority.
  Percentage of Respondents                                                       FY 2007        FY 2012
  Government effectiveness/governance                                              10.7%          12.5%
  HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                         2.4%           0.7%
  Economic growth                                                                  14.1%          10.3%
  Reducing corruption                                                              10.7%          15.8%
  Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                          2.4%           6.6%
  Increasing access to quality education                                           3.4%           7.4%
  Increasing access to quality health services                                     1.0%           4.4%
  Reducing poverty                                                                 12.0%          10.3%
  Developing the SME sector*                                                          -           4.8%
  Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                            5.5%           4.0%
  Improving basic infrastructure                                                   8.6%           7.4%
  Improving environmental quality                                                  1.0%           0.7%
  Protecting natural resources and environment                                     1.0%           2.2%
  Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                           5.8%           5.1%
  Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                   2.7%           3.7%
  Agriculture development                                                          2.4%           1.5%
  Tourism*                                                                            -           0.4%
  Access to finance*                                                                  -           0.0%
  Strengthening regulatory framework                                               1.4%           1.1%
  Improving trade and exports                                                      1.4%           0.4%
  Climate change*                                                                     -           0.0%
  Food security*                                                                      -           0.4%
  Other                                                                            13.4%          0.4%
*This response option not offered in FY 2007 country survey.

Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Sri Lanka?
(Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
 Percentage of Respondents                                                         FY 2007        FY 2012
 Agriculture development                                                            25.0%          20.3%
 Improving governance                                                               25.0%          14.8%
 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                     15.7%          13.7%
 Infrastructure development                                                         28.0%          15.1%
 Education                                                                          19.0%          16.5%
 Increasing economic growth*                                                           -           22.0%
 Developing the SME sector*                                                            -           16.5%
 Reducing corruption                                                                21.0%          12.0%
 Health                                                                             0.7%           2.1%
 Protecting the environment and natural resources                                   1.3%           2.4%
 Increasing income generating activities/ employment                                54.3%          46.4%
 Increasing foreign direct investment                                               6.3%           4.5%
 Food security*                                                                        -           3.8%
 Other                                                                              2.7%           2.4%




                                                                    88
The World Bank                                                           Sri Lanka                                   Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(Asked on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”)

Based on your observations of the World Bank in Sri Lanka, where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in
its support of country priorities? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
  Percentage of Respondents                                                           FY 2007     FY 2011
  Government effectiveness/governance                                                  19.5%       16.2%
  Food security*                                                                          -         2.2%
  Reducing corruption                                                                  10.1%       10.3%
  Reducing poverty                                                                     19.1%       11.8%
  Economic growth                                                                      36.9%       19.9%
  Promote policies and stimulate foreign direct investment                              7.0%        4.0%
  Increasing access to quality education                                               11.4%       10.3%
  Increasing access to quality health services                                          2.0%        4.0%
  Access to finance*                                                                      -         6.6%
  Developing the SME sector*                                                              -        12.1%
  Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                 4.4%        2.2%
  Improving basic infrastructure                                                       31.5%       16.9%
  Improving environmental quality                                                       2.0%        1.5%
  Agriculture development                                                               4.7%       11.8%
  Tourism*                                                                                -         0.7%
  Protecting natural resources and environment                                          1.3%        2.6%
  Managing HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                     0.0%        1.1%
  Promoting entrepreneurship*                                                             -         7.4%
  Reducing non communicable diseases                                                    0.7%        0.7%
  Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                               19.5%       14.0%
  Improving trade and exports                                                           2.7%        5.1%
  Climate change*                                                                         -         1.5%
  Developing a skilled labor force*                                                       -        11.0%
  Strengthening regulatory framework                                                    3.0%        4.4%
  Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                        8.1%        7.4%
  Other                                                                                12.8%        1.1%
*This response option not offered in FY 2007 country survey.

In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in Sri Lanka’s development strategies?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                           FY 2007      FY 2011
 The Bank should be more involved                                                     68.4%        68.6%
 The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level                                   17.0%        17.4%
 The Bank should be less involved                                                     6.1%         5.9%
 The Bank shouldn't be involved at all                                                0.0%         1.7%
 Don’t know                                                                           8.5%         6.3%

In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest value” brought by the World Bank to Sri Lanka?
  Percentage of Respondents                                                          FY 2007      FY 2011
  The Bank's knowledge                                                                11.3%        12.4%
  Technical advice                                                                    5.5%         6.4%
  Policy and economic advice                                                          12.7%        16.5%
  Lending when others won’t*                                                             -         14.7%
  Convener/facilitator                                                                2.7%         3.4%
  Donor coordination                                                                  13.7%        6.0%
  Ability to mobilize resources                                                       4.8%         5.3%
  Ability to build implementation capacity                                            4.8%         4.9%
  Financial resources                                                                 43.2%        29.3%
  Other                                                                               1.4%         1.5%
*This response option not offered in FY 2007 country survey.




                                                                       89
The World Bank                                                        Sri Lanka                                      Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
What is the “second greatest value”?
  Percentage of Respondents                                                       FY 2007         FY 2011
  The Bank's knowledge                                                             12.2%           5.7%
  Technical advice                                                                 12.2%           14.5%
  Policy and economic advice                                                       20.1%           14.5%
  Lending when others won’t*                                                          -            7.6%
  Convener/facilitator                                                             4.3%            3.8%
  Donor coordination                                                               13.3%           11.5%
  Ability to mobilize resources                                                    6.1%            7.6%
  Ability to build implementation capacity                                         11.8%           10.7%
  Financial resources                                                              19.0%           24.0%
  Other                                                                            1.1%            0.4%
*This response option not offered in FY 2007 country survey.

Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research efforts on in the next few years in
Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO) (Combined Responses)
  Percentage of Respondents                                                        FY 2007         FY 2011
  Education                                                                         24.6%           24.2%
  Health                                                                             5.6%            9.0%
  Social protection                                                                  7.0%            5.2%
  Transport                                                                          3.7%            5.6%
  Poverty                                                                           24.6%           17.0%
  Governance                                                                        22.3%           17.7%
  Anti-corruption                                                                   15.3%           14.6%
  Enhanced business environment for private sector development                      17.3%           16.3%
  Energy                                                                             8.0%            2.4%
  Promote Public Private Partnerships*                                                 -            12.5%
  Agricultural development                                                           7.6%            8.4%
  Water and sanitation                                                               3.3%            1.4%
  Monitoring and evaluation                                                          3.7%            2.8%
  Help restructure SOE's for better results*                                           -             5.2%
  Public expenditure                                                                 7.0%            3.5%
  Public sector performance                                                         13.6%           11.1%
  Labor markets/job creation                                                        17.3%            4.9%
  Financial markets                                                                  3.3%            2.4%
  Urban/metropolitan development                                                     6.0%            3.8%
  Environmental sustainability/ natural resources management                         7.6%            6.3%
  Improving equality of opportunity*                                                   -             3.5%
  Rural development*                                                                   -            13.5%
  Food security*                                                                       -             2.4%
  Climate change*                                                                      -             1.4%
  Other                                                                              1.7%            1.7%
*This response option not offered in FY 2007 country survey.




                                                                    90
The World Bank                                                          Sri Lanka                                   Country Survey 2012



C. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following statements about the
World Bank in Sri Lanka.




* In the FY ’07 survey, this statement read “The World Bank collaborates with other donors here”.

D. The Work of the World Bank: Importance
How important is it for the World Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in Sri Lanka?
(Asked on a 10-point* importance scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




* Responses from the FY ’07 survey were converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison.




                                                                      91
The World Bank                                                           Sri Lanka                                   Country Survey 2012



D. The Work of the World Bank: Effectiveness
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of development in Sri Lanka?
(Asked on a 10-point* effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




* Responses from the FY ’07 survey were converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison.

E. The Way the World Bank does Business
Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/activity listed below.
(Asked on a 10-point* effectiveness scale, 1 being Not at all, 10 being Very.)




* Responses from the FY ’06 survey were converted from a 5-pt. scale to a 10-pt. scale for comparison.




                                                                        92
The World Bank                                                      Sri Lanka                                    Country Survey 2012



F. Project/Program Related Issues
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”, 10 meaning you
“Strongly Agree”.




H. Communication and Outreach

I use/have used the World Bank website:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      FY 2007        FY 2012
 Yes                                                                             56.2%          73.4%
 No                                                                              43.8%          26.6%

I primarily use:
 Percentage of Respondents                                                      FY 2007        FY 2012
 The World Bank’s country website                                                48.2%          56.1%
 The World Bank’s main website                                                   51.8%          43.9%




                                                                  93
The World Bank                                           Sri Lanka                  Country Survey 2012



Appendix D: Sri Lanka Questionnaire


                              World Bank Client Survey FY11 – Sri Lanka

The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Sri Lanka or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The
following survey is meant to give the Bank’s team that works in Sri Lanka, more in-depth insight into
how the Bank’s work is perceived. This is one tool the Bank uses to assess the views of its critical
stakeholders. With this understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies,
outreach and programs that support development in Sri Lanka. The World Bank commissioned an
independent firm to oversee the logistics of this effort in Sri Lanka. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the survey, please circle the number that most
accurately reflects your answer. If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank.

PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF RESPONSES.
PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA
CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.
SECTION A: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

A1. Which of the following best describes your current position? (Please mark only one
response)
 1 Office of the President, Prime Minister, Minister
 2 Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department
 3 Office of Parlimentarian
 4 Project Implementation Unit (PIU)/Project Management Unit (PMU)
 5 Local Government Office or Staff
 6 Bilateral or Multilateral Agency
 7 Private Sector Organization
 8 NGOs (including CBOs)
 9 Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web etc.)
 10 Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank)
 11 Trade Union
 12 Faith-Based Groups
 13 Academia or Research Institute
 14 Judiciary
 15 Other (please specify): ________________________




                                                       94
The World Bank                                           Sri Lanka                      Country Survey 2012




SECTION A: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT..)

A2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only one response)
 1 Agriculture, Agribusiness, Forestry
 2 Commerce, Trade and Manufacturing
 3 Communications, Information Services
 4 Economic Management
 5 Environment, Natural Resource Management
 6 Finance, Banking, Insurance
 7 Infrastructure (e.g., Transport, Water, Energy, Telecommunications)
 8 Law, Justice
 9 Legislature, Politics
 10 Social Services (e.g., Education, Health)
 11 Tourism
 12 SME sector development
 13 Other (please specify): ________________________


A3. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Sri Lanka
on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “not familiar at all”, 10 meaning
“extremely familiar?"
       1          2     3      4      5         6   7        8       9       10
    Not                                                                  Extremel y
 fami l i ar at                                                           fami l i ar
    all


A4. How long have you been involved with (or a close observer of) the World Bank’s
activities?
 1 Less than one year
 2 One to three years
 3 More than three years


A5. Which best represents your current location?
 1 Northern Province
 2 Southern Province
 3 Western Province
 4 Eastern Province
 5 Uwa Province
 6 Sabaragamuwa Province
 7 North western Province
 8 Central Province
 9 North Central Province




                                                        95
The World Bank                                            Sri Lanka                               Country Survey 2012




SECTION B: GENERAL ISSUES FACING SRI LANKA

B1. On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning “extremely pessimistic”, 10 meaning
“extremely optimistic”, please indicate your perspective on the future of the
next generation in Sri Lanka
        1            2   3      4      5      6      7        8       9          10        
  Extremel y                                                                Extremel y Don't
 Pes s i mi s ti c                                                          Opti mi s ti c Know



B2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Sri Lanka.
                                                                         Most     Second Most
Please identify which one of these you consider the first Most         Important   Important
Important Development Priority. Then identify which one               Development Development
you consider the Second Most Important Development                      priority    priority
                                                                           (Choose (Choose only
Priority.
                                                                          only ONE)   ONE)
 1 Government effectiveness/governance                                                     
 2 HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                
 3 Economic growth                                                                         
 4 Reducing corruption                                                                     
 5 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                                 
 6 Increasing access to quality education                                                  
 7 Increasing access to quality health services                                            
 8 Reducing poverty                                                                        
 9 Developing the SME sector                                                               
 10 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                  
 11 Improving basic infrastructure                                                         
 12 Improving environmental quality                                                        
 13 Protecting natural resources and environment                                           
 14 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                                 
      Enhancing the opportunity for private sector
 15                                                                                        
      growth/investment
 16 Agriculture development                                                                
 17 Tourism                                                                                
 18 Access to finance                                                                      
 19 Strengthening regulatory framework                                                     
 20 Improving trade and exports                                                            
 21 Climate change                                                                         
 22 Food security                                                                          
 23 Other (please specify): ___________________                                            




                                                         96
The World Bank                                            Sri Lanka            Country Survey 2012




SECTION B: GENERAL ISSUES FACING SRI LANKA (CONT..)

B3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
Which TWO areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to
reducing poverty in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1 Agriculture development
 2 Improving governance
 3 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment
 4 Infrastructure development
 5 Education
 6 Increasing economic growth
 7 Developing the SME sector
 8 Reducing corruption
 9 Health
 10 Protecting the environment and natural resources
 11 Increasing income generating activities/ employment
 12 Increasing foreign direct investment
 13 Food security
 14 Other (please specify): _______________________




                                                       97
The World Bank                                           Sri Lanka            Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: GENERAL ISSUES FACING SRI LANKA (CONT..)

B4. Sustainable economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which TWO
areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating faster economic
growth in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1 Access to education
 2 Access to finance
 3 Enhancing Colombo as an International city
 4 Enhancing the environment for increased foreign direct investment
 5 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment
 6 Improving governance
 7 Improve environemnt for doing business and private sector growth
 8 Improved power generation infrastructure
 9 Improved transportation infrastructure
 10 Promoting and supporting the SME(small medium sized enterprise) sector
 11 Reducing corruption
 12 Improving access to and/or quality of education
 13 Improving access to and/or quality of health care
 14 Improving the skills of the labour force
 15 Improving trade and exports
 16 Better managing State owned enterprise Sector (SOE’s)
 17 Increase efficiency of public spending
 18 Increasing agricultural productivity
 19 Invest in Tourism products and services
 20 Encouraging Public Private Partnerships (PPP’s)
 21 Quality of education
 22 Ethnic reconciliation
 23 Increasing the role of Private sector in development and production
 24 Strengthening the regulatory framework
 25 Other (please specify): _______________________




                                                        98
The World Bank                                                Sri Lanka                                         Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

C1. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in
Sri Lanka, on a scale of 1-10, 1 being "Not effective at all", 10 being "Very
effective."
      1          2      3       4        5        6    7          8       9           10          
     Not                                                                             Very        Don't
  effecti ve                                                                       effecti ve    Know
    at al l



C2. Based on your observations of the World Bank in Sri Lanka...
1. What do you think the Bank considers its top priorities in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO)
2. Where would it be most productive for the Bank to focus most of its resources in its support of country
priorities? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                                                            Where would it be most
                                                                              What do you think the Bank
                                                                                                            productive for the Bank to
                                                                              considers its top priorities?
                                                                                                            focus most of its resources?
                                                                              (Choose   no          more
                                                                                                           (Choose   no          more
                                                                              than TWO)
                                                                                                           than TWO)
 1 Government effectiveness/governance                                                                                 
 2 Food security                                                                                                       
 3 Reducing corruption                                                                                                 
 4 Reducing poverty                                                                                                    
 5 Economic growth                                                                                                     
 6 Promote policies to stimulate foreign direct investment                                                             
 7 Increasing access to quality education                                                                              
 8 Increasing access to quality health services                                                                        
 9 Access to finance                                                                                                   
 10 Developing the SME sector                                                                                          
 11 Improving the effectiveness of law and justice system                                                              
 12 Improving basic infrastructure                                                                                     
 13 Improving environmental quality                                                                                    
 14 Agriculture development                                                                                            
 15 Tourism                                                                                                            
 16 Protecting natural resources and environment                                                                       
 17 Managing HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases                                                                  
 18 Promoting entrepreneurship                                                                                         
 19 Reducing NCD’s (Non communicable diseases)                                                                         
 20 Increasing employment/ income generating opportunities                                                             
 21 Improving trade and exports                                                                                        
 22 Climate change                                                                                                     
 23 Developing a skilled labour force                                                                                  
 24 Strengthening regulatory framework                                                                                 
 25 Enhancing the opportunity for private sector growth/investment                                                     
 26 Other (please specify): ___________________                                                                        




                                                             99
The World Bank                                                Sri Lanka                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT..)

C3. In your opinion, what should be the level of involvement of the World Bank in Sri Lanka’s
development strategies?
 1 The Bank should be more involved
 2 The Bank is currently involved at an optimum level
 3 The Bank should be less involved
 4 The Bank shouldn’t be involved at all
 5 Don’t know


C3.1. Which World Bank instrument do you believe is the most effective in reducing poverty
in Sri Lanka? (Choose only ONE)
 1 Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2 policy based lending (providing financing directly to the Government budget based on policy reforms)
 3 Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.,)
 4 Technical Assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 5 Results based lending
 6 Don't know


C3.2. Which World Bank instrument do you believe is lease effective in meeting the needs of
poverty in Sri Lanka? (Choose only ONE)
 1 Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2 policy based lending (providing financing directly to the Government budget based on policy reforms)
 3 Analytical work (studies, surveys, etc.,)
 4 Technical Assistance (advice, best practice, international experience)
 5 Results based lending
 6 Don't know


C4. In broad terms of economic and social development, what is the “greatest” value brought by the World
Bank to Sri Lanka? What is the “second greatest” value?
                                                                             Greatest Value    Second Greatest Value
                                                                           (Choose only ONE)    (Choose only ONE)
 1 The Bank’s knowledge (studies and analyses)                                                         
 2 Technical advice                                                                                    
 3 Policy and economic advice                                                                          
 4 Lending when others won’t                                                                           
 5 Convener/facilitator                                                                                
 6 Donor coordination                                                                                  
 7 Ability to mobilize resources (from private sector, government, etc.)                               
 8 Ability to build implementation capacity                                                            
 9 Financial resources                                                                                 
 10 Other (please specify): ___________________                                                        




                                                           100
The World Bank                                            Sri Lanka                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT..)

C5. Which of the following do you identify as the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in
Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO only)
 1 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2 Not exploring alternative policy options
 3 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 4 Staff too inaccessible
 5 Is arrogant in its approach
 6 Not client focused
 7 The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8 Not willing to honestly criticize politics and reform efforts in the country
 9 Too influenced by the US
 10 Not enough public disclosure of its work
 11 World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12 Inadequately aligned with country priorities
 13 Too political
 14 Too theoretical
 15 Too detailed
 16 Other (please specify): __________________________




                                                        101
The World Bank                                        Sri Lanka                  Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT..)

C6. The World Bank wants to ensure that the knowledge and studies it produces are relevant.
Which TWO of the following areas do you think would be most valuable for the Bank to focus
its research efforts on in the next few years in Sri Lanka? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1 Education
 2 Health
 3 Social protection
 4 Transport
 5 Poverty
 6 Governance
 7 Anti-corruption
 8 Enhanced business environment for private sector development
 9 Energy
 10 Promote PPP's (Public Private Partnerships)
 11 Agricultural development
 12 Water and sanitation
 13 Monitoring and evaluation
 14 Help restructure SOE's for better results
 15 Public expenditure
 16 Public sector performance
 17 Labor markets/job creation
 18 Financial markets
 19 Urban/metropolitan development
 20 Environmental sustainability/ natural resources management
 21 Improving equality of opportunity
 22 Rural development
 23 Food security
 24 Climate change
 25 Other (please specify): ____________________________________




                                                    102
The World Bank                                                   Sri Lanka                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT..)

C7. In addition to the regular relations with the national Government as its main interlocutor,
which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank work with more in your country to
ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1 NGOs
 2 Local Government
 3 Beneficiaries
 4 Private sector
 5 Youth
 6 Self employed womens' groups
 7 Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 8 Donor community
 9 Parliament
 10 Media
 11 Faith based organizations
 12 Other (please specify): ____________________________________



On a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning you strongly disagree, 10 meaning you strongly agree, please respond to the following
statements about the World Bank in Sri Lanka.
                                                                              Strongly                            Strongly Don't
                                                                              Disagree                               Agree Know
       Overall the Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in
C8.                                                                            1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       Sri Lanka
       The Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development
C9.                                                                            1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       priorities for this country
C10.   The Bank’s work reflects its own mission of poverty reduction           1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic
C11.                                                                           1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       for Sri Lanka
       The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Sri Lanka with
C12.                                                                           1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       respect
C13.   The World Bank collaborates well with other donors here                 1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
C14. The World Bank is responsive                                              1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
C15. Overall, I like to work/interact with Bank staff                          1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
     The Bank is an effective catalyst for discussion on issues related to
C16.                                                                           1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
     poverty
     In general, the strategies that the Bank supports are sustainable over
C17.                                                                           1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
     time
     The World Bank's work promotes country ownership of development
C18.                                                                           1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
     strategies
     The Bank's work promotes the empowerment of poor people to
C19.                                                                           1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
     participate in development
C20. The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending               1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
C21. The Bank gives appropriate priority to growth issues                      1    2    3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   




                                                               103
The World Bank                                                              Sri Lanka                                                Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORK OF THE WORLD BANK

For each item in the following section, please provide two responses: first, importance, meaning, in your opinion,
how important it is for the Bank to be involved in that particular area of work in Sri Lanka. Second, effectiveness,
meaning, how effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of having a positive impact on that area of
development in Sri Lanka.
                                                    Level of Importance                    Level of Effectiveness
                                                   Not                                                       Not




                                                                                                     Know




                                                                                                                                                             Know
                                                                                                     Don't




                                                                                                                                                             Don't
                                                   important                                 Very            effective                               Very
                                                   at all                                important           at all                              effective
D1.    Helping to reduce poverty                   1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       Helping to bring about economic
D2.                                                1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       growth
       Encouraging greater transparency in
D3.                                                1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       governance
D4.    Helping to strengthen the private sector    1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       Helping to strengthen the financial
D5.                                                1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       system
       Helping to strengthen the regulatory
D6.                                                1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       framework
       Helping to strengthen the judicial
D7.                                                1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       system
D8.    Helping to strengthen the public sector     1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       Helping to strengthen the education
D9.                                                1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       sector
D10.   Helping to strengthen the health sector     1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
     Safeguarding against corruption in
D11. projects/ programs that it funds with         1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
     its procurement rules
       Helping to integrate Sri Lanka into the
D12.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       global economy
       Ensuring that attention is paid to the
       environmental impact (the physical
D13.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       environment – land, water, air) of Bank
       supported programs and strategies
       Ensuring that attention is paid to
D14.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       gender disparities
       Helping to strengthen agricultural
D15.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       development
       Helping to strengthen infrastructure
D16.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       development
       Helping to strengthen environment and
D17.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       natural resources management
       Helping to strengthen the social
D18.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       protection sector
       Helping to improve the quality of life in
D19.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       urban areas
       Helping to reduce corruption in the
D20.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       country with its advice and support
       Helping to empower communities to
D21.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       participate in their own development
       Helping Sri Lanka adapt to/avert risk of
D22.                                               1    2      3   4   5    6    7   8     9   10            1   2      3   4   5   6   7   8    9   10      
       climate change




                                                                           104
The World Bank                                                    Sri Lanka                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION E: THE WAY THE WORLD BANK DOES BUSINESS

Please rate the World Bank in terms of its effectiveness vis-à-vis the particular attribute/ activity listed below using
a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning “Not effective at all”, 10 meaning “Very effective”.
                                                                              Not
                                                                              effective                                Very Don't
                                                                              at all                               effective Know
E1.    Technical competence                                                    1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
E2.    Producing knowledge and research (studies, analyses) that are useful    1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
E3.    Making the results of studies and analyses readily available            1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
E4.    Sharing knowledge about international best practices                    1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
E5.    Ability to adapt its knowledge to your country’s needs                  1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
E6.    Ensuring its staff is accessible                                        1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
E7.    Providing sound policy and economic advice                              1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
E8.    Straightforwardness in its dealings with you                            1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
E9.    Maintaining consistent messages                                         1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       Promoting the inclusion of local communities (beneficiaries) in the
E10.                                                                           1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       development of strategies
       Promoting the inclusion of civil society (NGOs, religious groups,
E11.                                                                           1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       interest groups) in the development of strategies
       Promoting the inclusion of local project experts in the development
E12.                                                                           1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       of strategies
       Promoting the inclusion of private sector in the development of
E13.                                                                           1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       strategies
E14. Giving appropriate priority to poverty reduction                          1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
E15. Lending in a way that promotes effective development                      1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   


SECTION F: PROJECT/PROGRAM RELATED ISSUES
The following section should be filled out only by respondents who have/have had direct experience and/or
involvement in the implementation of World Bank programs and/or projects.

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements on a 1-10 scale, 1 meaning you “Strongly Disagree”,
10 meaning you “Strongly Agree”.
                                                                              Strongly                             Strongly Don't
                                                                              Disagree                                Agree Know
F1.    The Bank is flexible in terms of adjusting to changing circumstances    1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
F2.    The Bank disburses funds promptly                                       1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
F3.    The Bank works efficiently                                              1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       The Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
F4.                                                                            1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       programs it supports
F5.    The Bank helps to build capacity at the community level                 1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
F6.    The Bank helps to build capacity of government officials                1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       The Bank and partners in government collaborate well together on
F7.                                                                            1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       Bank supported programs and projects in Sri Lanka
F8.    The Bank helps to strengthen institutional capacity                     1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       The Government supports and takes responsibility for development
F9.                                                                            1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   
       efforts in Sri Lanka
F10. The Bank’s procurement requirements are reasonable                        1    2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9   10   




                                                                 105
The World Bank                                             Sri Lanka                                Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN SRI LANKA

G1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank should play in
Sri Lanka’s development over the medium term in the near future? (1 meaning
that the Bank should not play a significant role at all, 10 meaning that the Bank
should play a very significant role)
        1           2   3      4       5      6       7         8      9        10          
      Not a                                                                     Very        Don't
 s i gni fi ca nt                                                          s i gni fi ca nt Know
 rol e a t a l l                                                                rol e


G2. Which of the following should the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in
Sri Lanka?
 1 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Sri Lanka’s specific challenges
 2 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3 Focus primarily on advice and advocacy issues
     Improve the competitiveness of its financing (e.g., cost, timeliness and other terms) compared to
 4
     markets
 5 Build capacity
 6 Greater selectivity in its work
 7 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Sri Lanka's economy
 8 Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9 Offer more products and services that reflect Srilanka's status as a middle income country
 10 Other (please specify): ___________________________________


G3. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the
following would you attribute this to? (Choose upto TWO)
 1 The World Bank works inefficiently/too slowly
 2 Government works inefficiently/too slowly
 3 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 4 Poor donor coordination
 5 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in government
 6 Political pressures and obstacles
 7 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 8 Other (please specify): ___________________________________




                                                          106
The World Bank                                           Sri Lanka            Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: COMMUNICATION AND OUTREACH

H1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development
issues in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO at most)
 1 Local newspapers
 2 International newspapers
 3 Local radio
 4 International radio
 5 Local television
 6 International television
 7 Periodicals
 8 Internet
 9 Social media
 10 Word of mouth
 11 Consultations/Conferrences/Fora
 12 Workshops/Seminars
 13 Other (please specify): _________________________


H2. Where do you get most of your information about the World Bank’s development
activities in Sri Lanka? (Choose TWO at most)
 1 Local newspapers
 2 International newspapers
 3 Local radio
 4 International radio
 5 Local television
 6 International television
 7 Periodicals
 8 Blogs
 9 Internet
 10 World Bank conferences, seminars, workshops
 11 World Bank publications, materials
 12 World Bank website
 13 Social media
 14 Direct contact/interaction with World Bank staff
 15 Other (please specify): _________________________




                                                        107
The World Bank                                         Sri Lanka                     Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: COMMUNICATION AND OUTREACH (CONT..)

H3. How you would prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose TWO only)
 1 World Bank website
 2 Face to face meetings/discussions
 3 E-newsletters
 4 Workshops/conferences
 5 Blogs
 6 Mobile phones
 7 Social media (Facebook, twitter, youtube)
 8 Traditional media (music, theatre, etc)
 9 Others (please specify): ______________________________________________


H4. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to information Policy under which the Bank will now
disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
 1 Yes
 2 No


H5. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past
year? (IF YES PLEASE GOTO QUESTION H6)
 1 Yes
 2 No


H6. Were you able to obtain this information?
 1 Yes
 2 No


H7. Do you have access to the internet?           H8. I use/have used the World Bank website:
 1   Yes                                           1     Yes
 2   No                                            2     No


H9. I primarily use:
 1   The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/srilanka)
 2   The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)




                                  Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                   108
