                            88563




Zambia Country Opinion
    Survey Report

  (July 2012 - June 2013)
The World Bank                                         Zambia                                     Country Survey 2012




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3
          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3
         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5
         IV. General Issues facing Zambia ....................................................10
          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank .................................14
         VI. Sectoral Effectiveness................................................................21
        VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments ..................................25
       VIII. How the World Bank Operates ..................................................37
         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Zambia ...........................41
          X. Communication and Openness..................................................45
         XI. Appendices ................................................................................54




                                                          2
The World Bank                                Zambia                             Country Survey 2012



I. Objectives

This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in Zambia
        perceive the Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Zambia regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Zambia;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in Zambia;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank’s effectiveness and results, knowledge
               and research, and communication and information sharing in Zambia; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in Zambia.

       Use data to help inform the Zambia country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
In May and June 2012, 553 stakeholders of the World Bank in Zambia were invited to provide
their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country survey.
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime Minister,
the office of a Minister, the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial
department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World Bank
supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a
project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral agencies; private
sector organizations; private foundations; the financial sector/private banks; NGOs; community-
based organizations; the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-based
groups; academia, research institutes or think tanks; the judiciary branch; and local citizens. A
total of 312 stakeholders participated in the country survey (56%).

Respondents either received and returned questionnaires via email or completed questionnaires
with a representative of the fielding agency. Respondents were asked about: general issues facing
Zambia, their overall attitudes toward the Bank; the World Bank’s effectiveness and results; the
Bank’s knowledge; working with the World Bank; the Bank’s future role in Zambia, and the
Bank’s communication and information sharing in Zambia:

A. General Issues facing Zambia: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Zambia is
   headed in the right direction economically, politically, and socially, what they thought were
   the top three most important development priorities, and which areas would contribute most
   to reducing poverty and generating economic growth in Zambia.




                                                3
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their familiarity
   with the World Bank, the Bank’s effectiveness in Zambia, Bank staff preparedness, the
   extent to which the Bank should seek to influence the global development agenda, their
   agreement with various statements regarding the Bank’s work in Zambia, and the extent to
   which the Bank is an effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate
   the sectoral areas on which it would be most productive for the Bank to focus its resources,
   the Bank’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses in its work, the most and least effective
   instruments in helping to reduce poverty in Zambia, with which groups the Bank should
   work more, and to what reasons respondents attributed failed or slow reform efforts.
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
   the Bank’s work helps achieve sustainable development results in Zambia, the Bank’s level
   of effectiveness across thirty-six development areas, such as economic growth, and the extent
   to which the Bank meets Zambia’s need for knowledge services and financial instruments.
D. The World Bank’s Knowledge: Respondents were asked to indicate how frequently they
   consult Bank knowledge/research, the areas on which the Bank should focus its research
   efforts, and to rate the effectiveness and quality of the Bank’s knowledge/research, including
   how significant of a contribution the Bank’s knowledge and research make to development
   results, the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge and research, the effectiveness of the
   Bank providing linkage to non-Bank expertise, and the extent to which Zambia received
   value for money from fee-for-service products/services.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate their level of agreement with
   a series of statements regarding working with the Bank, such as the World Bank’s
   “Safeguard Policy” requirements being reasonable, working with the World Bank increasing
   Zambia’s institutional capacity, and the Bank disbursing funds promptly.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Zambia: Respondents were asked to rate how
   significant a role the Bank should play in Zambia’s development in the near future and to
   indicate what the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Zambia.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate where they
   get information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their access to the Internet, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s website and PICs. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s
   Access to Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of
   agreement that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data
   policy. Respondents were also asked their level of agreement that they know how to find
   information from the Bank and that the Bank is responsive to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank, their exposure
   to the Bank in Zambia, and their geographic location.

In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 319 respondents (98% response rate) who completed the
country survey in FY 2007 and the 208 respondents (58% response rate) who completed the
survey in FY 2004. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were possible.


                                                4
The World Bank                               Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
    For further analyses, the small number of consultants working on Bank-supported
       projects were combined with respondents from PMUs, respondents from bilateral
       agencies were combined with those from multilateral agencies, respondents from the
       financial sector/private banks were combined with those from the private sector, and the
       small number of respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, local government,
       private foundations, trade unions, and the judiciary branch were included in the “Other”
       category. Note there were no respondents from the office of a Minister.




                                               5
The World Bank                   Zambia       Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization




                                   6
The World Bank                              Zambia                            Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The majority of respondents indicated that they were located in the Lusaka province.
        Because of the small number of respondents from the Northern, Northwestern, Luapula,
        Muchinga, and Eastern provinces, these locations were combined into an “Other
        provinces” category for all further analyses.




                                              7
The World Bank                            Zambia   Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Professional Collaboration with the World Bank




Exposure to the World Bank




                                            8
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Familiarity with the World Bank
 Across all respondents, familiarity with the Bank received a mean rating of 6.3 on a
   10-point scale with 1 being not familiar at all and 10 being extremely familiar. This was
   significantly lower than the FY ’07 and FY ’04 surveys, in which familiarity with the Bank
   received a mean rating of 6.6 and 6.8, respectively, across all respondents.
        Consultants on Bank projects and respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies
           indicated the highest levels of familiarity whereas respondents from the office of the
           President and CBOs indicated significantly lower levels.
        Respondents from the Lusaka and Copperbelt provinces had the highest levels of
           familiarity with the Bank whereas respondents from the Southern province had
           significantly lower levels of familiarity.
        It should be noted that respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the Bank were
           significantly, strongly correlated with their impressions of the Bank’s overall
           effectiveness in Zambia as well as significantly, moderately correlated with their
           perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results and
           the Bank’s relevance to Zambia’s development.




                                                9
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Zambia

Headed in the Right Direction

       When asked whether Zambia was headed in the right or wrong direction economically,
        nearly three-quarters of all respondents indicated that Zambia was headed in the right
        direction. Over half of all respondents indicated that Zambia was headed in the right
        direction politically and exactly half of all respondents indicated that Zambia was headed
        in the right direction socially.
             Majorities of respondents across all stakeholder groups and all geographic
              locations indicated that Zambia was headed in the right direction economically.
             Pluralities of respondents across most stakeholder groups and most geographic
              locations indicated that Zambia was headed in the right direction politically,
              except respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies who were more likely
              to indicate that they weren’t sure, local citizens and respondents from the Western
              province who were more likely to say Zambia was headed in the wrong direction
              politically.
             Pluralities of respondents across most stakeholder groups and all geographic
              locations indicated that Zambia was headed in the right direction socially, except
              respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies, the media, faith-based groups,
              and academia/research institutes who were more likely to indicate that they
              weren’t sure.




                                                10
The World Bank                                           Zambia                                     Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
Development Priority
    Respondents indicated that education was the most important development priority in
      Zambia. Poverty reduction, job creation/employment, rural development, and agricultural
      development were also considered top priorities. Respondents from independent
      government institutions also indicated access to finance was a top priority and
      respondents from the Copperbelt province indicated that governance was a top priority.
           In the FY ’07 country survey*, HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases
             (32%), education (28%), and governance (26%) were considered the most
             important development priorities for Zambia.




       *
           Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’ 07 survey.
                                                           11
The World Bank                                           Zambia                                    Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
Reducing Poverty
       Respondents indicated that education, job creation/employment, rural development,
        agricultural development, and access to finance would contribute most to reducing
        poverty in Zambia. Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies also indicated
        that inclusive economic growth would contribute to reducing poverty in Zambia.
             In the FY ’07 country survey*, respondents felt that agriculture development
                (38%), education (36%), increasing employment (31%), and health (27%) would
                contribute most to poverty reduction in Zambia




        *
            Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’07 survey.
                                                           12
The World Bank                               Zambia                            Country Survey 2012



IV. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)

Economic Growth

       Respondents indicated that agricultural development, education, access to finance,
        energy, jobs creation/employment, domestic private sector development, and trade and
        exports would contribute most to generating economic growth in Zambia.




                                               13
The World Bank                                           Zambia                                     Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Focusing World Bank Resources

       Respondents indicated that the Bank would have the most impact on development results
        in Zambia by focusing most of its attention and resources on rural development,
        education, agricultural development, and poverty reduction. Consultants on Bank
        projects/respondents from PMUs indicated that the Bank should also focus on domestic
        private sector development.
             In the FY ’07 country survey*, respondents indicated that it would be most
                productive for the Bank to focus on education (30%) and employment (26%).




        *
            Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’ 07 survey.
                                                            14
The World Bank                                 Zambia                               Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

The World Bank’s Overall Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, ratings of the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in Zambia
        received a mean rating of 6.0 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at all and 10
        being very effective. This was statistically similar to the FY ’07 and FY ’04 surveys, in
        which the Bank’s overall effectiveness received a mean rating of 6.1 and 5.8,
        respectively, across all respondents.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondent from academia/research
              institutes gave the highest ratings for the World Bank’s overall effectiveness in
              Zambia whereas respondents from faith-based groups and independent
              government institutions gave the lowest ratings. Respondents across all
              geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s overall
              effectiveness in Zambia.




                                                 15
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Achieving Sustainable Development Results

       Across all respondents, the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development results
        in Zambia received a mean rating of 6.6 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no degree at
        all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of the
              President gave the highest ratings for the World Bank helping achieve sustainable
              development results in Zambia whereas respondents from faith-based groups gave
              the lowest ratings. Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically
              similar ratings for the World Bank helping achieve sustainable development
              results in Zambia.




                                                16
The World Bank                               Zambia                             Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Staff Preparedness

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s staff being well prepared to help Zambia solve
        its most complicated development challenges received a mean rating of 6.9 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of the
              President gave the highest ratings for the World Bank’s staff being well prepared
              whereas respondents from faith-based groups gave the lowest ratings.
              Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for
              the World Bank’s staff being well prepared to help Zambia solve its most
              complicated development challenges.




                                               17
The World Bank                                           Zambia                                    Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Greatest Value

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest value to Zambia was its
        financial resources. The Bank’s technical assistance, training/capacity building, and
        policy advice were also considered of great value to Zambia.
                 Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey* indicated that the Bank’s greatest
                  values to Zambia were its financial resources (44%), knowledge (40%), policy
                  and economic advice (35%), and technical advice (25%).




        *
            Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’07 survey.




                                                           18
The World Bank                                           Zambia                                    Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Greatest Weakness
       Respondents indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Zambia were
        bring too influenced by developed countries and being too bureaucratic in its operational
        policies and procedures. The Bank imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
        political realities and there not being enough public disclosure of its work were also
        considered weaknesses. Consultants on Bank projects/respondents from PMUs also
        indicated that Bank processes are too slow and complex and respondents from the
        Western province indicated that the Bank is not adequately sensitive to political/social
        realities in Zambia.
             Respondents in the FY ’07 survey* indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses
                 were being too influenced by the US (32%) and being too bureaucratic in its
                 operational policies and procedures (29%).




        *
            Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’07 survey.
                                                           19
The World Bank                                  Zambia                               Country Survey 2012



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Attributing Slow or Failed Reform Efforts

       When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, respondents
        indicated that they most often attribute this to an inadequate level of citizen/civil society
        participation, the government working inefficiently, the Bank not reaching out enough to
        non-state actors, and reforms not being well thought out in light of country challenges.
             In addition, respondents from the media indicated that they most often attribute
              failed or slowed reform efforts to political pressures and the Bank working too
              slowly. Respondents from the Copperbelt province indicated that the Bank works
              too slowly. Respondents from the Central province indicated that there is an
              inadequate amount of consultation and respondents from the Western province
              indicated that the World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities
              on the ground.




                                                  20
The World Bank                                Zambia                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness
Specific Areas of Effectiveness
    Respondents saw the Bank as most effective at economic growth and health, both
        receiving a mean rating of 7.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being
        not effective at all and 10 being very effective.




                                                21
The World Bank                                 Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder differences in their ratings of the Bank’s effectiveness
        across seven of these thirty-six areas. For the most part, respondents from the media had
        the highest ratings across these areas whereas respondents from CBOs and faith-based
        groups tended to have significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness across
        these areas. Those areas with significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Transport”;
             “Urban development”;
             “Regulatory framework”;
             “Communicable/non-communicable disease”;
             “Water and sanitation”;
             “Trade and exports”; and
             “Social protection”.

       There were significant differences between geographic locations in their ratings of the
        Bank’s effectiveness across eleven of these thirty-six areas. For the most part,
        respondents from the Copperbelt and Central provinces had the highest ratings across
        these areas whereas respondents from the Western province tended to have significantly
        lower ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness across these areas. Those areas with significant
        geographic location differences were:
             “Anti-corruption”;
             “Environmental sustainability”;
             “Poverty reduction”;
             “Energy”;
             “Job creation/employment”;
             “Rural development”;
             “Global integration”;
             “Education”;
             “Social protection”;
             “Public sector reform”; and
             “Agricultural development”.


       Responses across all stakeholder groups, geographic locations, and country surveys can
        be found in the Appendix.




                                                 22
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)
Specific Areas of Effectiveness (continued)
    Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly lower ratings for the Bank’s
        effectiveness at anti-corruption, law and justice, basic infrastructure, domestic private
        sector development, and social protection, but significantly higher effectiveness ratings
        for poverty reduction, gender, health, and public sector reform, compared to respondents
        in the FY ’07 country survey.




                                                23
The World Bank                                 Zambia                               Country Survey 2012



VI. Sectoral Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness

To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness and
ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable development results in Zambia, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-six specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve sustainable
development results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area
increase, respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of
effectiveness in one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results increase. Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of
effectiveness in one specific area are related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s
overall effectiveness or perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable
development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Zambia. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at crime and violence; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth.

       Achieving Sustainable Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest
        Pearson Product-Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results in
        Zambia, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of
        perceptions of the Bank’s ability to help achieve sustainable development results. The
        areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The Bank’s effectiveness at food security;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at governance;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at education;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at agricultural development;
             The Bank’s effectiveness at job creation/employment; and
             The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth.




                                                 24
The World Bank                                Zambia                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments

Knowledge: Frequency of Use

       A plurality of respondents indicated that they consulted World Bank knowledge and
        research a few times a year.
             Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies indicated that they utilized
              Bank research weekly. Consultants on Bank-supported projects/respondents from
              PMUs indicated that they utilized Bank research monthly. Employees of
              ministries and respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks,
              NGOs, the media, academia/research institutes, and other organizations indicated
              that they utilized Bank research a few times a year. Local citizens indicated that
              they utilized Bank research at most a few times a year. Respondents from the
              office of the President indicated that they rarely utilized World Bank knowledge
              and research. Respondents from CBOs, independent government institution, and
              faith-based groups indicated that they never used Bank research.
             Respondents from the Lusaka province indicated that they utilized Bank research
              a few times a year. Respondents from the Southern province indicated that they
              utilized Bank research at most a few times a year. Respondents from the Western
              and Copperbelt provinces indicated that they rarely utilized World Bank
              knowledge and research. Respondents from the Central province and Other
              provinces indicated that they never used Bank research.




                                                25
The World Bank                                Zambia                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Meeting Zambia’s Knowledge Needs

       Across all respondents, the extent to which the Bank meets Zambia’s needs for
        knowledge services received a mean rating of 6.2 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to no
        degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from independent
              government institutions gave the highest ratings for the Bank meeting Zambia’s
              needs for knowledge services whereas respondents from faith-based groups and
              other organizations gave the lowest ratings. Respondents across all geographic
              locations gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank meeting Zambia’s needs
              for knowledge services.




                                                26
The World Bank                                        Zambia                                    Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Knowledge: Focusing Bank Research
    Respondents indicated that it would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its research
      and knowledge efforts on education, agricultural development, and poverty reduction.
      Domestic private sector development and job creation/employment were other research
      areas considered valuable. Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies also
      indicated that the Bank should focus its research on inclusive economic growth.
           Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey indicated that it would be most
              valuable for the Bank to focus on education (40%) and health (28%) in Zambia.




       *
        Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’ 07 survey.
                                                        27
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Effectiveness

       Across all respondents, the effectiveness of the World Bank’s knowledge and research to
        provide support for program implementation received the highest mean rating, 6.9, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not at all effective and 10 being very effective.
             Consultants on Bank projects/respondents from PMUs and respondents from the
              private sector/financial/private banks and independent government institutions
              gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and
              research to stimulate public debate/dialogue whereas respondents from faith-
              based groups, local citizens, and other organizations gave significantly lower
              ratings. Respondents from CBOs, the media, and independent government
              institutions gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge
              and research to contribute to good policy making whereas respondents from
              bilateral or multilateral agencies, NGOs, faith-based groups, local citizens, and
              other organizations gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from the media
              and faith-based groups gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s
              knowledge and research to provide support for program implementation whereas
              respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies, NGOs, and other
              organizations gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents across all stakeholder
              groups had statistically similar ratings for the effectiveness of the Bank’s
              knowledge and research in the other two areas.
             Respondents across all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for
              the effectiveness of the Bank’s knowledge and research in these areas.




                                                28
The World Bank                                 Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Qualities

       Across all respondents, the World Bank’s knowledge and research being a source of
        relevant information on global good practices received the highest mean rating, 7.2, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from the Lusaka, Central, and Copperbelt provinces gave the highest
              ratings that the Bank’s research is accessible whereas respondents from the
              Western province gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from the Lusaka
              and Copperbelt provinces gave the highest ratings that the Bank’s research is a
              source of relevant information on global good practices whereas respondents from
              the Southern, Western, and Other provinces gave significantly lower ratings.
              Respondents from the Copperbelt province gave the highest ratings that the
              Bank’s research is adequately disseminated whereas respondents from the
              Western and Other provinces gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents across
              all geographic locations had statistically similar ratings for the other qualities of
              the Bank’s research.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings for
              these qualities of the Bank’s research.




                                                29
The World Bank                                 Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Contribution

       Across all respondents, the significance of the contribution that the World Bank’s
        knowledge and research make to development results in Zambia received a mean rating
        of 6.8 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not significant at all and 10 being very
        significant.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the private
              sector/financial sector/private banks gave the highest ratings for the contribution
              that the Bank’s knowledge and research make to development results in Zambia
              whereas respondents from the office of the President gave the lowest ratings.
              Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for
              the contribution that the Bank’s knowledge and research make to development
              results in Zambia.




                                                30
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Technical Quality

       Across all respondents, the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge and
        research received a mean rating of 7.5 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being very low
        technical quality and 10 being very high technical quality.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from academia/research
              institutes gave the highest ratings for the technical quality of the Bank’s
              knowledge and research whereas respondents from CBOs gave the lowest ratings.
              Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for
              the technical quality of the Bank’s knowledge and research.




                                                31
The World Bank                                 Zambia                               Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Linkage to Non-Bank Expertise

       Across all respondents, the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage to non-Bank
        expertise received a mean rating of 6.1 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being not effective at
        all and 10 being very effective.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from the office of the
              President gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at providing
              linkage to non-Bank expertise whereas respondents from academia/research
              institutes gave the lowest ratings. Respondents across all geographic locations
              gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness at providing linkage
              to non-Bank expertise.




                                                 32
The World Bank                                 Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Knowledge: Value for Money

       Across all respondents, Zambia receiving value for money from the Bank’s fee-for-
        service products/service received a mean rating of 6.5 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being to
        no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, local citizens gave the highest ratings
              for the value for money of the Bank’s fee-for-service products whereas
              respondents from independent government institutions gave the lowest ratings.
              Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for
              the value for money of the Bank’s fee-for-service products.




                                                 33
The World Bank                               Zambia                             Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Most Effective

       Over half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank’s investment lending was its
        most effective instrument in helping Zambia reduce poverty. Respondents also indicated
        that the Banks capacity development, policy-based lending/budget support to the
        Government, and technical assistance were also quite effective.




                                               34
The World Bank                               Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Least Effective

       Nearly a third of all respondents indicated that the Bank’s Trust Fund management was
        least effective in helping Zambia reduce poverty. A quarter of all respondents indicated
        that the World Bank’s knowledge products/service, policy-based lending/ budget support
        to the Government, technical assistance, and capacity development were least effective.




                                               35
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VII. World Bank Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Instruments: Meeting Zambia’s Needs

       Across all respondents, agreement that the Bank’s financial instruments meet Zambia’s
        needs received a mean rating of 5.8 on a 10-point scale, with 1 being strongly disagree
        and 10 being strongly agree.
             Although it was not a significant difference, respondents from academia/research
              institutes had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank’s financial instruments
              meet Zambia’s needs whereas respondents from faith-based groups and the office
              of the President had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents across
              all geographic locations had statistically similar levels of agreement that the
              Bank’s financial instruments meet Zambia’s needs.




                                                36
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates

The World Bank’s Work in Zambia

       In terms of its work, the World Bank currently playing a relevant role in development in
        Zambia received the highest mean level of agreement, 7.1, across all respondents, on a
        10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of
              agreement that the Bank plays a relevant role in Zambia’s development, that the
              programs and strategies the Bank supports are realistic for Zambia, and that the
              Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Zambia with respect compared to
              respondents from the FY ’07 country survey. In addition, respondents in this
              year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement regarding all
              of these aspects of the Bank’s work in Zambia compared to respondents from the
              FY ’04 country survey.
             Respondents from the Central province had the highest levels of agreement that
              the Bank is aligned with their development priorities whereas respondents from
              the Western province had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents
              across all geographic locations had statistically similar levels of agreement
              regarding the other aspects of the Bank’s work in Zambia.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement regarding these aspects of the Bank’s work in Zambia.




                                                37
The World Bank                                 Zambia                               Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions

       Across all respondents, agreement that the World Bank provides effective
        implementation support and that working with the World Bank increases Zambia’s
        institutional capacity both received the highest mean rating, 7.1, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.




                                                 38
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement
        that the Bank disburses funds promptly compared to respondents in the FY ’07 country
        survey, but statistically similar levels of agreement as respondents in the FY ’04 country
        survey. Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of
        agreement that working with the World Bank increases Zambia’s institutional capacity
        compared to respondents in the FY ’07 and FY ’04 country surveys. Respondents in this
        year’s country survey had statistically similar levels of agreement that the World Bank
        effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it supports as respondents in
        the FY ’07 and FY ’04 country surveys and statistically similar levels of agreement that
        that the World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending as respondents in the
        FY ’07 country survey.

       There were three instances in which there were significant stakeholder group differences
        across these aspects of how the World Bank operates.
             Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and local
              citizens had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank disburses funds
              promptly and that the Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely manner
              whereas respondents from CBOs and independent government institutions had
              significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, the media, and
              local citizens had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank’s teams and visits
              are well coordinated whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies
              had significantly lower levels of agreement.

       There was just one instance in which there was a significant difference between
        geographic locations across these aspects of how the World Bank operates.
             Respondents from the Copperbelt province had the highest levels of agreement
              that the Bank disburses funds promptly whereas respondent from the Western and
              Other provinces had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                39
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



VIII. How the World Bank Operates (continued)
The World Bank as an Effective Development Partner
    Across all respondents, the extent to which the World Bank is an effective development
      partner in terms of its collaboration with the Government in Zambia received the highest
      mean rating, 8.1, on a 10-point scale with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a
      very significant degree.
           Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and the media
              gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s collaboration with groups outside of the
              Government whereas respondents from NGOs gave significantly lower ratings.
              Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar ratings for the
              other aspects of the Bank as an effective development partner.
           Respondents from the Central province gave significantly higher ratings for the
              Bank’s flexibility (in terms of the country and the institution), being inclusive,
              and staff accessibility compared to respondents from all other locations.
              Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for
              the other aspects of the Bank as an effective development partner.




                                                40
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Zambia

Role Significance

       Respondents indicated that the Bank should play a fairly significant role in Zambia’s
        development in the near future, receiving a mean rating of 8.4 across all respondents on a
        10-point scale with 1 being not a significant role and 10 being very significant role.
             Respondents from the Western and Other provinces gave the highest ratings for
              the role significance that the Bank should have whereas respondents from the
              Copperbelt province gave significantly lower ratings.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar ratings for the
              role significance that the Bank should have in Zambia’s near future.




                                                41
The World Bank                                           Zambia                                     Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Zambia (continued)

Making the Bank of Greater Value

       Nearly half of all respondents indicated that the World Bank should reduce the
        complexity of obtaining Bank financing to make itself of greater value in Zambia.
        Respondents also indicated that the Bank should improve the quality of its experts as
        related to Zambia’s specific challenges. Respondents from bilateral or multilateral
        agencies indicated that the Bank should also ensure greater selectivity in its work,
        respondents from CBOs indicated that the Bank should offer more innovative financial
        products, and respondents from the Central province indicated that the Bank should also
        provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Zambia’s economy.
                 Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey* indicated that the World Bank should
                  improve the quality of its experts as related to Zambia’s specific challenges (33%)
                  and reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing (28%) to make
                  itself of greater value to Zambia.




        *
            Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’ 07 survey.

                                                           42
The World Bank                                Zambia                             Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Zambia (continued)

Collaborating in Zambia

       Respondents indicated that the World Bank should work more closely with local
        government, the private sector, NGOs, and beneficiaries to ensure better development
        results in Zambia. In addition, respondents from the media indicated that the Bank should
        work more with the media, respondents from faith-based groups indicated that the Bank
        should work more with faith-based organizations, and respondents from academia/
        research institutes indicated that the Bank should work more with academia/think
        tanks/research institutes.




                                                43
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank in Zambia (continued)

Influencing the Global Development Agenda

       Across all respondents, the extent to which respondents believed the World Bank should
        influence the global development agenda received a mean rating of 7.8 on a 10-point
        scale, with 1 being to no degree at all and 10 being to a very significant degree.
             Respondents from the Central and Other provinces gave the highest ratings for the
              extent to which the Bank should influence the global development agenda
              whereas respondents from the Copperbelt province gave significantly lower
              ratings.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar ratings for the
              extent to which the World Bank should influence the global development agenda.




                                                44
The World Bank                                          Zambia                                     Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Nearly three-quarters of all respondents indicated that they got most of their information
        about economic and social development issues in Zambia from local newspapers. The
        Internet, local television, and local radio were other popular information sources.
                Respondents in the FY ’07 country survey* also indicated that they got most of
                 their information about economic and social development issues in Zambia from
                 local newspapers (73%).




        *
            Not all of the response options provided in the FY ’12 survey were provided in the FY ’0 7 survey.




                                                           45
The World Bank                               Zambia                            Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sources (continued)

       When asked how they would prefer to receive information from the World Bank,
        respondents indicated that the World Bank website, World Bank publications and other
        written materials, World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences, e-Newsletters, and
        direct contact with World Bank staff would be preferred.




                                              46
The World Bank                                Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       Less than a quarter of all respondents indicated that they were aware of the Bank’s
        Access to Information policy.
             Respondents from the Copperbelt province were significantly more likely to be
              aware of the Bank’s Access to Information policy compared to respondents from
              all other geographic locations.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              awareness for the Bank’s Access to Information policy.




       Less than a quarter of all respondents indicated that they had requested information from
        the World Bank in the past year.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of requesting information from the World Bank.




                                                47
The World Bank                                Zambia                               Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       More than three-quarters of all respondents who indicated that they had requested
        information from the World Bank indicated that they were able to obtain this information.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
              statistically similar rates of obtaining their requested information.




       Agreement that respondents use more data from the World Bank as a result of its Open
        Data policy received a mean rating of 4.7, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
              statistically similar levels of agreement that they use more data from the World
              Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data policy.




                                                48
The World Bank                                 Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       Nearly all respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet.
             Respondents from CBOs and local citizens had significantly lower rates of
              Internet access compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from the Central province had significantly lower rates of Internet
              access compared to respondents from other geographic locations.




Website Usage

       Over half all respondents indicated that they had used the Bank’s website, statistically
        similar to the rates of website usage found in the FY ’07 country survey.
             Respondents from the office of the President, CBOs, and local citizens had
              significantly lower rates of Bank website usage compared to respondents from
              other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from the Central, Southern, and Western provinces had significantly
              lower rates of Bank website usage compared to respondents from other
              geographic locations.




                                                 49
The World Bank                               Zambia                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage (continued)

       Of those respondents who used the Bank’s website, more than two-thirds indicated that
        they used the World Bank’s main website, significantly fewer than in the FY ’07 survey.
             Respondents from CBOs, the media, and local citizens were significantly more
              likely to use the Bank’s country website compared to respondents from other
              stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from the Western and Central provinces were significantly more
              likely to use the Bank’s country website compared to respondents from other
              geographic locations.




                                               50
The World Bank                                Zambia                               Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Evaluation

       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s websites, agreement that
        respondents find the information on the Bank’s websites useful received the highest mean
        rating, 8.1, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with 1 being strongly disagree and
        10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, local citizens,
              and other organizations had the highest levels of agreement that Bank websites
              are easy to navigate and that they find the information on Bank websites useful
              whereas respondents from CBOs had significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Respondents from the Central and Western provinces had significantly lower
              levels of agreement that they find the information on the Bank’s websites useful
              and that the Bank websites are easy to navigate compared to respondents from
              other geographic locations.




                                                51
The World Bank                                 Zambia                               Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
PIC Usage
       Less than a quarter of all respondents in this year’s country survey indicated that they had
        used the Bank’s PICs in Zambia, statistically similar to the usage of the Bank’s PICs in
        the FY ’07 country survey.
             Respondents from the Copperbelt province were significantly more likely to have
               used the Bank’s PICs in Zambia compared to respondents from other locations.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar rates of usage
               for the World Bank’s PICs.




PIC Evaluation
       Among those respondents who utilized the World Bank’s PICs, agreement that
        respondents find them to be a valuable source of information related to development in
        Zambia received a mean rating of 5.9, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had
               statistically similar levels of agreement regarding the value of the Bank’s PICs.




                                                 52
The World Bank                                Zambia                             Country Survey 2012



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       In terms of the Bank’s information sharing in Zambia, respondents had the highest level
        of agreement that the Bank is responsive to their information requests and inquiries,
        receiving a mean rating of 6.2, across all respondents, on a 10-point scale with
        1 being strongly disagree and 10 being strongly agree.
             Respondents from the Western province had significantly lower levels of
              agreement that the Bank is responsive to their information requests and inquiries
              compared to respondents from other geographic locations. Respondents across all
              geographic locations had statistically similar levels of agreement that when they
              need information from the World Bank they know how to find it.
             Respondents across all stakeholder groups had statistically similar levels of
              agreement that when they need information from the World Bank they know how
              to find it and that the Bank is responsive to their information requests and
              inquiries.




                                               53
The World Bank                                  Zambia                              Country Survey 2012



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 55


          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 72


          C. Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location .................... 91


          D. Responses to All Questions by Year............................................ 106


          E. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank........ 108


          F. World Bank Client Survey 2012 – Zambia Questionnaire ........... 109




                                              ZAMBIA




                                                 54
The World Bank                                     Zambia                                    Country Survey 2012


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=312)
A. General Issues facing Zambia
                                          Economically              Politically                Socially
1. In general, would you say that         Percentage of            Percentage of            Percentage of
  Zambia is headed in...?              Respondents (N=293)      Respondents (N=295)      Respondents (N=278)
The right direction                          71.0%                       58.6%                  50.0%
The wrong direction                          15.0%                       20.0%                  18.0%
Not sure                                     14.0%                       21.4%                  32.0%
2. When considering development priorities, which ONE             Percentage of Respondents (N=219)
   development priority below is the most important in
   Zambia? Which ONE is the second most important
                                                                            nd          rd
   development priority? Which ONE is the third most           Most         2 Most      3 Most
   important priority?                                       Important     Important   Important    Combined
Education                                                      19.2%         12.3%       5.7%         37.2%
Poverty reduction                                              19.6%         5.0%        3.9%         28.6%
Job creation/employment                                        5.9%          13.7%       7.8%         27.5%
Rural development                                              13.2%         5.9%        7.8%         27.0%
Agricultural development                                       7.8%          5.9%        10.9%        24.6%
Governance                                                     5.9%          6.8%        4.3%         17.1%
Domestic private sector development                            4.1%          4.1%        3.9%         12.1%
Health                                                         2.3%          5.0%        3.9%         11.2%
Access to finance                                              2.7%          3.7%        4.3%         10.7%
Transport                                                      1.4%          3.7%        4.3%         9.4%
Anti-corruption                                                2.7%          2.3%        4.3%         9.4%
Basic infrastructure                                           1.4%          3.2%        3.9%         8.5%
Natural resource management                                    1.8%          5.9%        0.4%         8.2%
Foreign direct investment                                      1.8%          2.7%        3.5%         8.0%
Inclusive economic growth                                      2.3%          2.3%        2.6%         7.2%
Public financial management                                    1.8%          2.7%        1.3%         5.9%
Water and sanitation                                           0.5%          2.7%        2.6%         5.8%
Energy                                                         1.8%          0.9%        2.2%         4.9%
Social protection                                              0.9%          1.8%        0.9%         3.6%
Gender                                                         0.0%          0.9%        2.6%         3.5%
Food security                                                  0.5%          2.3%        0.4%         3.2%
Livestock sector development                                   0.0%          0.9%        2.2%         3.1%
Climate change                                                 0.5%          0.5%        2.2%         3.1%
Trade and exports                                              0.0%          1.4%        1.3%         2.7%
Urban development                                              0.5%          0.5%        1.7%         2.7%
Environmental sustainability                                   0.0%          0.0%        2.6%         2.6%
Information and communications technology                      0.5%          0.5%        1.3%         2.2%
Equality of opportunity                                        0.0%          0.5%        1.7%         2.2%
Public sector reform                                           0.5%          0.5%        0.9%         1.8%
Law and justice                                                0.0%          0.0%        1.7%         1.7%
Regulatory framework                                           0.0%          0.0%        1.3%         1.3%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                         0.0%          0.9%        0.0%         0.9%
Regional integration                                           0.0%          0.5%        0.4%         0.9%
Global integration                                             0.5%          0.0%        0.4%         0.9%
Financial markets                                              0.0%          0.0%        0.4%         0.4%
Crime and violence                                             0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Disaster management                                            0.0%          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%


                                                     55
The World Bank                                     Zambia                            Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many
    different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do
    you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Zambia?      Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than THREE)                                         (Responses Combined; N=308)
Education                                                                           36.4%
Job creation/employment                                                             33.4%
Rural development                                                                   32.5%
Agricultural development                                                            30.8%
Access to finance                                                                   23.4%
Inclusive economic growth                                                           14.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                 12.7%
Health                                                                              10.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                 9.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                              9.7%
Anti-corruption                                                                      9.1%
Transport                                                                            8.8%
Governance                                                                           8.1%
Food security                                                                        7.8%
Basic infrastructure                                                                 6.5%
Natural resource management                                                          6.5%
Energy                                                                               5.2%
Public financial management                                                          4.2%
Trade and exports                                                                    3.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                            3.6%
Livestock sector development                                                         3.6%
Social protection                                                                    2.6%
Regional integration                                                                 2.3%
Gender                                                                               1.9%
Climate change                                                                       1.6%
Urban development                                                                    1.3%
Law and justice                                                                      1.3%
Global integration                                                                   1.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                         1.3%
Public sector reform                                                                 1.0%
Regulatory framework                                                                 0.6%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                               0.3%
Information and communications technology                                            0.3%
Financial markets                                                                    0.3%
Disaster management                                                                  0.0%
Crime and violence                                                                   0.0%




                                                     56
The World Bank                                            Zambia                                    Country Survey 2012


A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE
    areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating                       Percentage of Respondents
    economic growth in Zambia? (Choose no more than THREE)                             (Responses Combined; N=304)
Agricultural development                                                                           27.3%
Education                                                                                          24.0%
Access to finance                                                                                  22.4%
Energy                                                                                             21.7%
Job creation/employment                                                                            21.1%
Domestic private sector development                                                                19.4%
Trade and exports                                                                                  19.1%
Rural development                                                                                  15.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                                          15.8%
Natural resource management                                                                        15.1%
Governance                                                                                         12.2%
Transport                                                                                          11.8%
Anti-corruption                                                                                    11.5%
Basic infrastructure                                                                                9.5%
Equality of opportunity                                                                             8.6%
Public financial management                                                                         6.6%
Health                                                                                              5.6%
Global integration                                                                                  4.3%
Information and communications technology                                                           3.9%
Financial markets                                                                                   3.3%
Food security                                                                                       2.6%
Public sector reform                                                                                2.0%
Livestock sector development                                                                        2.0%
Social protection                                                                                   1.6%
Water and sanitation                                                                                1.6%
Regulatory framework                                                                                1.6%
Regional integration                                                                                1.3%
Gender                                                                                              1.3%
Law and justice                                                                                     1.3%
Climate change                                                                                      1.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                                        1.0%
Urban development                                                                                   0.7%
Disaster management                                                                                 0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                              0.0%
Crime and violence                                                                                  0.0%


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank

Familiarity, Overall Effectiveness, Preparedness                                            N       Mean        SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in Zambia, on a ten-
                                                                                           304      6.26       2.32
   point scale? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank's effectiveness in
                                                                                           280      6.03       2.07
   Zambia, on a ten-point scale. (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank’s staff is well prepared to help
   Zambia solve its most complicated development challenges, on a ten-point                256      6.89       2.16
   scale, on a ten-point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


                                                            57
The World Bank                                    Zambia                            Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact
    on development results in Zambia, in which sectoral areas do you
    believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and        Percentage of Respondents
    resources in Zambia? (Choose no more than THREE)                   (Responses Combined; N=307)
Rural development                                                                  42.0%
Education                                                                          34.9%
Agricultural development                                                           26.4%
Poverty reduction                                                                  20.5%
Governance                                                                         16.0%
Domestic private sector development                                                13.4%
Transport                                                                          13.0%
Health                                                                             12.7%
Job creation/employment                                                            12.1%
Basic infrastructure                                                               10.7%
Public financial management                                                        10.4%
Energy                                                                              9.4%
Access to finance                                                                   9.4%
Natural resource management                                                         8.8%
Water and sanitation                                                                8.5%
Inclusive economic growth                                                           6.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                           5.5%
Public sector reform                                                                4.2%
Livestock sector development                                                        4.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                     4.2%
Food security                                                                       3.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                             2.9%
Information and communications technology                                           2.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                        2.0%
Climate change                                                                      2.0%
Trade and exports                                                                   2.0%
Regulatory framework                                                                2.0%
Social protection                                                                   1.6%
Gender                                                                              1.6%
Financial markets                                                                   1.6%
Regional integration                                                                1.3%
Global integration                                                                  1.3%
Law and justice                                                                     1.0%
Urban development                                                                   0.3%
Crime and violence                                                                  0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                              0.0%
Disaster management                                                                 0.0%




                                                    58
The World Bank                                           Zambia                                    Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                               Percentage of Respondents (N=256)
5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do
                                                                                           nd
   you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second        Greatest      2 Greatest
   greatest value in Zambia?                                                Value          Value        Combined
Financial resources                                                         45.7%          15.1%          60.8%
Technical assistance                                                        14.8%          20.2%          35.0%
Training/capacity building                                                  15.6%          15.9%          31.5%
Policy advice                                                               9.8%           14.0%          23.7%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                  7.0%           9.3%           16.3%
Donor coordination                                                          2.0%           10.9%          12.8%
Studies/analyses                                                            2.0%           6.2%           8.2%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                               1.6%           3.5%           5.1%
Data                                                                        1.2%           2.7%           3.9%
Convening/facilitating                                                      0.0%           1.9%           1.9%
Other                                                                       0.4%           0.4%           0.8%

6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest                 Percentage of Respondents
   WEAKNESSES in its work in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)                       (Responses Combined; N=298)
Too influenced by developed countries                                                            28.5%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                      25.5%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                            21.5%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                         19.1%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                   16.8%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Zambia                                 15.1%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                     13.8%
World Bank processes too slow and complex                                                        13.4%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                          9.4%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                            9.1%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                               7.4%
Not client focused                                                                                3.4%
Other                                                                                             3.4%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                          2.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                             1.7%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                               1.7%

7. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in               Percentage of Respondents
   reducing poverty in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)                             (Responses Combined; N=301)
Investment lending                                                                               52.5%
Capacity development                                                                             38.2%
Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                                           33.2%
Technical assistance                                                                             32.9%
Knowledge products/services                                                                       9.6%
Don’t know                                                                                        8.6%
Trust Fund management                                                                             8.0%
Other                                                                                             1.7%




                                                           59
The World Bank                                        Zambia                                   Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the LEAST effective in         Percentage of Respondents
   reducing poverty in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)                        (Responses Combined; N=290)
Trust Fund management                                                                       32.1%
Knowledge products/services                                                                 26.6%
Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government                                      24.8%
Technical assistance                                                                        22.8%
Capacity development                                                                        22.1%
Don’t know                                                                                  20.3%
Investment lending                                                                          16.2%
Other                                                                                        0.3%

Global Development Agenda                                                                 N      Mean       SD
9. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the
    global development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate
                                                                                         277      7.77     2.18
    change, communicable diseases, international financial systems, trade, etc.), on a
    ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

10. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its
  main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World
  Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better                     Percentage of Respondents
  development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=307)
Local Government                                                                            34.9%
Private sector                                                                              30.0%
NGOs                                                                                        29.0%
Beneficiaries                                                                               26.4%
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                        21.2%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                    19.5%
Parliament                                                                                   9.8%
Donor community                                                                              9.4%
Faith based organizations                                                                    7.8%
Media                                                                                        6.8%
Other                                                                                        2.3%
Foundations                                                                                  1.3%

                                                                                          Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s
work in Zambia, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)           N      Mean        SD
11. Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Zambia      284     7.14      2.16
12. The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I consider the development priorities
                                                                                         272     6.42      2.29
    for Zambia
13. The World Bank supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Zambia        272     6.37      2.32
14. The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Zambia with respect                252     7.02      2.41




                                                        60
The World Bank                                            Zambia                                     Country Survey 2012


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

                                                                                                       Degree
To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Zambia in
terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)        N      Mean       SD
15. Responsiveness                                                                             253      6.16     2.09
16. Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products and services)                           244      5.31     2.19
17. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                   249      5.49     2.19
18. Being inclusive                                                                            253      5.67     2.34
19. Openness (sharing data and other information)                                              264      6.25     2.48
20. Staff accessibility                                                                        250      5.47     2.54
21. Straightforwardness and honesty                                                            253      6.75     2.33
22. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                                        254      6.30     2.48
23. Collaboration with the Government                                                          274      8.07     1.71
24. Collaboration with other donors                                                            230      7.77     2.04
25. Follow through over time                                                                   202      6.62     2.27

26. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
  place, which of the following would you attribute this to?                            Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                           (Responses Combined; N=294)
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                             26.5%
The Government works inefficiently                                                                24.8%
The World Bank does not reach out enough to non-state actors                                      23.1%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                   21.8%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                 18.4%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                               17.0%
The World Bank works too slowly                                                                   14.3%
The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                14.3%
ground
Inadequate consultation                                                                         11.2%
The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                     6.8%
Poor donor coordination                                                                          6.5%
Support not in the right area                                                                    6.5%
Other                                                                                            2.4%




                                                            61
The World Bank                                       Zambia                                Country Survey 2012


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the         Effectiveness
following areas of development in Zambia, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                           N       Mean      SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                                217      5.54     2.57
2.    Information and communications technology                                      211      5.95     2.17
3.    Transport                                                                      235      6.60     2.26
4.    Crime and violence                                                             185      3.89     2.23
5.    Law and justice                                                                201      4.84     2.51
6.    Urban development                                                              239      6.31     2.08
7.    Environmental sustainability                                                   230      6.50     2.17
8.    Regulatory framework                                                           217      6.37     2.19
9.    Basic infrastructure                                                           241      6.55     2.09
10.   Communicable/non-communicable disease                                          226      6.32     2.40
11.   Poverty reduction                                                              259      6.78     2.25
12.   Gender                                                                         215      6.08     2.12
13.   Domestic private sector development                                            227      6.08     2.26
14.   Foreign direct investment                                                      220      6.64     2.07
15.   Water and sanitation                                                           252      7.01     2.03
16.   Trade and exports                                                              207      5.94     2.20
17.   Economic growth                                                                247      7.12     2.07
18.   Energy                                                                         233      6.73     2.00
19.   Disaster management                                                            206      5.78     2.16
20.   Monitoring and evaluation                                                      215      6.51     2.19
21.   Public financial management                                                    227      6.71     2.16
22.   Job creation/employment                                                        221      4.67     2.20
23.   Financial markets                                                              213      5.82     2.11
24.   Equality of opportunity                                                        197      5.27     2.28
25.   Health                                                                         250      7.10     2.03
26.   Rural development                                                              251      6.18     2.35
27.   Global integration                                                             217      6.59     2.11
28.   Governance                                                                     243      6.51     2.21
29.   Food security                                                                  226      6.06     2.25
30.   Education                                                                      248      6.60     2.20
31.   Social protection                                                              203      4.74     2.34
32.   Climate change                                                                 228      5.89     2.19
33.   Public sector reform                                                           241      6.75     2.03
34. Regional integration                                                             216      6.33     2.13
35. Agricultural development                                                         251      6.50     2.25
36. Natural resource management                                                      216      5.88     2.40




                                                       62
The World Bank                                                 Zambia                        Country Survey 2012


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

Achieving Sustainable Results                                                           N      Mean       SD
37. To what extent does the World Bank’s work help achieve sustainable development
    results in Zambia, on a ten point scale?                                           278      6.58     1.84
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank
    in Zambia, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)           N      Mean       SD
38. The World Bank’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending, Development
                                                                                       276      5.75     2.19
    Policy Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.) meet the needs of Zambia
39. The World Bank meets Zambia’s needs for knowledge services (e.g., research
                                                                                       272      6.23     2.19
    analysis, data, technical assistance)



D. The World Bank’s Knowledge

1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research             Percentage of Respondents
   (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?                                  (N=302)
Weekly                                                                                    5.3%
Monthly                                                                                   9.6%
A few times a year                                                                       37.1%
Rarely                                                                                   24.2%
Never                                                                                    23.8%




                                                                63
The World Bank                                        Zambia                                Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

2. When thinking about the development challenges in Zambia, where do
    you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its
    research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?                        Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than THREE)                                                (Responses Combined; N=303)
Education                                                                                  32.7%
Agricultural development                                                                   28.1%
Poverty reduction                                                                          24.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                        21.1%
Job creation/employment                                                                    20.8%
Rural development                                                                          15.8%
Governance (building strong institutions/government effectiveness)                         13.9%
Health                                                                                     12.9%
Public sector reform                                                                       11.6%
Inclusive economic growth                                                                  11.6%
Water and sanitation                                                                       11.2%
Energy                                                                                     10.6%
Access to finance                                                                           8.3%
Trade and exports                                                                           7.3%
Livestock sector development                                                                6.3%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                            6.3%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                        6.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                             5.9%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                      5.0%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                              4.3%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                               4.3%
Gender                                                                                      3.6%
Foreign direct investment                                                                   3.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                                3.3%
Basic infrastructure                                                                        3.3%
Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)                3.0%
Financial markets                                                                           2.3%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                     2.0%
Food security                                                                               2.0%
Information and communications technology                                                   1.7%
Regulatory framework                                                                        1.7%
Disaster management                                                                         1.3%
Global integration                                                                          1.3%
Urban development                                                                           0.3%
Regional integration                                                                        0.3%
Crime and violence                                                                          0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                      0.0%




                                                        64
The World Bank                                                  Zambia                                  Country Survey 2012


D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at…                    Level of Effectiveness
in Zambia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                           N      Mean        SD
3. Raising your awareness of the particular topic                                               259      5.76      2.34
4.   Stimulating public debate/dialogue                                                         260      5.60      2.32
5.   Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills                                                     267      6.07      2.33
6.   Contributing to good policy making                                                         268      6.79      2.10
7.   Providing support for program implementation                                               264      6.94      2.13


To what extent do you believe that the World B ank’s knowledge and research…                            Degree
in Zambia? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                             N       Mean       SD
8.   Are timely                                                                                 239      5.76     2.22
9.   Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                    251      5.81     2.23
10. Are relevant to Zambia's development priorities                                             265      6.75     2.05
11. Provide feasible recommendations                                                            253      6.51     1.94
12. Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                        253      6.24     2.32
13. A source of relevant information on global good practices                                   256      7.21     1.99
14. Are adequately disseminated                                                                 257      5.36     2.45
15. Are appropriately translated                                                                232      5.22     2.62
16. Are adaptable to Zambia's specific development challenges and circumstances                 258      6.08     2.41


Overall Evaluations                                                                                 N     Mean       SD
17. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank ’s knowledge
    and research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?               273      6.77     1.96
     (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
18. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank ’s knowledge/
    research, on a ten point scale?                                                               272      7.52     1.83
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
19. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise
                                                                                                  199      6.09     2.02
    (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing, etc.) ? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
20. To what extent do you believe that Zambia received value for money from the
    World Bank’s products/services that were paid for on a fee for service basis?                 215      6.47     2.03
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                 65
The World Bank                                                Zambia                           Country Survey 2012


E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten            Level of Agreement
point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                   N      Mean      SD
1. The World Bank disburses funds promptly                                             224      5.45    2.30
2. The World Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it
                                                                                       261       7.05     2.19
    supports
3. The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                 232       5.92     2.38
4.   The World Bank’s “Safeguard Policy” requirements are reasonable                   206       6.20     2.17
5.   The World Bank imposes reasonable conditions on its lending                       249       5.64     2.35
6.   Working with the World Bank increases Zambia’s institutional capacity             269       7.11     2.12
7.   The World Bank ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes           195       6.17     2.31
8.  The World Bank’s teams and visits are well coordinated                             218       6.64     2.38
9.  Where country systems are adequate (e.g., procurement, financial
                                                                                       208       6.75     2.29
    management, etc.), the World Bank makes appropriate use of them
10. The World Bank provides effective implementation support (i.e., supervision of
                                                                                       255       7.12     2.20
    projects)



F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Zambia

The Bank’s Role                                                                         N       Mean      SD
1. How significant a role do you believe the Bank SHOULD play in Zambia’s
development in the near future, on a ten point scale?                                  292      8.36     1.80
(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)

2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of              Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=295)
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing                                     47.5%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Zambia's specific challenges               35.6%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Zambia's
                                                                                             22.0%
economy
Offer more innovative financial products                                                     18.0%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                             15.6%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                       14.6%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                     14.2%
Work faster                                                                                  10.5%
Focus primarily on advocacy issues                                                            7.5%
Other                                                                                         4.7%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                                   2.0%




                                                               66
The World Bank                                       Zambia                             Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing

1. Where do you get most of your information about economic and social       Percentage of Respondents
  development issues in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)                  (Responses Combined; N=302)
Local newspapers                                                                       72.5%
Internet                                                                               38.1%
Local television                                                                       31.1%
Local radio                                                                            22.8%
Periodicals                                                                            10.6%
International television                                                                7.3%
International newspapers                                                                4.0%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                               3.3%
Other                                                                                   3.3%
International radio                                                                     2.3%
Mobile phones                                                                           0.7%
Instant messaging                                                                       0.3%
Blogs                                                                                   0.0%

2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?          Percentage of Respondents
  (Choose no more than TWO)                                                (Responses Combined; N=302)
World Bank website                                                                     38.7%
World Bank publications and other written materials                                    34.1%
World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                                              33.1%
e-Newsletters                                                                          26.8%
Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)               25.8%
World Bank Public Information Center                                                   14.6%
Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                                               9.6%
Mobile phones                                                                           6.0%
Other                                                                                   3.3%
Instant messaging                                                                       2.6%
Blogs                                                                                   1.0%

3. Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under
    which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession      Percentage of Respondents
    that is not a list of exceptions?                                                (N=284)
Yes                                                                                   21.8%
No                                                                                    78.2%

4. Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities     Percentage of Respondents
    in the past year?                                                                (N=280)
Yes                                                                                   20.4%
No                                                                                    79.6%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                         (N=53)
Yes                                                                                   77.4%
No                                                                                    22.6%

                                                                            Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                               (N=280)
Yes                                                                                   92.1%
No                                                                                     7.9%



                                                       67
The World Bank                                      Zambia                                   Country Survey 2012


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank website?                                           (N=281)
Yes                                                                                        56.2%
No                                                                                         43.8%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                            (N=176)
The World Bank’s country website (www. worldbank.org/zambia)                               31.8%
The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)                                          68.2%

9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information                  Percentage of Respondents
    Centers (PICs) in Zambia?                                                             (N=290)
Yes                                                                                        38.5%
No                                                                                         44.6%
I don’t know what a PIC is                                                                 16.9%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point           Level of Agreement
scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                       N       Mean      SD
10. I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the organization’s Open
                                                                                     206      4.71      2.72
    Data policy
11. The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of information related to
                                                                                      76      5.87      2.92
    development in Zambia
12. I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate                                  167      6.86      2.41
13. I find the information on the World Bank’s websites useful                       168      7.43      2.17
14. When I need information from the World Bank I know how to find it                205      6.03      2.96
15. The World Bank is responsive to my information requests and inquiries            174      6.16      2.66




                                                      68
The World Bank                                       Zambia                    Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information

1. Which of the following best describes your current position?   Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                       (N=295)
Employee of Ministry                                                        21.7%
NGO                                                                         14.6%
Private Sector                                                              12.2%
Local Citizens                                                               7.1%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                       5.4%
Other                                                                        5.4%
Media                                                                        5.1%
PMU                                                                          4.1%
Community-Based Organization                                                 4.1%
Independent Government Institution                                           3.7%
Faith-Based Group                                                            3.4%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                2.7%
Local Government                                                             2.4%
Consultant/Contractor on Bank-Supported Project                              1.7%
Multilateral Agency                                                          1.4%
Private Foundation                                                           1.4%
Office of the President/Prime Minister                                       1.0%
Trade Union                                                                  1.0%
Bilateral Agency                                                             0.7%
Judiciary Branch                                                             0.7%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                    0.3%




                                                       69
The World Bank                                        Zambia                             Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                 Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                 (N=294)
Other                                                                                 16.0%
Education                                                                              9.9%
Agricultural development                                                               7.5%
Poverty reduction                                                                      7.1%
Domestic private sector development                                                    5.1%
Energy                                                                                 4.8%
Governance                                                                             4.8%
Economic growth                                                                        4.4%
Health                                                                                 4.1%
Natural resource management                                                            3.7%
Financial markets                                                                      3.4%
Gender                                                                                 3.1%
Information and communications technology                                              3.1%
Environmental sustainability                                                           2.4%
Monitoring and evaluation                                                              2.4%
Public financial management                                                            2.4%
Anti-corruption                                                                        1.7%
Job creation/employment                                                                1.7%
Law and justice                                                                        1.4%
Rural development                                                                      1.4%
Trade and exports                                                                      1.4%
Water and sanitation                                                                   1.4%
Climate change                                                                         1.0%
Food security                                                                          1.0%
Public sector reform                                                                   1.0%
Regulatory framework                                                                   1.0%
Crime and violence                                                                     0.7%
Social protection                                                                      0.7%
Transport                                                                              0.7%
Disaster management                                                                    0.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                                0.3%
Urban development                                                                      0.3%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World         Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in your country?                                                              (N=292)
Yes                                                                                   53.4%
No                                                                                    46.6%

4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World      Percentage of Respondents
  Bank in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)                                          (N=281)
Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities                              38.1%
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)             35.6%
Use World Bank reports/data                                                           30.6%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                         28.8%
Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.                          26.7%




                                                        70
The World Bank                                       Zambia                Country Survey 2012


H. Background Information (continued)

                                                              Percentage of Respondents
5. Which best represents your geographic location?                     (N=298)
Lusaka province                                                         65.1%
Central province                                                         8.7%
Southern province                                                        8.1%
Western province                                                         6.7%
Copperbelt province                                                      5.7%
Northern province                                                        2.7%
North western province                                                   1.0%
Luapula province                                                         1.0%
Muchinga province                                                        0.7%
Eastern province                                                         0.3%




                                                      71
The World Bank                                                                                             Zambia                                                                                  Country Survey 2012


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

A. General Issues facing Zambia
In general, would you say that Zambia is headed in...?

 Economically                                       Office of                   Consultant on    Bilateral/       Private Sector/                             Independent    Faith-
                                                   President/     Employee of       Bank        Multilateral         Financial                                Government     Based                Local
 Percentage of Respondents                       Prime Minister    a Ministry   project/PMU       Agency        Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO    Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 The right direction                                 100.0%          68.3%         81.3%          100.0%               68.3%          71.4%   81.8%   92.3%       90.9%      60.0%      71.4%     65.0%      63.6%
 The wrong direction                                  0.0%           10.0%          6.3%            0.0%               19.5%          19.0%   18.2%   7.7%         0.0%      10.0%      21.4%     20.0%      18.2%
 Not sure                                             0.0%           21.7%         12.5%            0.0%               12.2%           9.5%    0.0%   0.0%         9.1%      30.0%      7.1%      15.0%      18.2%


 Politically                                        Office of                   Consultant on    Bilateral/       Private Sector/                             Independent    Faith-
                                                   President/     Employee of       Bank        Multilateral         Financial                                Government     Based                Local
 Percentage of Respondents                       Prime Minister    a Ministry   project/PMU       Agency        Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO    Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 The right direction                                 100.0%          67.2%         62.5%           33.3%               54.8%          57.1%   72.7%   57.1%       63.6%      50.0%      50.0%     38.9%      65.6%
 The wrong direction                                  0.0%           12.1%          0.0%           16.7%               19.0%          31.0%   18.2%   14.3%       18.2%      10.0%      31.3%     44.4%      21.9%
 Not sure                                             0.0%           20.7%         37.5%           50.0%               26.2%          11.9%    9.1%   28.6%       18.2%      40.0%      18.8%     16.7%      12.5%


 Socially                                           Office of                   Consultant on    Bilateral/       Private Sector/                             Independent    Faith-
                                                   President/     Employee of       Bank        Multilateral         Financial                                Government     Based                Local
 Percentage of Respondents                       Prime Minister    a Ministry   project/PMU       Agency        Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO    Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 The right direction                                 66.7%           48.2%         57.1%           33.3%               60.0%          52.5%   63.6%   33.3%       60.0%      40.0%      13.3%     44.4%      51.6%
 The wrong direction                                 33.3%           25.0%         14.3%            0.0%               15.0%          25.0%    9.1%   16.7%       20.0%      10.0%      26.7%     16.7%       6.5%
 Not sure                                             0.0%           26.8%         28.6%           66.7%               25.0%          22.5%   27.3%   50.0%       20.0%      50.0%      60.0%     38.9%      41.9%




                                                                                                           72
The World Bank                                                                                                     Zambia                                                                                            Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)

When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Zambia? Which ONE is the second most important development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   st
 1 Most Important                                        Office of                     Consultant on     Bilateral/       Private Sector/                                  Independent      Faith-
                                                        President/     Employee of         Bank         Multilateral         Financial                                     Government       Based                   Local
 Percentage of Respondents                            Prime Minister    a Ministry     project/PMU        Agency        Sector/Private Bank    NGO      CBO      Media      Institution     Group     Academia     Citizens    Other
 Rural development                                         0.0%           16.7%           13.3%            16.7%               12.1%           9.4%     0.0%     14.3%         22.2%        11.1%       16.7%       15.4%      14.8%
 Education                                                 0.0%           14.3%            6.7%             0.0%               18.2%          25.0%    16.7%     14.3%          0.0%        22.2%       25.0%       30.8%      22.2%
 Social protection                                        100.0%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.7%
 Transport                                                 0.0%            4.8%            6.7%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                         0.0%           21.4%            6.7%            33.3%               18.2%          28.1%    16.7%     14.3%         22.2%         0.0%       41.7%       15.4%      18.5%
 Public sector reform                                      0.0%            0.0%            6.7%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Regional integration                                      0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Gender                                                    0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                       0.0%            0.0%           13.3%             0.0%               9.1%            0.0%    16.7%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       8.3%         7.7%       3.7%
 Access to finance                                         0.0%            0.0%            6.7%             0.0%               3.0%            3.1%     0.0%      0.0%         11.1%        22.2%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                 0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               3.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%         11.1%         0.0%       8.3%         0.0%       3.7%
 Water and sanitation                                      0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.7%
 Anti-corruption                                           0.0%            2.4%            6.7%             0.0%               6.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       3.7%
 Livestock sector development                              0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Public financial management                               0.0%            4.8%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            3.1%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                   0.0%            7.1%           13.3%             0.0%               3.0%            6.3%     0.0%     28.6%         11.1%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       7.4%
 Governance                                                0.0%            2.4%            6.7%            16.7%               9.1%           15.6%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%        11.1%       0.0%         0.0%       3.7%
 Financial markets                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Urban development                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%        11.1%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                              0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                   0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Health                                                    0.0%            4.8%            6.7%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%         11.1%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Energy                                                    0.0%            4.8%            0.0%             0.0%               3.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.7%
 Food security                                             0.0%            0.0%            6.7%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Climate change                                            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            3.1%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Agricultural development                                  0.0%            7.1%            0.0%            16.7%               9.1%            3.1%    50.0%     14.3%          0.0%        22.2%       0.0%         7.7%       3.7%
 Trade and exports                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Crime and violence                                        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Inclusive economic growth                                 0.0%            2.4%            0.0%            16.7%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       7.4%
 Law and justice                                           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                      0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                    0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                      0.0%            4.8%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%     14.3%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Natural resource management                               0.0%            2.4%            0.0%             0.0%               3.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%         11.1%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       0.0%
 Global integration                                        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               3.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Disaster management                                       0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Information and communications technology                 0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            3.1%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                   73
The World Bank                                                                                                     Zambia                                                                                            Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Zambia? Which ONE is the second most important development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   nd
 2 Most Important                                        Office of                     Consultant on     Bilateral/       Private Sector/                                  Independent      Faith-
                                                        President/     Employee of         Bank         Multilateral         Financial                                     Government       Based                   Local
 Percentage of Respondents                            Prime Minister    a Ministry     project/PMU        Agency        Sector/Private Bank    NGO      CBO      Media      Institution     Group     Academia     Citizens    Other
 Rural development                                         0.0%            7.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%           12.9%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       8.3%         7.7%       7.1%
 Education                                                 0.0%            9.3%           33.3%            16.7%               12.5%          12.9%    28.6%      0.0%         22.2%        12.5%       0.0%        15.4%       3.6%
 Social protection                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            3.2%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%      10.7%
 Transport                                                 0.0%            9.3%            6.7%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%         22.2%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                         0.0%            0.0%            6.7%             0.0%               3.1%            3.2%    14.3%     28.6%         11.1%        12.5%       16.7%        0.0%       3.6%
 Public sector reform                                      0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Regional integration                                      0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Gender                                                    0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            6.5%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                      100.0%           4.7%            0.0%             0.0%               6.3%            6.5%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       3.6%
 Access to finance                                         0.0%            0.0%            6.7%             0.0%               6.3%            3.2%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%      10.7%
 Foreign direct investment                                 0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%     28.6%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        15.4%       7.1%
 Water and sanitation                                      0.0%            2.3%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            3.2%     0.0%      0.0%         11.1%        12.5%       0.0%         0.0%       3.6%
 Anti-corruption                                           0.0%            2.3%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            3.2%    14.3%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.6%
 Livestock sector development                              0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        15.4%       0.0%
 Public financial management                               0.0%            2.3%            0.0%             0.0%               6.3%            6.5%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       8.3%         0.0%       0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                   0.0%           16.3%            6.7%            16.7%               21.9%           6.5%     0.0%     14.3%         11.1%        12.5%       16.7%        7.7%      21.4%
 Governance                                                0.0%           11.6%            6.7%            33.3%               6.3%            3.2%     0.0%     14.3%          0.0%         0.0%       16.7%        0.0%       3.6%
 Financial markets                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Urban development                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                              0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                   0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       0.0%
 Health                                                    0.0%            7.0%            0.0%             0.0%               9.4%            6.5%    14.3%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       8.3%         0.0%       0.0%
 Energy                                                    0.0%            2.3%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Food security                                             0.0%            4.7%            0.0%            16.7%               0.0%            3.2%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%        12.5%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Climate change                                            0.0%            2.3%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Agricultural development                                  0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            16.7%               3.1%            9.7%    14.3%     14.3%          0.0%        12.5%       8.3%         7.7%      10.7%
 Trade and exports                                         0.0%            2.3%            6.7%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.6%
 Crime and violence                                        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Inclusive economic growth                                 0.0%            4.7%            6.7%             0.0%               3.1%            3.2%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Law and justice                                           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                      0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                    0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               6.3%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                      0.0%            4.7%           13.3%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%         22.2%         0.0%       8.3%         0.0%       0.0%
 Natural resource management                               0.0%            7.0%            6.7%             0.0%               0.0%            6.5%    14.3%      0.0%          0.0%        25.0%       8.3%         7.7%       3.6%
 Global integration                                        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Disaster management                                       0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Information and communications technology                 0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.6%




                                                                                                                   74
The World Bank                                                                                                     Zambia                                                                                            Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Zambia? Which ONE is the second most important development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   rd
 3 Most Important                                        Office of                     Consultant on     Bilateral/       Private Sector/                                  Independent      Faith-
                                                        President/     Employee of         Bank         Multilateral         Financial                                     Government       Based                   Local
 Percentage of Respondents                            Prime Minister    a Ministry     project/PMU        Agency        Sector/Private Bank    NGO      CBO      Media      Institution     Group     Academia     Citizens    Other
 Rural development                                         0.0%           11.1%            0.0%             0.0%               6.3%            2.9%    37.5%      0.0%          0.0%        37.5%       0.0%         7.7%      10.7%
 Education                                                 0.0%            6.7%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            2.9%     0.0%      0.0%         11.1%         0.0%       7.7%         7.7%      17.9%
 Social protection                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            2.9%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Transport                                                 0.0%            0.0%            7.1%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%     11.1%          0.0%        25.0%       0.0%        15.4%       3.6%
 Poverty reduction                                         0.0%            6.7%            0.0%            16.7%               3.1%            2.9%    12.5%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       3.6%
 Public sector reform                                      0.0%            0.0%            7.1%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Regional integration                                      0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            2.9%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Gender                                                    0.0%            0.0%            7.1%             0.0%               3.1%            2.9%    12.5%     11.1%          0.0%         0.0%       7.7%         0.0%       0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                       0.0%            6.7%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%     11.1%          0.0%         0.0%       7.7%         0.0%       7.1%
 Access to finance                                         0.0%            6.7%            0.0%             0.0%               9.4%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%         33.3%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.6%
 Foreign direct investment                                 0.0%            2.2%            7.1%             0.0%               6.3%            2.9%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%        12.5%       0.0%         7.7%       3.6%
 Water and sanitation                                      0.0%            2.2%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            5.9%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       7.7%         7.7%       3.6%
 Anti-corruption                                           0.0%            2.2%           14.3%             0.0%               0.0%            5.9%     0.0%     11.1%          0.0%        12.5%       15.4%        0.0%       3.6%
 Livestock sector development                              0.0%            2.2%            0.0%             0.0%               6.3%            0.0%     0.0%     11.1%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Public financial management                               0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.6%
 Job creation/employment                                  100.0%           4.4%           14.3%            16.7%               9.4%           11.8%     0.0%     11.1%         11.1%         0.0%       15.4%        0.0%       3.6%
 Governance                                                0.0%            6.7%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%           11.8%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       7.7%         0.0%       3.6%
 Financial markets                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.6%
 Urban development                                         0.0%            2.2%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       3.6%
 Environmental sustainability                              0.0%            2.2%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%           11.8%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                   0.0%            4.4%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       0.0%
 Health                                                    0.0%            4.4%            7.1%             0.0%               3.1%            5.9%    12.5%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       3.6%
 Energy                                                    0.0%            4.4%            7.1%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%         22.2%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Food security                                             0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       0.0%
 Climate change                                            0.0%            2.2%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            5.9%     0.0%     11.1%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Agricultural development                                  0.0%           13.3%           21.4%            16.7%               9.4%            2.9%    12.5%     11.1%         11.1%         0.0%       7.7%         7.7%      17.9%
 Trade and exports                                         0.0%            2.2%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         7.7%       0.0%
 Crime and violence                                        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Inclusive economic growth                                 0.0%            0.0%            7.1%            16.7%               6.3%            2.9%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%        12.5%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Law and justice                                           0.0%            4.4%            0.0%            16.7%               0.0%            2.9%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                      0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%     11.1%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.6%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                    0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                      0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            16.7%               3.1%            8.8%    12.5%      0.0%         11.1%         0.0%       7.7%         0.0%       0.0%
 Natural resource management                               0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            2.9%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Global integration                                        0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       7.7%         0.0%       0.0%
 Disaster management                                       0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Information and communications technology                 0.0%            2.2%            0.0%             0.0%               3.1%            0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       7.7%         0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                   75
The World Bank                                                                                                     Zambia                                                                                           Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Zambia?
                                                          Office of                     Consultant on      Bilateral/      Private Sector/                                   Independent      Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                               President/     Employee of          Bank        Multilateral         Financial                                      Government       Based                Local
 (Responses Combined)                                 Prime Minister      a Ministry     project/PMU        Agency      Sector/Private Bank    NGO        CBO     Media       Institution     Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Water and sanitation                                       0.0%            12.5%           23.5%            16.7%              4.7%           4.7%      0.0%     20.0%           9.1%         0.0%      0.0%      14.3%       3.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                   33.3%             3.1%            5.9%             0.0%              9.3%          18.6%      8.3%      0.0%           9.1%         0.0%      12.5%      9.5%      18.2%
 Access to finance                                         66.7%            14.1%           35.3%            16.7%              27.9%         16.3%     25.0%     26.7%          45.5%        30.0%      6.3%      33.3%      27.3%
 Inclusive economic growth                                  0.0%             6.3%            5.9%            83.3%              7.0%          27.9%     16.7%     20.0%           9.1%         0.0%      18.8%     28.6%      15.2%
 Climate change                                             0.0%             3.1%            0.0%             0.0%              2.3%           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       6.1%
 Disaster management                                        0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Regional integration                                       0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              2.3%           2.3%      0.0%      6.7%           0.0%        10.0%      0.0%       4.8%       6.1%
 Gender                                                     0.0%             1.6%            5.9%             0.0%              0.0%           7.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       4.8%       0.0%
 Rural development                                          0.0%            50.0%           29.4%            50.0%              16.3%         27.9%     41.7%     26.7%          36.4%        60.0%      37.5%     33.3%      18.2%
 Urban development                                          0.0%             0.0%            5.9%             0.0%              4.7%           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       3.0%
 Education                                                 33.3%            37.5%           17.6%            16.7%              46.5%         41.9%     16.7%     40.0%          36.4%        30.0%      50.0%     28.6%      30.3%
 Regulatory framework                                       0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              2.3%           2.3%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                       0.0%             6.3%           17.6%             0.0%              4.7%           2.3%      0.0%      0.0%          36.4%        20.0%      12.5%      4.8%       3.0%
 Social protection                                          0.0%             3.1%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%           2.3%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       4.8%      12.1%
 Law and justice                                            0.0%             1.6%            0.0%             0.0%              4.7%           0.0%      8.3%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Transport                                                  0.0%            10.9%           11.8%            16.7%              11.6%          0.0%     25.0%      0.0%          18.2%         0.0%      6.3%       4.8%       6.1%
 Crime and violence                                         0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                     0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            16.7%              0.0%           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Information and communications technology                  0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       3.0%
 Anti-corruption                                            0.0%             7.8%           11.8%             0.0%              14.0%          4.7%      8.3%      6.7%           0.0%        10.0%      0.0%      14.3%      21.2%
 Domestic private sector development                        0.0%             7.8%           29.4%             0.0%              23.3%         11.6%     16.7%     13.3%           0.0%         0.0%      18.8%      9.5%      15.2%
 Foreign direct investment                                 33.3%             1.6%            0.0%             0.0%              4.7%           2.3%      0.0%      0.0%           9.1%        10.0%      12.5%      0.0%       6.1%
 Global integration                                         0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              4.7%           0.0%      0.0%     13.3%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Energy                                                    33.3%            10.9%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%           4.7%      0.0%      0.0%          18.2%        10.0%      6.3%       9.5%       0.0%
 Public sector reform                                       0.0%             0.0%            5.9%             0.0%              4.7%           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Livestock sector development                               0.0%             1.6%            0.0%             0.0%              4.7%           2.3%     16.7%      6.7%           9.1%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       6.1%
 Governance                                                 0.0%             3.1%            5.9%             0.0%              11.6%         11.6%      0.0%      0.0%           9.1%        20.0%      6.3%       4.8%      15.2%
 Natural resource management                               33.3%             7.8%            0.0%             0.0%              4.7%           4.7%      0.0%      0.0%           9.1%        40.0%      6.3%       4.8%       6.1%
 Environmental sustainability                               0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              2.3%           4.7%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       4.8%       0.0%
 Health                                                     0.0%            12.5%            5.9%             0.0%              9.3%           9.3%      8.3%     20.0%           0.0%         0.0%      12.5%      9.5%       9.1%
 Public financial management                                0.0%             1.6%            0.0%             0.0%              7.0%           7.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        10.0%      6.3%       4.8%       6.1%
 Agricultural development                                  33.3%            35.9%           11.8%            50.0%              20.9%         37.2%     66.7%     40.0%          18.2%        20.0%      43.8%     23.8%      27.3%
 Job creation/employment                                   33.3%            42.2%           35.3%            33.3%              30.2%         27.9%     33.3%     40.0%          27.3%        20.0%      43.8%     23.8%      30.3%
 Financial markets                                          0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              2.3%           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Trade and exports                                          0.0%             9.4%           17.6%             0.0%              2.3%           0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       4.8%       3.0%
 Food security                                              0.0%             4.7%           17.6%             0.0%              9.3%          14.0%      8.3%     20.0%           0.0%        10.0%      0.0%       4.8%       3.0%




                                                                                                                    76
The World Bank                                                                                                   Zambia                                                                                         Country Survey 2012

A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Zambia? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                         Office of                    Consultant on      Bilateral/      Private Sector/                                 Independent      Faith-
  Percentage of Respondents                             President/     Employee of         Bank         Multilateral        Financial                                    Government       Based                Local
  (Responses Combined)                                Prime Minister    a Ministry     project/PMU        Agency       Sector/Private Bank    NGO       CBO     Media     Institution     Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
  Energy                                                   0.0%           29.0%            11.8%           16.7%              18.6%           7.0%     25.0%    26.7%         18.2%        0.0%      18.8%     33.3%      30.3%
  Equality of opportunity                                  0.0%            0.0%             5.9%            0.0%              11.6%          11.6%     16.7%     0.0%          9.1%       20.0%      6.3%      14.3%      18.2%
  Social protection                                        0.0%            1.6%             0.0%            0.0%              0.0%            2.3%      0.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       4.8%       3.0%
  Global integration                                       0.0%            1.6%             5.9%            0.0%              4.7%            4.7%      0.0%    20.0%          0.0%        0.0%      12.5%      4.8%       3.0%
  Climate change                                           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%      0.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       6.1%
  Anti-corruption                                          0.0%            9.7%             0.0%           33.3%              11.6%           9.3%     25.0%    13.3%         18.2%        0.0%      12.5%     14.3%      15.2%
  Disaster management                                      0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%      0.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Rural development                                        0.0%           19.4%             5.9%           16.7%              16.3%          20.9%     16.7%     0.0%         18.2%       20.0%      18.8%     23.8%       9.1%
  Access to finance                                       50.0%           29.0%            17.6%            0.0%              20.9%          18.6%     25.0%    13.3%         18.2%       40.0%      6.3%      28.6%      21.2%
  Foreign direct investment                               50.0%           16.1%            17.6%           16.7%              9.3%           14.0%      8.3%    26.7%         18.2%       20.0%      31.3%      4.8%      15.2%
  Urban development                                        0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%              4.7%            0.0%      0.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                     0.0%            0.0%            11.8%            0.0%              0.0%            2.3%      8.3%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Education                                                0.0%           19.4%            11.8%            0.0%              30.2%          23.3%     25.0%    20.0%         18.2%       30.0%      43.8%     19.0%      27.3%
  Information and communications technology                0.0%            6.5%             0.0%           16.7%              0.0%            0.0%      8.3%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      6.3%       0.0%      15.2%
  Regulatory framework                                     0.0%            1.6%             0.0%            0.0%              4.7%            4.7%      0.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable diseases                   0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%      0.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Trade and exports                                       50.0%           27.4%            17.6%            0.0%              18.6%          16.3%      8.3%    20.0%         45.5%       10.0%      6.3%      23.8%       9.1%
  Public sector reform                                     0.0%            1.6%             5.9%            0.0%              2.3%            0.0%      8.3%     6.7%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       3.0%
  Regional integration                                    50.0%            1.6%             0.0%            0.0%              2.3%            2.3%      0.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Domestic private sector development                      0.0%           14.5%            35.3%           16.7%              25.6%          27.9%     16.7%    20.0%         27.3%       40.0%      6.3%       9.5%      12.1%
  Job creation/employment                                  0.0%           19.4%            29.4%           50.0%              32.6%          14.0%      8.3%    26.7%          9.1%       10.0%      12.5%     19.0%      24.2%
  Agricultural development                                 0.0%           24.2%            35.3%           50.0%              18.6%          37.2%     16.7%    40.0%         27.3%       30.0%      37.5%     19.0%      24.2%
  Food security                                            0.0%            1.6%            11.8%            0.0%              0.0%            2.3%      0.0%     6.7%          0.0%       20.0%      0.0%       4.8%       0.0%
  Governance                                               0.0%           11.3%             0.0%           33.3%              18.6%          16.3%      8.3%     6.7%         27.3%       10.0%      18.8%      0.0%       9.1%
  Transport                                                0.0%           16.1%            23.5%           33.3%              9.3%            7.0%      8.3%     0.0%          9.1%       10.0%      18.8%      4.8%      12.1%
  Livestock sector development                             0.0%            3.2%             0.0%            0.0%              2.3%            0.0%      0.0%     6.7%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       4.8%       3.0%
  Gender                                                   0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%              0.0%            7.0%      0.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       3.0%
  Natural resource management                             50.0%           16.1%            11.8%            0.0%              14.0%          18.6%     16.7%     6.7%          9.1%       30.0%      0.0%      23.8%      18.2%
  Environmental sustainability                             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%              2.3%            2.3%      0.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       4.8%       0.0%
  Health                                                   0.0%            3.2%            11.8%            0.0%              7.0%            7.0%     25.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      6.3%       9.5%       0.0%
  Basic infrastructure                                     0.0%           11.3%            11.8%            0.0%              4.7%           11.6%      0.0%    13.3%         18.2%       10.0%      31.3%      0.0%       6.1%
  Law and justice                                          0.0%            3.2%             0.0%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%      8.3%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       3.0%
  Crime and violence                                       0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%              0.0%            0.0%      0.0%     0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
  Public financial management                             50.0%            4.8%             0.0%           16.7%              4.7%            4.7%      0.0%    20.0%          9.1%        0.0%      6.3%      19.0%       3.0%
  Financial markets                                        0.0%            4.8%             0.0%            0.0%              4.7%            4.7%      8.3%     6.7%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%       4.8%       0.0%




                                                                                                                  77
The World Bank                                                                                                                    Zambia            Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective; 1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                                   78
The World Bank                                                                                                      Zambia                                                                                              Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Zambia, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most of its attention and resources in Zambia?
   (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                       Office of                    Consultant on       Bilateral/       Private Sector/                                    Independent        Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                            President/     Employee of          Bank         Multilateral         Financial                                       Government         Based                   Local
 (Responses Combined)                               Prime Minister    a Ministry     project/PMU         Agency        Sector/Private Bank     NGO       CBO      Media       Institution      Group     Academia     Citizens    Other
 Rural development                                       0.0%            47.6%           29.4%            50.0%               46.5%           37.2%     50.0%     50.0%          36.4%         50.0%       25.0%       60.0%      30.3%
 Education                                              33.3%            36.5%           11.8%             0.0%               51.2%           27.9%     33.3%     21.4%          36.4%         30.0%       43.8%       25.0%      36.4%
 Social protection                                       0.0%             1.6%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             2.3%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         10.0%        6.3%        0.0%       3.0%
 Governance                                             33.3%             6.3%            5.9%            33.3%               20.9%           27.9%      0.0%     28.6%           0.0%         20.0%       12.5%        5.0%      27.3%
 Transport                                               0.0%            15.9%           23.5%             0.0%               11.6%            9.3%      0.0%      0.0%          36.4%         30.0%        6.3%       15.0%      12.1%
 Poverty reduction                                      66.7%            19.0%           11.8%            16.7%               16.3%           20.9%     25.0%     35.7%          27.3%         10.0%       18.8%       10.0%      21.2%
 Public sector reform                                    0.0%             1.6%           17.6%            16.7%               9.3%             2.3%      8.3%      0.0%           9.1%          0.0%        6.3%        0.0%       0.0%
 Regional integration                                    0.0%             1.6%            0.0%             0.0%               2.3%             4.7%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Gender                                                  0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%            11.6%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Crime and violence                                      0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                     0.0%            12.7%           35.3%             0.0%               16.3%           14.0%      8.3%     21.4%           9.1%         10.0%       18.8%       10.0%       9.1%
 Foreign direct investment                               0.0%             4.8%            0.0%             0.0%               2.3%             4.7%     16.7%      0.0%           9.1%         10.0%       12.5%       10.0%       6.1%
 Water and sanitation                                    0.0%             7.9%           23.5%            16.7%               9.3%             7.0%      0.0%      0.0%           9.1%         10.0%        6.3%       10.0%       9.1%
 Energy                                                  0.0%            15.9%            5.9%             0.0%               11.6%            0.0%      0.0%      0.0%          18.2%         10.0%        0.0%        5.0%      18.2%
 Livestock sector development                            0.0%             3.2%            0.0%             0.0%               4.7%             0.0%     25.0%      0.0%           0.0%         20.0%       12.5%        5.0%       3.0%
 Access to finance                                      33.3%             9.5%           17.6%             0.0%               9.3%             7.0%     25.0%     21.4%           0.0%         10.0%        0.0%        0.0%      12.1%
 Public financial management                             0.0%            11.1%            5.9%            66.7%               9.3%            18.6%      0.0%      7.1%           9.1%          0.0%       18.8%        5.0%       0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                33.3%             6.3%           11.8%            33.3%               16.3%            2.3%      8.3%     35.7%           9.1%         10.0%       12.5%       20.0%      18.2%
 Financial markets                                       0.0%             3.2%            5.9%             0.0%               2.3%             2.3%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Urban development                                       0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       3.0%
 Environmental sustainability                            0.0%             3.2%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             4.7%      0.0%      0.0%           9.1%          0.0%        6.3%        0.0%       0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                 0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             2.3%      8.3%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        6.3%       20.0%       3.0%
 Health                                                  0.0%            17.5%            5.9%             0.0%               7.0%            14.0%     16.7%     14.3%          27.3%         10.0%       18.8%        5.0%       6.1%
 Global integration                                      0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               4.7%             2.3%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        5.0%       0.0%
 Food security                                          33.3%             4.8%            5.9%             0.0%               0.0%             4.7%      0.0%      7.1%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        5.0%       3.0%
 Climate change                                          0.0%             4.8%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             4.7%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       3.0%
 Agricultural development                               33.3%            34.9%           29.4%            16.7%               18.6%           25.6%     41.7%     14.3%           9.1%         10.0%       18.8%       25.0%      36.4%
 Trade and exports                                       0.0%             1.6%            5.9%             0.0%               0.0%             2.3%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%       10.0%       3.0%
 Inclusive economic growth                               0.0%             6.3%            5.9%            16.7%               2.3%             9.3%      0.0%      7.1%           0.0%         10.0%       12.5%       10.0%       9.1%
 Law and justice                                         0.0%             1.6%            0.0%            16.7%               2.3%             0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                    0.0%             0.0%            5.9%             0.0%               2.3%             2.3%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        5.0%       6.1%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                  0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                    0.0%            11.1%            5.9%            16.7%               9.3%            11.6%     16.7%     21.4%          36.4%          0.0%       12.5%        5.0%       3.0%
 Natural resource management                            33.3%             6.3%           23.5%             0.0%               7.0%             7.0%      0.0%      0.0%           9.1%         30.0%        6.3%       15.0%       9.1%
 Anti-corruption                                         0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               2.3%             7.0%      8.3%     14.3%           0.0%         10.0%        6.3%       10.0%       6.1%
 Information and communications technology               0.0%             3.2%            0.0%             0.0%               2.3%             2.3%      8.3%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        6.3%        0.0%       3.0%
 Disaster management                                     0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%      0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                    79
The World Bank                                                                                                         Zambia                                                                                   Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Zambia?
 Greatest Value                                            Office of                       Consultant on     Bilateral/        Private Sector/                             Independent    Faith-
                                                          President/      Employee of          Bank         Multilateral          Financial                                Government     Based                Local
 Percentage of Respondents                              Prime Minister     a Ministry      project/PMU        Agency         Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO    Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Financial resources                                        100.0%           56.6%            68.8%            50.0%                47.2%          37.1%   36.4%   55.6%       27.3%      30.0%      0.0%      55.6%      42.9%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                  0.0%             3.8%             0.0%             0.0%                8.3%           14.3%    0.0%    0.0%        9.1%       0.0%      27.3%      5.6%       7.1%
 Technical assistance                                        0.0%            17.0%            18.8%             0.0%                13.9%          20.0%   18.2%   22.2%        9.1%      30.0%      18.2%     11.1%       3.6%
 Policy advice                                               0.0%             3.8%            12.5%            33.3%                8.3%           14.3%    9.1%   22.2%       18.2%      20.0%      9.1%       0.0%      10.7%
 Donor coordination                                          0.0%             1.9%             0.0%            16.7%                0.0%            2.9%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      9.1%       0.0%       3.6%
 Data                                                        0.0%             1.9%             0.0%             0.0%                2.8%            0.0%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       3.6%
 Training/capacity building                                  0.0%             9.4%             0.0%             0.0%                13.9%           8.6%   36.4%    0.0%       36.4%      20.0%      27.3%     16.7%      28.6%
 Studies/analyses                                            0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                2.8%            2.9%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      9.1%       5.6%       0.0%
 Convening/facilitating                                      0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%            0.0%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                               0.0%             3.8%             0.0%             0.0%                2.8%            0.0%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       5.6%       0.0%
 Other                                                       0.0%             1.9%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%            0.0%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Zambia?
   nd
 2 Greatest Value                                          Office of                       Consultant on     Bilateral/        Private Sector/                             Independent    Faith-
                                                          President/      Employee of          Bank         Multilateral          Financial                                Government     Based                Local
 Percentage of Respondents                              Prime Minister     a Ministry      project/PMU        Agency         Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO    Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Financial resources                                         0.0%            18.5%             0.0%            16.7%                5.7%            2.9%   36.4%   30.0%       18.2%      10.0%      16.7%     29.4%      25.0%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                 100.0%            7.4%             0.0%            16.7%                2.9%            8.6%    0.0%   10.0%        9.1%      40.0%      16.7%      5.9%      14.3%
 Technical assistance                                        0.0%            35.2%            31.3%             0.0%                17.1%          17.1%    0.0%   20.0%        0.0%       0.0%      25.0%      5.9%      25.0%
 Policy advice                                               0.0%             9.3%            12.5%            16.7%                28.6%          22.9%    9.1%    0.0%       27.3%      10.0%      8.3%      11.8%       3.6%
 Donor coordination                                          0.0%             5.6%            18.8%             0.0%                11.4%           5.7%    9.1%   20.0%       18.2%      20.0%      0.0%      17.6%       7.1%
 Data                                                        0.0%             1.9%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%            8.6%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      8.3%       5.9%       3.6%
 Training/capacity building                                  0.0%            20.4%            31.3%             0.0%                22.9%          11.4%    9.1%   10.0%        0.0%       0.0%      25.0%     17.6%      10.7%
 Studies/analyses                                            0.0%             0.0%             6.3%            50.0%                2.9%            8.6%   18.2%   10.0%       18.2%      10.0%      0.0%       5.9%       3.6%
 Convening/facilitating                                      0.0%             1.9%             0.0%             0.0%                2.9%            5.7%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       3.6%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                               0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                5.7%            8.6%    9.1%    0.0%        9.1%      10.0%      0.0%       0.0%       3.6%
 Other                                                       0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%                0.0%            0.0%    9.1%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%




                                                                                                                        80
The World Bank                                                                                                     Zambia                                                                                  Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                            Office of                    Consultant on     Bilateral/      Private Sector/                            Independent    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                President/     Employee of          Bank        Multilateral        Financial                               Government     Based                Local
 (Responses Combined)                                   Prime Minister    a Ministry     project/PMU        Agency      Sector/Private Bank   NGO     CBO     Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
                                                             33.3%          24.6%            18.8%            0.0%              21.4%         23.3%   11.1%   20.0%      36.4%       20.0%     26.7%     20.0%       15.6%
 political realities
 Not exploring alternative policy options                     0.0%           4.9%            12.5%            0.0%              11.9%         9.3%    11.1%   20.0%       9.1%       10.0%     13.3%     10.0%        6.3%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                             66.7%          39.3%            25.0%           33.3%              28.6%         23.3%   0.0%    26.7%      18.2%       0.0%      20.0%      5.0%       31.3%
 procedures
 Staff too inaccessible                                      33.3%           9.8%             0.0%           16.7%              9.5%          4.7%    33.3%   13.3%       9.1%       0.0%      13.3%      5.0%        6.3%
 Arrogant in its approach                                     0.0%           3.3%             0.0%           16.7%              0.0%          2.3%     0.0%    6.7%       9.1%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Not client focused                                           0.0%           3.3%             6.3%            0.0%              2.4%          0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       5.0%        6.3%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                        0.0%           1.6%             0.0%            0.0%              0.0%          0.0%     0.0%    0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        6.3%
 Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform
                                                              0.0%           9.8%             6.3%            0.0%              9.5%          25.6%   22.2%   20.0%       0.0%       10.0%     13.3%     15.0%       21.9%
 efforts in the country
 Too influenced by developed countries                       66.7%          27.9%            18.8%            0.0%              38.1%         18.6%   22.2%   20.0%      45.5%       50.0%     40.0%     40.0%       21.9%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                     0.0%           8.2%             0.0%           33.3%              16.7%         18.6%   44.4%   26.7%      18.2%       40.0%     26.7%     20.0%       21.9%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                    0.0%          18.0%            31.3%           16.7%              11.9%         16.3%    0.0%    6.7%      27.3%       10.0%     6.7%      20.0%        3.1%
 Not aligned with country priorities                          0.0%          11.5%            12.5%            0.0%              9.5%           2.3%    0.0%    0.0%       9.1%       20.0%     6.7%       5.0%        3.1%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                          0.0%           1.6%             6.3%           16.7%              0.0%           0.0%   11.1%    6.7%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Not collaborating enough with non-state actors               0.0%           6.6%            12.5%           33.3%              11.9%         44.2%   22.2%    0.0%      18.2%        0.0%     0.0%      30.0%       21.9%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities
                                                              0.0%          19.7%             6.3%           16.7%              11.9%         9.3%    22.2%   13.3%       0.0%       30.0%     13.3%     20.0%       25.0%
 in Zambia
 Other                                                        0.0%           1.6%            12.5%            0.0%              4.8%          0.0%    0.0%    6.7%        0.0%       0.0%      13.3%      0.0%        3.1%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                        Office of                       Consultant on     Bilateral/     Private Sector/                              Independent    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                             President/       Employee of         Bank        Multilateral        Financial                                 Government     Based                Local
 (Responses Combined)                                Prime Minister      a Ministry     project/PMU        Agency      Sector/Private Bank     NGO     CBO    Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Investment lending                                      33.3%             65.6%            58.8%           50.0%             38.6%           35.7%   66.7%   50.0%       63.6%      37.5%      50.0%     52.4%      59.4%
 Capacity development                                    33.3%             34.4%            35.3%           16.7%             34.1%           52.4%   33.3%   28.6%       54.5%      62.5%      37.5%     33.3%      40.6%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the
                                                          0.0%             37.7%            17.6%           66.7%             20.5%           33.3%   25.0%   50.0%      54.5%       0.0%      50.0%     28.6%       34.4%
 Government
 Knowledge products/services                             66.7%              1.6%             0.0%           16.7%             15.9%           19.0%   16.7%    7.1%       9.1%       12.5%     12.5%      9.5%        0.0%
 Technical assistance                                     0.0%             36.1%            29.4%           50.0%             45.5%           50.0%   16.7%   28.6%      18.2%       50.0%     31.3%     19.0%       18.8%
 Trust Fund management                                    0.0%             11.5%             5.9%            0.0%             9.1%             2.4%    8.3%   14.3%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%      14.3%        6.3%
 Other                                                    0.0%              1.6%             5.9%            0.0%             2.3%             0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        6.3%
 Don’t know                                              33.3%              3.3%            11.8%            0.0%             15.9%            2.4%    8.3%    7.1%       0.0%       12.5%     6.3%      19.0%       12.5%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the LEAST effective in reducing poverty in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                         Office of                       Consultant on     Bilateral/     Private Sector/                             Independent    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                              President/       Employee of          Bank       Multilateral        Financial                                Government     Based                Local
 (Responses Combined)                                 Prime Minister      a Ministry      project/PMU       Agency      Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO    Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Investment lending                                        0.0%             10.2%             5.9%           16.7%             22.5%          22.0%    9.1%   28.6%       30.0%      30.0%      12.5%     15.0%       9.4%
 Capacity development                                      0.0%             13.6%            11.8%            0.0%             17.5%          26.8%   36.4%   35.7%       20.0%      30.0%      37.5%     40.0%      18.8%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the
                                                          33.3%             25.4%            17.6%           33.3%             25.0%          31.7%   36.4%   14.3%      20.0%       30.0%     18.8%     15.0%       21.9%
 Government
 Knowledge products/services                               0.0%             28.8%            23.5%            0.0%             27.5%          43.9%   18.2%   35.7%      40.0%       30.0%     25.0%     15.0%       18.8%
 Technical assistance                                     66.7%             25.4%            23.5%           16.7%             22.5%           9.8%    9.1%   21.4%      50.0%       10.0%     25.0%     35.0%       18.8%
 Trust Fund management                                    33.3%             37.3%            41.2%           66.7%             25.0%          39.0%   27.3%    7.1%      40.0%       30.0%     25.0%     30.0%       31.3%
 Other                                                     0.0%              0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%    0.0%    0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        3.1%
 Don’t know                                               33.3%             22.0%            17.6%           33.3%             27.5%           4.9%   27.3%   28.6%       0.0%       10.0%     12.5%     20.0%       31.3%




                                                                                                                    81
The World Bank                                                                                                        Zambia                                                                                                 Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)
                                                             Office of                       Consultant on     Bilateral/      Private Sector/                                    Independent       Faith-
  Percentage of Respondents                                 President/      Employee of          Bank         Multilateral        Financial                                       Government        Based                   Local
  (Responses Combined)                                    Prime Minister     a Ministry      project/PMU         Agency      Sector/Private Bank   NGO        CBO      Media       Institution     Group      Academia     Citizens     Other
  NGOs                                                        33.3%             16.1%            35.3%             0.0%             18.6%         74.4%      25.0%     20.0%          18.2%         20.0%       25.0%       23.8%       33.3%
  Local Government                                             0.0%             43.5%            41.2%            66.7%             37.2%         23.3%       8.3%     33.3%          72.7%         40.0%       31.3%       23.8%       27.3%
  Beneficiaries                                               66.7%             25.8%            23.5%            16.7%             30.2%         14.0%      50.0%     26.7%           0.0%         30.0%       0.0%        57.1%       33.3%
  Private sector                                              66.7%             30.6%            29.4%            50.0%             41.9%         25.6%      16.7%     33.3%          18.2%         20.0%       37.5%       14.3%       36.4%
  Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                        33.3%             25.8%            11.8%            16.7%             14.0%         14.0%      75.0%     20.0%          45.5%         10.0%       12.5%        9.5%       15.2%
  Donor community                                              0.0%              8.1%             5.9%            33.3%             11.6%          9.3%       0.0%      6.7%          18.2%          0.0%       18.8%        9.5%        9.1%
  Foundations                                                  0.0%              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             2.3%           2.3%       0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         10.0%       0.0%         4.8%        0.0%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                     0.0%             24.2%            23.5%            16.7%             25.6%         16.3%       0.0%      6.7%           9.1%         10.0%       56.3%        4.8%       18.2%
  Parliament                                                   0.0%              8.1%            23.5%             0.0%             2.3%           9.3%       0.0%     13.3%           9.1%         10.0%       6.3%        14.3%       18.2%
  Media                                                        0.0%              3.2%             0.0%             0.0%             4.7%           7.0%       0.0%     40.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%        14.3%        6.1%
  Faith based organizations                                    0.0%              6.5%             5.9%             0.0%             7.0%           4.7%       8.3%      0.0%           9.1%         50.0%       6.3%        23.8%        0.0%
  Other                                                        0.0%              4.8%             0.0%             0.0%             2.3%           0.0%       8.3%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       6.3%         0.0%        3.0%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Zambia, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                                                                                       82
The World Bank                                                                                                           Zambia                                                                                         Country Survey 2012

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Zambia in terms of…, on a ten point scale? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                            Office of                      Consultant on    Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                      Independent    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                 President/      Employee of         Bank        Multilateral           Financial                                        Government     Based                Local
 (Responses Combined)                                    Prime Minister     a Ministry     project/PMU        Agency        Sector/Private Bank    NGO          CBO        Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 The World Bank works too slowly                              0.0%             8.2%           25.0%           16.7%                 31.0%          4.7%         0.0%       28.6%       18.2%      11.1%      0.0%      5.0%       18.2%
 The World Bank does not reach out enough to non-
                                                             33.3%            13.1%           12.5%            0.0%                 31.0%         39.5%        10.0%       14.3%       9.1%       33.3%     33.3%     15.0%       30.3%
 state actors
 The Government works inefficiently                          66.7%            23.0%           25.0%           66.7%                 19.0%         20.9%        40.0%       14.3%       9.1%       22.2%     40.0%     30.0%       30.3%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                             33.3%            26.2%           18.8%           16.7%                 26.2%         34.9%        30.0%       21.4%      27.3%       22.2%      0.0%     35.0%       30.3%
 participation
 Poor donor coordination                                      0.0%             6.6%           12.5%           16.7%                 2.4%           4.7%        10.0%       14.3%       0.0%       0.0%       6.7%     10.0%        0.0%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow
                                                              0.0%             6.6%           12.5%           16.7%                 9.5%           7.0%         0.0%       7.1%        9.1%       0.0%       0.0%      5.0%        6.1%
 through/follow-up
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government          0.0%            11.5%           18.8%           50.0%                 16.7%         30.2%        10.0%        7.1%      27.3%       11.1%     40.0%     15.0%        6.1%
 Political pressures and obstacles                            0.0%            13.1%           12.5%           16.7%                 28.6%         11.6%        10.0%       28.6%      27.3%       11.1%     20.0%     30.0%       24.2%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                              0.0%            41.0%           25.0%            0.0%                 11.9%         18.6%        10.0%       14.3%       9.1%       22.2%     20.0%     20.0%       18.2%
 challenges
 Support not in the right area                               33.3%             6.6%            0.0%            0.0%                 4.8%          11.6%        20.0%       7.1%        0.0%       11.1%      6.7%      0.0%        0.0%
 Inadequate consultation                                      0.0%            18.0%           18.8%            0.0%                 2.4%           7.0%        30.0%       0.0%       27.3%       33.3%      0.0%      5.0%        9.1%
 The World Bank is not sensitive enough to
                                                              0.0%            18.0%            6.3%            0.0%                 4.8%           9.3%        30.0%       14.3%       9.1%       22.2%     26.7%     20.0%       18.2%
 political/social realities on the ground
 Other                                                        0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            0.0%                 7.1%           0.0%         0.0%       14.3%       9.1%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%        3.0%




                                                                                                                          83
The World Bank                                                                                                            Zambia                                                                 Country Survey 2012

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Zambia, on a ten point scale? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Zambia, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                                                                                           84
The World Bank                                                                                                         Zambia                                                                                             Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge
How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?
                                                        Office of                        Consultant on       Bilateral/       Private Sector/                                 Independent        Faith-
                                                      President/        Employee of           Bank          Multilateral         Financial                                    Government         Based                   Local
 Percentage of Respondents                          Prime Minister       a Ministry       project/PMU         Agency        Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO      Media      Institution       Group     Academia     Citizens    Other
 Weekly                                                   0.0%              6.3%             11.8%             40.0%               6.8%            0.0%    0.0%      6.7%          0.0%          11.1%       12.5%        0.0%       3.0%
 Monthly                                                 33.3%              9.5%             41.2%             40.0%               4.5%           11.9%    0.0%      0.0%         18.2%           0.0%       0.0%         4.8%       9.1%
 A few times a year                                       0.0%             33.3%             17.6%             20.0%               38.6%          59.5%    0.0%     66.7%         18.2%          22.2%       56.3%       33.3%      33.3%
 Rarely                                                  66.7%             34.9%              5.9%              0.0%               25.0%          16.7%   30.0%     13.3%         18.2%          22.2%       12.5%       23.8%      27.3%
 Never                                                    0.0%             15.9%             23.5%              0.0%               25.0%          11.9%   70.0%     13.3%         45.5%          44.4%       18.8%       38.1%      27.3%
When thinking about the development challenges in Zambia, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the next few years?   (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                         Office of                     Consultant on      Bilateral/     Private Sector/                                       Independent        Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                              President/    Employee of          Bank         Multilateral         Financial                                         Government         Based                  Local
 (Responses Combined)                                 Prime Minister   a Ministry      project/PMU         Agency      Sector/Private Bank       NGO      CBO      Media        Institution       Group    Academia     Citizens    Other
 Public sector reform                                       0.0%         14.1%             29.4%            16.7%              15.9%             4.8%     0.0%      13.3%           0.0%           0.0%      0.0%        14.3%      15.2%
 Gender                                                     0.0%          0.0%              5.9%             0.0%              2.3%             14.3%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%          11.1%      0.0%         4.8%       3.0%
 Education                                                 33.3%         31.3%             11.8%             0.0%              34.1%            23.8%    50.0%      40.0%          18.2%          33.3%      37.5%       42.9%      39.4%
 Domestic private sector development                      100.0%         23.4%             23.5%            16.7%              27.3%            16.7%    10.0%      13.3%          27.3%           0.0%      25.0%       19.0%      24.2%
 Foreign direct investment                                  0.0%          3.1%              0.0%            16.7%              0.0%              2.4%     0.0%       6.7%           0.0%          11.1%      6.3%         0.0%       9.1%
 Water and sanitation                                       0.0%          7.8%             17.6%            33.3%              11.4%            11.9%    10.0%      13.3%           9.1%          11.1%      6.3%        14.3%       9.1%
 Trade and exports                                          0.0%         14.1%              0.0%             0.0%              4.5%              7.1%     0.0%       6.7%           9.1%          11.1%      18.8%        0.0%       6.1%
 Inclusive economic growth                                  0.0%          7.8%             29.4%            50.0%              6.8%             11.9%    10.0%       6.7%           9.1%           0.0%      18.8%       19.0%       9.1%
 Energy                                                    33.3%         12.5%             17.6%             0.0%              15.9%             0.0%     0.0%       0.0%          18.2%           0.0%      6.3%        14.3%      12.1%
 Disaster management                                        0.0%          1.6%              0.0%             0.0%              4.5%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%           0.0%      6.3%         0.0%       0.0%
 Livestock sector development                               0.0%          4.7%              0.0%             0.0%              9.1%              2.4%    30.0%       6.7%           0.0%           0.0%      6.3%         4.8%      15.2%
 Governance (building strong
                                                            0.0%         10.9%              0.0%            16.7%              15.9%            31.0%     0.0%       6.7%           9.1%         22.2%       12.5%        0.0%      15.2%
 institutions/government effectiveness)
 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
                                                            0.0%          3.1%              0.0%             0.0%              4.5%              2.4%     0.0%       6.7%          27.3%          0.0%        0.0%        4.8%       6.1%
 assistance)
 Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)              0.0%          4.7%              0.0%             0.0%              2.3%             16.7%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         11.1%       6.3%         0.0%       0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                         33.3%         21.9%              5.9%             0.0%              20.5%            40.5%    40.0%      46.7%          27.3%          0.0%       37.5%       28.6%      15.2%
 Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                    0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%              11.4%             0.0%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         11.1%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                            0.0%          3.1%             11.8%             0.0%              2.3%              4.8%    10.0%      20.0%           9.1%          0.0%       12.5%        9.5%       6.1%
 Financial markets                                          0.0%          1.6%             11.8%             0.0%              2.3%              2.4%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         9.5%       0.0%
 Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                     0.0%          3.1%              0.0%             0.0%              6.8%              2.4%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         11.1%       12.5%       14.3%       9.1%
 Urban development                                          0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%              2.3%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Crime and violence                                         0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%              0.0%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Regional integration                                       0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%              0.0%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         4.8%       0.0%
 Information and communications technology                  0.0%          1.6%              0.0%             0.0%              2.3%              2.4%     0.0%       6.7%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.0%
 Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)           0.0%          6.3%             11.8%            33.3%              4.5%              2.4%     0.0%       0.0%           9.1%         11.1%       6.3%         9.5%       3.0%
 Agricultural development                                  33.3%         32.8%             35.3%            16.7%              27.3%            26.2%    30.0%      33.3%          27.3%         33.3%       37.5%       14.3%      24.2%
 Access to finance                                         33.3%          6.3%             17.6%             0.0%              13.6%             7.1%    10.0%       6.7%          18.2%         22.2%       0.0%         4.8%       3.0%
 Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)       0.0%          7.8%              5.9%             0.0%              2.3%              7.1%     0.0%       0.0%           9.1%         22.2%       6.3%         9.5%       6.1%
 Public financial management (e.g., public
                                                            0.0%          1.6%              0.0%            33.3%              0.0%              4.8%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       9.1%
 expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 Job creation/employment                                    0.0%         17.2%             17.6%            33.3%              22.7%            23.8%    30.0%      20.0%          27.3%         11.1%       6.3%        14.3%      24.2%
 Health                                                     0.0%         15.6%             11.8%             0.0%              4.5%              9.5%    40.0%      20.0%           9.1%         11.1%       6.3%        14.3%      12.1%
 Rural development                                          0.0%         25.0%             23.5%            16.7%              4.5%              9.5%    30.0%      20.0%          27.3%         33.3%       6.3%        23.8%       9.1%
 Global integration                                        33.3%          1.6%              0.0%             0.0%              4.5%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%
 Food security                                              0.0%          3.1%              0.0%             0.0%              2.3%              2.4%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         11.1%       0.0%         0.0%       3.0%
 Environmental sustainability                               0.0%          3.1%              0.0%             0.0%              2.3%              7.1%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         11.1%       12.5%        0.0%       3.0%
 Regulatory framework                                       0.0%          1.6%              5.9%             0.0%              4.5%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       3.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                       0.0%          4.7%              0.0%            16.7%              4.5%              0.0%     0.0%       6.7%           9.1%          0.0%       6.3%         4.8%       0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                     0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%              0.0%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%           0.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%       0.0%


                                                                                                                       85
The World Bank                                                                                                                    Zambia                                                                           Country Survey 2012

D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at… in Zambia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

“To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research... in Zambia ? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective; 1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                                   86
The World Bank                                                                                                          Zambia       Country Survey 2012

E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Zambia




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)




                                                                                                                         87
The World Bank                                                                                                     Zambia                                                                                   Country Survey 2012

F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Zambia (continued)
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                        Office of                       Consultant on     Bilateral/       Private Sector/                             Independent    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                             President/       Employee of          Bank        Multilateral         Financial                                Government     Based                Local
 (Responses Combined)                                Prime Minister       a Ministry     project/PMU        Agency       Sector/Private Bank   NGO     CBO     Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to
                                                          33.3%             34.4%            31.3%          16.7%              57.1%           34.9%   30.0%   26.7%       0.0%       30.0%     64.3%     23.8%       28.1%
 Zambia's specific challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank
                                                          66.7%             60.7%            56.3%          16.7%              33.3%           44.2%   20.0%   53.3%      81.8%       60.0%     28.6%     42.9%       50.0%
 financing
 Focus primarily on advocacy issues                        0.0%              3.3%             0.0%           0.0%               7.1%           14.0%   0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       30.0%      0.0%     14.3%       12.5%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing
                                                           0.0%             13.1%             6.3%          16.7%              21.4%           14.0%   10.0%   13.3%      27.3%       0.0%      28.6%     14.3%       12.5%
 compared to markets
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                   33.3%             14.8%            18.8%          33.3%              14.3%           16.3%   0.0%    6.7%        0.0%       10.0%     14.3%     14.3%       21.9%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                          33.3%             23.0%             6.3%          16.7%              16.7%           34.9%   20.0%   40.0%      27.3%       10.0%     21.4%     19.0%        9.4%
 statistics/figures on Zambia's economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                 33.3%             16.4%            18.8%          16.7%              9.5%            14.0%   50.0%    6.7%      36.4%       20.0%     7.1%      23.8%       28.1%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                  0.0%              9.8%            25.0%          16.7%              9.5%             9.3%   30.0%   40.0%       9.1%       20.0%     21.4%     23.8%        9.4%
 Increase availability of Fee-Based services               0.0%              1.6%             0.0%           0.0%              0.0%             4.7%   10.0%    6.7%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%
 Work faster                                               0.0%              9.8%            25.0%          16.7%              16.7%            2.3%   10.0%    6.7%       0.0%       20.0%     0.0%       9.5%       15.6%
 Other                                                     0.0%              3.3%             0.0%          16.7%              4.8%             4.7%   10.0%    0.0%       9.1%        0.0%     14.3%      0.0%        9.4%




G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                        Office of                     Consultant on     Bilateral/      Private Sector/                                Independent    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                             President/      Employee of         Bank        Multilateral        Financial                                   Government     Based                Local
 (Responses Combined)                                Prime Minister     a Ministry     project/PMU        Agency     Sector/Private Bank        NGO     CBO    Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Local newspapers                                        66.7%            79.4%            64.7%          50.0%              65.9%             83.7%   36.4%   80.0%       72.7%      55.6%      46.7%     81.0%      84.8%
 International newspapers                                 0.0%             3.2%             0.0%           0.0%              4.5%               9.3%    0.0%    6.7%        0.0%       0.0%      6.7%       4.8%       3.0%
 Local radio                                              0.0%            22.2%            17.6%           0.0%              20.5%              9.3%   72.7%   33.3%        9.1%      55.6%      6.7%      38.1%      27.3%
 International radio                                     33.3%             0.0%             5.9%          16.7%              2.3%               0.0%    0.0%    6.7%        0.0%       0.0%      6.7%       4.8%       0.0%
 Local television                                        66.7%            25.4%            23.5%          16.7%              29.5%             34.9%   45.5%   20.0%       36.4%      22.2%      26.7%     28.6%      39.4%
 International television                                 0.0%             9.5%            11.8%           0.0%              9.1%               2.3%    9.1%    0.0%       18.2%      33.3%      0.0%       9.5%       0.0%
 Periodicals                                              0.0%            14.3%            17.6%           0.0%              9.1%              11.6%    0.0%    6.7%        9.1%      11.1%      13.3%     14.3%       6.1%
 Internet                                                33.3%            36.5%            52.9%          33.3%              50.0%             46.5%    9.1%   33.3%       45.5%      22.2%      66.7%     19.0%      27.3%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                0.0%             0.0%             5.9%           0.0%              4.5%               2.3%    9.1%   13.3%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       9.1%
 Blogs                                                    0.0%             0.0%             0.0%           0.0%              0.0%               0.0%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Mobile phones                                            0.0%             0.0%             0.0%           0.0%              0.0%               0.0%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      6.7%       0.0%       0.0%
 Instant messaging                                        0.0%             0.0%             0.0%           0.0%              0.0%               0.0%    9.1%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%
 Other                                                    0.0%             4.8%             0.0%          33.3%              0.0%               0.0%    0.0%    0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      13.3%      0.0%       3.0%




                                                                                                                    88
The World Bank                                                                                                         Zambia                                                                                          Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                         Office of                    Consultant on          Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                    Independent    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                              President/     Employee of        Bank              Multilateral          Financial                                       Government     Based                Local
 (Responses Combined)                                 Prime Minister    a Ministry    project/PMU             Agency         Sector/Private Bank    NGO       CBO       Media      Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 World Bank website                                       33.3%           45.9%          64.7%                 16.7%                38.6%          52.4%      0.0%      6.7%          45.5%      0.0%       75.0%     14.3%      30.3%
 Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face
                                                           0.0%           27.9%          17.6%                 66.7%               22.7%           31.0%      36.4%     60.0%        18.2%       0.0%       0.0%     28.6%       24.2%
 meetings/discussions)
 e-Newsletters                                             0.0%           37.7%           5.9%                 66.7%               34.1%           19.0%      18.2%     26.7%        45.5%       50.0%     18.8%      9.5%       27.3%
 Instant messaging                                         0.0%            1.6%           0.0%                  0.0%               0.0%             2.4%       0.0%      6.7%         9.1%        0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        6.1%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                 0.0%           34.4%          41.2%                  0.0%               27.3%           35.7%      54.5%     53.3%        27.3%       40.0%     31.3%     38.1%       27.3%
 World Bank Public Information Center                     66.7%            6.6%           5.9%                  0.0%               15.9%            9.5%      18.2%     13.3%         0.0%       30.0%     18.8%     33.3%       18.2%
 World Bank publications and other written materials      66.7%           37.7%          35.3%                 50.0%               27.3%           35.7%      27.3%     13.3%        45.5%       40.0%     37.5%     38.1%       30.3%
 Mobile phones                                            33.3%            1.6%          11.8%                  0.0%               9.1%             0.0%       9.1%      6.7%         0.0%       10.0%     6.3%       9.5%        9.1%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                 0.0%            1.6%           5.9%                  0.0%               6.8%             9.5%      27.3%     13.3%         0.0%       10.0%     12.5%      9.5%       24.2%
 Blogs                                                     0.0%            0.0%           5.9%                  0.0%               0.0%             2.4%       0.0%      0.0%         0.0%        0.0%     0.0%       4.8%        0.0%
 Other                                                     0.0%            1.6%           5.9%                  0.0%               6.8%             0.0%       0.0%      0.0%         0.0%       20.0%     0.0%       0.0%        3.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                          Office of                       Consultant on      Bilateral/       Private Sector/                                     Independent    Faith-
                                                         President/      Employee of          Bank         Multilateral          Financial                                        Government     Based                Local
 Percentage of Respondents                             Prime Minister     a Ministry      project/PMU         Agency       Sector/Private Bank      NGO          CBO      Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Yes                                                        50.0%           13.6%            35.3%             20.0%               30.0%           23.1%        20.0%     13.3%       30.0%      30.0%      12.5%     20.0%      28.1%
 No                                                         50.0%           86.4%            64.7%             80.0%               70.0%           76.9%        80.0%     86.7%       70.0%      70.0%      87.5%     80.0%      71.9%

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
                                                         Office of                        Consultant on      Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                    Independent    Faith-
                                                        President/        Employee of         Bank          Multilateral          Financial                                       Government     Based                Local
 Percentage of Respondents                           Prime Minister        a Ministry     project/PMU         Agency         Sector/Private Bank    NGO        CBO      Media      Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Yes                                                       0.0%              12.5%           37.5%             66.7%                22.5%          26.3%      30.0%     28.6%         27.3%      0.0%       13.3%     10.0%      18.8%
 No                                                       100.0%             87.5%           62.5%             33.3%                77.5%          73.7%      70.0%     71.4%         72.7%      100.0%     86.7%     90.0%      81.3%

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                           Office of                      Consultant on      Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                    Independent    Faith-
                                                          President/      Employee of         Bank          Multilateral          Financial                                       Government     Based                Local
 Percentage of Respondents                              Prime Minister     a Ministry     project/PMU         Agency         Sector/Private Bank    NGO       CBO       Media      Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Yes                                                         0.0%            100.0%          83.3%            100.0%                87.5%          88.9%     100.0%     50.0%         33.3%      0.0%       50.0%     50.0%      40.0%
 No                                                          0.0%             0.0%           16.7%              0.0%                12.5%          11.1%      0.0%      50.0%         66.7%      0.0%       50.0%     50.0%      60.0%

Do you have access to the Internet?*
                                                           Office of                      Consultant on      Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                    Independent    Faith-
                                                          President/      Employee of         Bank          Multilateral          Financial                                       Government     Based                Local
  Percentage of Respondents                             Prime Minister     a Ministry     project/PMU         Agency         Sector/Private Bank    NGO        CBO      Media      Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
  Yes                                                       100.0%           96.5%           100.0%           100.0%                97.5%          97.3%      60.0%     93.3%        100.0%      90.0%     100.0%     57.1%     100.0%
  No                                                         0.0%             3.5%            0.0%              0.0%                2.5%            2.7%      40.0%      6.7%          0.0%      10.0%      0.0%      42.9%      0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*
                                                           Office of                      Consultant on      Bilateral/        Private Sector/                                    Independent    Faith-
                                                          President/      Employee of         Bank          Multilateral          Financial                                       Government     Based                Local
  Percentage of Respondents                             Prime Minister     a Ministry     project/PMU         Agency         Sector/Private Bank    NGO       CBO       Media      Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
  Yes                                                        0.0%            62.7%           82.4%            100.0%                58.5%          63.2%      0.0%      50.0%         63.6%      62.5%      78.6%     30.0%      46.9%
  No                                                        100.0%           37.3%           17.6%              0.0%                41.5%          36.8%     100.0%     50.0%         36.4%      37.5%      21.4%     70.0%      53.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



                                                                                                                        89
The World Bank                                                                                                          Zambia                                                                                     Country Survey 2012

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Which do you primarily use?*
                                                           Office of                       Consultant on      Bilateral/         Private Sector/                              Independent    Faith-
                                                          President/       Employee of         Bank          Multilateral           Financial                                 Government     Based                Local
  Percentage of Respondents                             Prime Minister      a Ministry     project/PMU         Agency          Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO     Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
  The World Bank's country website                           0.0%             25.0%           26.7%              0.0%                 33.3%          41.4%   100.0%   55.6%        0.0%      0.0%       7.7%      57.1%      47.4%
  The World Bank's main website                              0.0%             75.0%           73.3%            100.0%                 66.7%          58.6%    0.0%    44.4%      100.0%      100.0%     92.3%     42.9%      52.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Zambia?
                                                         Office of                     Consultant on          Bilateral/         Private Sector/                              Independent    Faith-
                                                        President/      Employee of        Bank              Multilateral           Financial                                 Government     Based                Local
 Percentage of Respondents                            Prime Minister     a Ministry    project/PMU             Agency          Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO     Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Yes                                                       0.0%             16.4%         17.6%                 33.3%                 31.7%          27.9%    0.0%    21.4%        9.1%      22.2%      6.3%      19.0%      19.4%
 No                                                       66.7%             57.4%         64.7%                 66.7%                 56.1%          53.5%   63.6%    64.3%       72.7%      44.4%      68.8%     61.9%      67.7%
 I don’t know what a PIC is                               33.3%             26.2%         17.6%                  0.0%                 12.2%          18.6%   36.4%    14.3%       18.2%      33.3%      25.0%     19.0%      12.9%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
                                                           Office of                       Consultant on      Bilateral/         Private Sector/                              Independent    Faith-
                                                          President/      Employee of          Bank          Multilateral           Financial                                 Government     Based                Local
 Percentage of Respondents                              Prime Minister     a Ministry      project/PMU         Agency          Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO     Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Yes                                                        33.3%            64.5%            88.2%            100.0%                 44.2%          65.0%   45.5%    57.1%       70.0%      12.5%      43.8%     28.6%      37.5%
 No                                                         66.7%            35.5%            11.8%              0.0%                 55.8%          35.0%   54.5%    42.9%       30.0%      87.5%      56.3%     71.4%      62.5%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                           Office of                    Consultant on     Bilateral/             Private Sector/                              Independent    Faith-
 Percentage of Respondents                                President/     Employee of        Bank        Multilateral                Financial                                 Government     Based                Local
 (Responses Combined)                                   Prime Minister    a Ministry    project/PMU        Agency              Sector/Private Bank    NGO     CBO     Media    Institution   Group    Academia   Citizens    Other
 Observer                                                   100.0%           28.3%          0.0%             0.0%                     43.6%          29.3%   50.0%    30.8%       36.4%      60.0%      25.0%     52.6%      46.9%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                 33.3%           25.0%         41.2%             0.0%                     38.5%          24.4%   25.0%    46.2%       45.5%      20.0%      43.8%     21.1%      31.3%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored
                                                             33.3%           41.7%         35.3%            33.3%                    20.5%           65.9%   50.0%    23.1%      27.3%       50.0%     25.0%     31.6%       31.3%
 events/activities
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                0.0%           48.3%         58.8%           100.0%                    23.1%           19.5%   0.0%     53.8%      36.4%       0.0%       6.3%     10.5%       15.6%
 Use World Bank website for information, data,
                                                              0.0%           16.7%         23.5%            33.3%                    23.1%           31.7%   37.5%    15.4%      27.3%       20.0%     56.3%     26.3%       40.6%
 research, etc.

                                                                                                                         90
The World Bank                                                          Zambia                                                      Country Survey 2012




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions by Geographic Location

A. General Issues facing Zambia
In general, would you say that Zambia is headed in...?

 Economically
                                                             Lusaka          Central        Southern        Western        Copperbelt        Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                  Province        Province        Province        Province        Province       Provinces
 The right direction                                         73.8%           68.0%           63.6%           50.0%           76.5%           86.7%
 The wrong direction                                         12.0%           12.0%           22.7%           38.9%           17.6%           6.7%
 Not sure                                                    14.2%           20.0%           13.6%           11.1%            5.9%           6.7%


 Politically
                                                             Lusaka          Central        Southern        Western        Copperbelt        Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                  Province        Province        Province        Province        Province       Provinces
 The right direction                                         59.2%           75.0%           41.7%           33.3%           66.7%           81.3%
 The wrong direction                                         16.8%           16.7%           33.3%           55.6%            6.7%           6.3%
 Not sure                                                    23.9%            8.3%           25.0%           11.1%           26.7%           12.5%


 Socially
                                                             Lusaka          Central        Southern        Western        Copperbelt        Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                  Province        Province        Province        Province        Province       Provinces
 The right direction                                         50.0%           54.5%           38.1%           38.9%           80.0%           42.9%
 The wrong direction                                         16.3%           13.6%           33.3%           33.3%            6.7%           14.3%
 Not sure                                                    33.7%           31.8%           28.6%           27.8%           13.3%           42.9%

When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Zambia? Which ONE is the second most important
development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   st
 1 Most Important                                            Lusaka          Central        Southern        Western        Copperbelt        Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                  Province        Province        Province        Province        Province       Provinces
 Rural development                                           11.3%            0.0%           33.3%            9.1%            6.7%           28.6%
 Education                                                   19.2%           33.3%           16.7%           18.2%           20.0%           14.3%
 Social protection                                            1.3%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Transport                                                    2.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                           19.9%            0.0%           16.7%           18.2%           20.0%           28.6%
 Public sector reform                                         0.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Regional integration                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Gender                                                       0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                          4.6%           11.1%            0.0%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%
 Access to finance                                            3.3%           11.1%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                    2.0%           11.1%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                         0.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                              3.3%            0.0%            8.3%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Livestock sector development                                 0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Public financial management                                  2.6%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                      6.6%           11.1%            0.0%            9.1%            6.7%           0.0%
 Governance                                                   6.6%            0.0%            8.3%            0.0%           13.3%           0.0%
 Financial markets                                            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Urban development                                            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            9.1%            0.0%           0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                 0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                      0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Health                                                       2.6%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Energy                                                       2.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%
 Food security                                                0.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Climate change                                               0.0%           11.1%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Agricultural development                                     3.3%           11.1%           16.7%           27.3%            6.7%           28.6%
 Trade and exports                                            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Crime and violence                                           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Inclusive economic growth                                    3.3%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Law and justice                                              0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                         2.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Natural resource management                                  1.3%            0.0%            0.0%            9.1%            6.7%           0.0%
 Global integration                                           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%
 Disaster management                                          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Information and communications technology                    0.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%




                                                                          91
The World Bank                                                          Zambia                                                      Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Zambia? Which ONE is the second most important
  development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   nd
 2 Most Important                                            Lusaka          Central        Southern        Western        Copperbelt        Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                  Province        Province        Province        Province        Province       Provinces
 Rural development                                            7.3%           10.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Education                                                   12.0%            0.0%           18.2%           25.0%            0.0%           7.1%
 Social protection                                            0.7%           20.0%            0.0%            8.3%            0.0%           0.0%
 Transport                                                    4.0%           10.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           7.1%
 Poverty reduction                                            5.3%           20.0%            9.1%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Public sector reform                                         0.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Regional integration                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%
 Gender                                                       1.3%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                          4.0%           10.0%            0.0%            0.0%           13.3%           0.0%
 Access to finance                                            2.7%            0.0%           18.2%            0.0%           13.3%           0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                    2.7%           10.0%            0.0%            8.3%            0.0%           0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                         2.7%           10.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                              1.3%            0.0%            0.0%           16.7%            6.7%           0.0%
 Livestock sector development                                 0.7%            0.0%            9.1%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Public financial management                                  4.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Job creation/employment                                     14.7%           10.0%           18.2%            0.0%            6.7%           28.6%
 Governance                                                   7.3%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           20.0%           7.1%
 Financial markets                                            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Urban development                                            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                 0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                      0.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Health                                                       4.7%            0.0%            0.0%            8.3%            0.0%           21.4%
 Energy                                                       0.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Food security                                                1.3%            0.0%           18.2%            8.3%            0.0%           0.0%
 Climate change                                               0.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Agricultural development                                     6.0%            0.0%            9.1%            8.3%            6.7%           0.0%
 Trade and exports                                            2.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Crime and violence                                           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Inclusive economic growth                                    3.3%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Law and justice                                              0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                         0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           13.3%           0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                         3.3%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           14.3%
 Natural resource management                                  5.3%            0.0%            0.0%           16.7%            6.7%           14.3%
 Global integration                                           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Disaster management                                          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Information and communications technology                    0.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%




                                                                          92
The World Bank                                                          Zambia                                                      Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in Zambia? Which ONE is the second most important
  development priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
   rd
 3 Most Important                                            Lusaka          Central        Southern        Western        Copperbelt        Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                  Province        Province        Province        Province        Province       Provinces
 Rural development                                            6.4%            7.7%            8.3%           27.3%            6.7%           14.3%
 Education                                                    5.8%            7.7%            8.3%            0.0%            0.0%           7.1%
 Social protection                                            0.6%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Transport                                                    3.8%            0.0%            8.3%           18.2%            0.0%           7.1%
 Poverty reduction                                            3.2%           15.4%            8.3%            0.0%            0.0%           7.1%
 Public sector reform                                         0.6%            0.0%            8.3%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Regional integration                                         0.6%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Gender                                                       3.2%            7.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                          4.5%            0.0%            8.3%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%
 Access to finance                                            3.8%           15.4%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           14.3%
 Foreign direct investment                                    3.2%            0.0%            0.0%            9.1%            6.7%           0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                         1.3%            7.7%            0.0%            0.0%            6.7%           14.3%
 Anti-corruption                                              5.8%            0.0%            8.3%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Livestock sector development                                 1.9%            0.0%            0.0%            9.1%            0.0%           0.0%
 Public financial management                                  0.6%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           7.1%
 Job creation/employment                                      9.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           13.3%           7.1%
 Governance                                                   5.8%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%
 Financial markets                                            0.6%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Urban development                                            2.6%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                 1.9%            7.7%            8.3%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                      1.9%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%
 Health                                                       3.2%            0.0%            0.0%            9.1%            6.7%           7.1%
 Energy                                                       1.9%            7.7%            0.0%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%
 Food security                                                0.6%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Climate change                                               1.9%            7.7%            0.0%            9.1%            0.0%           0.0%
 Agricultural development                                    10.9%            7.7%           25.0%            0.0%           13.3%           7.1%
 Trade and exports                                            1.3%            0.0%            8.3%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Crime and violence                                           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Inclusive economic growth                                    3.2%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           7.1%
 Law and justice                                              1.9%            0.0%            0.0%            9.1%            0.0%           0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                         1.3%            7.7%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                         3.8%            0.0%            0.0%            9.1%            6.7%           0.0%
 Natural resource management                                  0.6%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Global integration                                           0.6%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Disaster management                                          0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
 Information and communications technology                    1.3%            0.0%            0.0%            0.0%            6.7%           0.0%




                                                                          93
The World Bank                                                            Zambia                                                       Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would
   contribute most to reducing poverty in Zambia?
 Percentage of Respondents                                    Lusaka            Central        Southern       Western         Copperbelt         Other
 (Responses Combined)                                        Province          Province        Province       Province         Province        Provinces
 Water and sanitation                                           9.4%             15.4%          12.5%          10.0%              0.0%           5.9%
 Equality of opportunity                                       11.5%              7.7%           0.0%           0.0%             11.8%           5.9%
 Access to finance                                             24.0%             30.8%           4.2%          25.0%             23.5%           29.4%
 Inclusive economic growth                                     16.7%             15.4%           8.3%          10.0%              5.9%           17.6%
 Climate change                                                 1.0%              3.8%           0.0%           0.0%             11.8%           0.0%
 Disaster management                                            0.0%              0.0%           0.0%           0.0%              0.0%           0.0%
 Regional integration                                           2.6%              3.8%           0.0%           0.0%              5.9%           0.0%
 Gender                                                         2.6%              3.8%           0.0%           0.0%              0.0%           0.0%
 Rural development                                             31.3%             23.1%          37.5%          35.0%             17.6%           64.7%
 Urban development                                              1.6%              0.0%           0.0%           0.0%              5.9%           0.0%
 Education                                                     32.8%             42.3%          58.3%          30.0%             29.4%           41.2%
 Regulatory framework                                           0.5%              0.0%           0.0%           0.0%              5.9%           0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                           8.9%              0.0%           4.2%           0.0%              0.0%           11.8%
 Social protection                                              3.1%              3.8%           0.0%           5.0%              0.0%           0.0%
 Law and justice                                                1.6%              3.8%           0.0%           0.0%              0.0%           0.0%
 Transport                                                      7.8%              3.8%          16.7%          25.0%              5.9%           5.9%
 Crime and violence                                             0.0%              0.0%           0.0%           0.0%              0.0%           0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                         0.5%              0.0%           0.0%           0.0%              0.0%           0.0%
 Information and communications technology                      0.0%              0.0%           4.2%           0.0%              0.0%           0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                               11.5%             11.5%           4.2%           0.0%              5.9%           5.9%
 Domestic private sector development                           14.1%             15.4%           8.3%           5.0%             29.4%           0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                      4.7%              0.0%           4.2%           0.0%              5.9%           0.0%
 Global integration                                             0.5%              0.0%           4.2%           0.0%             11.8%           0.0%
 Energy                                                         5.2%              7.7%           8.3%           0.0%              5.9%           0.0%
 Public sector reform                                           1.0%              0.0%           0.0%           0.0%              5.9%           0.0%
 Livestock sector development                                   0.0%              3.8%           4.2%          20.0%             11.8%           0.0%
 Governance                                                     6.8%              3.8%          20.8%          15.0%              5.9%           5.9%
 Natural resource management                                    6.3%              3.8%           4.2%           0.0%             17.6%           11.8%
 Environmental sustainability                                   1.0%              0.0%           4.2%           0.0%              5.9%           0.0%
 Health                                                         9.9%             19.2%          12.5%           5.0%             11.8%           11.8%
 Public financial management                                    4.2%              0.0%           0.0%           5.0%             11.8%           5.9%
 Agricultural development                                      28.1%             30.8%          45.8%          45.0%             29.4%           29.4%
 Job creation/employment                                       37.5%             30.8%          16.7%          40.0%              5.9%           41.2%
 Financial markets                                              0.0%              0.0%           0.0%           0.0%              5.9%           0.0%
 Trade and exports                                              5.7%              0.0%           0.0%           5.0%              0.0%           0.0%
 Food security                                                  6.3%             15.4%          12.5%          10.0%              5.9%           5.9%




                                                                           94
The World Bank                                                                     Zambia                                                           Country Survey 2012




A. General Issues facing Zambia (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
    Zambia? (Choose no more than THREE)
  Percentage of Respondents                                   Lusaka          Central        Southern         Western        Copperbelt        Other
  (Responses Combined)                                       Province        Province         Province        Province         Province      Provinces
  Energy                                                      20.4%           28.0%             8.7%           40.0%            29.4%          17.6%
  Equality of opportunity                                      7.9%           12.0%             0.0%           10.0%            11.8%          11.8%
  Social protection                                            1.0%            8.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%
  Global integration                                           4.2%            8.0%             4.3%            0.0%             5.9%          5.9%
  Climate change                                               0.5%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            11.8%          0.0%
  Anti-corruption                                              8.4%           28.0%            13.0%           10.0%            17.6%          17.6%
  Disaster management                                          0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%
  Rural development                                           17.3%           20.0%            21.7%           10.0%            11.8%          0.0%
  Access to finance                                           21.5%           36.0%            26.1%           20.0%             5.9%          29.4%
  Foreign direct investment                                   19.9%            8.0%             4.3%           10.0%             0.0%          23.5%
  Urban development                                            0.5%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             5.9%          0.0%
  Water and sanitation                                         0.5%            0.0%             8.7%            5.0%             0.0%          5.9%
  Education                                                   20.9%           28.0%            43.5%           40.0%            11.8%          17.6%
  Information and communications technology                    3.7%           12.0%             0.0%            0.0%            11.8%          0.0%
  Regulatory framework                                         1.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            17.6%          0.0%
  Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%
  Trade and exports                                           19.4%           16.0%            17.4%           15.0%             5.9%          35.3%
  Public sector reform                                         2.1%            4.0%             4.3%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%
  Regional integration                                         1.6%            0.0%             4.3%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%
  Domestic private sector development                         23.0%           20.0%             8.7%            5.0%            29.4%          5.9%
  Job creation/employment                                     18.3%           28.0%            17.4%           10.0%            29.4%          29.4%
  Agricultural development                                    26.2%           16.0%            34.8%           25.0%            29.4%          47.1%
  Food security                                                2.6%            0.0%             8.7%            0.0%             0.0%          5.9%
  Governance                                                  14.1%            0.0%             8.7%           10.0%             0.0%          17.6%
  Transport                                                   14.1%            4.0%             8.7%           10.0%            17.6%          5.9%
  Livestock sector development                                 1.0%            0.0%            13.0%            5.0%             0.0%          0.0%
  Gender                                                       1.0%            4.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%
  Natural resource management                                 14.7%            0.0%            17.4%           25.0%            23.5%          17.6%
  Environmental sustainability                                 0.5%            0.0%             0.0%            5.0%             0.0%          0.0%
  Health                                                       6.3%            0.0%             0.0%           15.0%            11.8%          0.0%
  Basic infrastructure                                        12.6%            0.0%            13.0%            5.0%             0.0%          5.9%
  Law and justice                                              1.0%            4.0%             4.3%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%
  Crime and violence                                           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%          0.0%
  Public financial management                                  7.3%            8.0%             4.3%           10.0%             5.9%          0.0%
  Financial markets                                            3.7%            4.0%             0.0%            5.0%             5.9%          0.0%



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective; 1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                                     95
The World Bank                                                              Zambia                                                          Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development results in Zambia, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank
   should focus most of its attention and resources in Zambia? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Lusaka         Central     Southern         Western          Copperbelt        Other
 (Responses Combined)                                           Province       Province     Province         Province          Province       Provinces
 Rural development                                               39.1%           46.2%       45.8%             63.2%            43.8%           41.2%
 Education                                                       30.7%           38.5%       54.2%             42.1%            43.8%           35.3%
 Social protection                                                2.1%            0.0%        0.0%              5.3%             0.0%           0.0%
 Governance                                                      15.6%            7.7%       29.2%             10.5%            12.5%           23.5%
 Transport                                                       15.1%            3.8%       20.8%             10.5%             6.3%           0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                               20.3%           30.8%       12.5%             15.8%            25.0%           17.6%
 Public sector reform                                             4.2%            7.7%        4.2%              0.0%             6.3%           5.9%
 Regional integration                                             1.0%            0.0%        4.2%              0.0%             6.3%           0.0%
 Gender                                                           2.1%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Crime and violence                                               0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Domestic private sector development                             17.2%           11.5%        0.0%              0.0%            25.0%           0.0%
 Foreign direct investment                                        5.7%            7.7%        0.0%             15.8%             0.0%           5.9%
 Water and sanitation                                             5.7%           11.5%       20.8%             10.5%             6.3%           17.6%
 Energy                                                          11.5%            3.8%        8.3%              0.0%            12.5%           0.0%
 Livestock sector development                                     2.1%            0.0%        4.2%             26.3%             0.0%           11.8%
 Access to finance                                                9.9%           15.4%        8.3%             15.8%             0.0%           5.9%
 Public financial management                                     13.0%            0.0%        4.2%              0.0%             6.3%           17.6%
 Job creation/employment                                         12.5%           15.4%        8.3%              5.3%            18.8%           17.6%
 Financial markets                                                2.6%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Urban development                                                0.5%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                     2.1%            0.0%        4.2%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Equality of opportunity                                          1.6%           11.5%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%           11.8%
 Health                                                           9.9%            7.7%       20.8%             26.3%            12.5%           23.5%
 Global integration                                               1.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%            12.5%           0.0%
 Food security                                                    3.1%            3.8%        8.3%              0.0%             0.0%           5.9%
 Climate change                                                   1.0%           11.5%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Agricultural development                                        26.6%           26.9%       25.0%             26.3%            25.0%           17.6%
 Trade and exports                                                1.6%            7.7%        4.2%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Inclusive economic growth                                        8.3%            3.8%        0.0%              5.3%             0.0%           5.9%
 Law and justice                                                  1.6%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                             2.1%            0.0%        0.0%              5.3%             6.3%           0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                           0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                            12.5%            0.0%        8.3%             10.5%             0.0%           17.6%
 Natural resource management                                      9.4%            3.8%        0.0%              5.3%            25.0%           17.6%
 Anti-corruption                                                  4.2%           15.4%        4.2%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Information and communications technology                        2.6%            7.7%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
 Disaster management                                              0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%           0.0%

When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Zambia?
 Greatest Value                                                  Lusaka           Central         Southern         Western        Copperbelt         Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                      Province         Province         Province         Province        Province        Provinces
 Financial resources                                             42.6%            41.2%            55.6%            60.0%           57.1%            57.1%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                       5.9%            17.6%            11.1%             0.0%            7.1%            0.0%
 Technical assistance                                            16.6%            17.6%            11.1%             0.0%            7.1%            14.3%
 Policy advice                                                   11.8%             5.9%             0.0%             6.7%           14.3%            7.1%
 Donor coordination                                               2.4%             5.9%             0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
 Data                                                             1.2%             5.9%             0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
 Training/capacity building                                      14.2%             5.9%            22.2%            33.3%            7.1%            21.4%
 Studies/analyses                                                 2.4%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%            7.1%            0.0%
 Convening/facilitating                                           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                    2.4%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
 Other                                                            0.6%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            0.0%




                                                                              96
The World Bank                                                              Zambia                                                          Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)
When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Zambia?
   nd
 2 Greatest Value                                                Lusaka           Central         Southern         Western        Copperbelt         Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                      Province         Province         Province         Province        Province        Provinces
 Financial resources                                             13.7%            26.3%             5.3%            33.3%           14.3%            7.1%
 Mobilizing third party financial resources                      11.3%             0.0%            10.5%             0.0%            0.0%            21.4%
 Technical assistance                                            20.8%            15.8%            15.8%            13.3%           21.4%            28.6%
 Policy advice                                                   13.7%            15.8%            15.8%            26.7%            7.1%            7.1%
 Donor coordination                                              10.1%             5.3%            10.5%             0.0%           21.4%            28.6%
 Data                                                             3.6%             0.0%             5.3%             0.0%            0.0%            0.0%
 Training/capacity building                                      16.1%            26.3%            26.3%             6.7%           21.4%            0.0%
 Studies/analyses                                                 6.0%             5.3%             5.3%            13.3%            0.0%            7.1%
 Convening/facilitating                                           1.2%             0.0%             0.0%             0.0%            7.1%            0.0%
 Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                    3.6%             5.3%             5.3%             0.0%            7.1%            0.0%
 Other                                                            0.0%             0.0%             0.0%             6.7%            0.0%            0.0%

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Lusaka        Central          Southern        Western      Copperbelt              Other
 (Responses Combined)                                           Province      Province          Province        Province      Province             Provinces
 Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
                                                                 20.2%          16.0%            26.1%           18.8%          31.3%                35.3%
 political realities
 Not exploring alternative policy options                        10.1%           8.0%            13.0%            6.3%           0.0%                 5.9%
 Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                                 28.7%          28.0%            30.4%            6.3%          18.8%                 5.9%
 procedures
 Staff too inaccessible                                           7.4%          20.0%            13.0%            6.3%           6.3%                11.8%
 Arrogant in its approach                                         2.7%           0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                5.9%
 Not client focused                                               3.2%           4.0%             0.0%            0.0%           6.3%                5.9%
 The credibility of its knowledge/data                            1.6%           8.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                0.0%
 Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts
                                                                 11.7%          20.0%             8.7%           31.3%           0.0%                11.8%
 in the country
 Too influenced by developed countries                           31.4%          16.0%            34.8%           18.8%          43.8%                17.6%
 Not enough public disclosure of its work                        15.4%          24.0%            26.1%           25.0%           6.3%                41.2%
 World Bank processes too slow and complex                       15.4%          12.0%             8.7%            0.0%          25.0%                11.8%
 Not aligned with country priorities                              7.4%           0.0%             8.7%            6.3%          12.5%                17.6%
 Not aligned with other donors’ work                              1.1%           8.0%             0.0%            6.3%           0.0%                0.0%
 Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                  16.0%          12.0%            17.4%           18.8%          12.5%                11.8%
 Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                 14.4%          16.0%             8.7%           43.8%          18.8%                 5.9%
 Zambia
 Other                                                            4.8%           0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           6.3%                 0.0%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                   Lusaka            Central        Southern        Western       Copperbelt               Other
 (Responses Combined)                                       Province          Province        Province        Province       Province              Provinces
 Investment lending                                           54.0%             50.0%           41.7%          70.0%          31.3%                  53.3%
 Capacity development                                         38.6%             42.3%           37.5%          25.0%          37.5%                  46.7%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government       31.7%             53.8%           29.2%          20.0%          31.3%                  33.3%
 Knowledge products/services                                   9.0%             11.5%           16.7%           5.0%          12.5%                  6.7%
 Technical assistance                                         30.7%             26.9%           37.5%          25.0%          31.3%                  60.0%
 Trust Fund management                                         7.9%              3.8%            8.3%          10.0%          25.0%                  0.0%
 Other                                                         1.6%              0.0%            4.2%           0.0%           6.3%                  0.0%
 Don’t know                                                   10.1%              3.8%            8.3%          15.0%           6.3%                  0.0%

Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the LEAST effective in reducing poverty in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                     Lusaka           Central        Southern        Western       Copperbelt              Other
 (Responses Combined)                                         Province         Province        Province        Province       Province             Provinces
 Investment lending                                            13.8%              4.0%           34.8%          11.1%          18.8%                 35.3%
 Capacity development                                          18.2%             32.0%           34.8%          16.7%          31.3%                 23.5%
 Policy based lending/ budget support to the Government        24.9%             32.0%           30.4%          27.8%           0.0%                 17.6%
 Knowledge products/services                                   28.2%             32.0%           13.0%          27.8%          18.8%                 23.5%
 Technical assistance                                          24.9%             16.0%           21.7%          16.7%          31.3%                 11.8%
 Trust Fund management                                         26.5%             48.0%           30.4%          33.3%          56.3%                 52.9%
 Other                                                          0.6%              0.0%            0.0%           0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%
 Don’t know                                                    23.8%             12.0%            8.7%          27.8%          12.5%                 17.6%




                                                                              97
The World Bank                                                              Zambia                                                         Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different between locations

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate
with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
  Percentage of Respondents                                       Lusaka            Central        Southern         Western        Copperbelt        Other
  (Responses Combined)                                           Province          Province         Province        Province        Province       Provinces
  NGOs                                                            30.5%              26.9%           20.8%           20.0%            41.2%          17.6%
  Local Government                                                36.8%              34.6%           45.8%           15.0%            11.8%          47.1%
  Beneficiaries                                                   22.1%              11.5%           33.3%           65.0%            41.2%          35.3%
  Private sector                                                  37.9%              11.5%           12.5%           10.0%            29.4%          23.5%
  Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                            15.3%              30.8%           25.0%           55.0%            23.5%          23.5%
  Donor community                                                  9.5%               3.8%           16.7%           10.0%            11.8%          11.8%
  Foundations                                                      1.1%               0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             5.9%           0.0%
  Academia/think tanks/research institutes                        23.7%              11.5%           12.5%            5.0%            17.6%          17.6%
  Parliament                                                       9.5%              23.1%           12.5%            0.0%             0.0%           5.9%
  Media                                                            7.4%              19.2%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
  Faith based organizations                                        4.2%              19.2%           12.5%           15.0%             5.9%          11.8%
  Other                                                            1.1%               3.8%            8.3%            0.0%             5.9%           5.9%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Zambia, on a ten point scale?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                              98
The World Bank                                                             Zambia                                                        Country Survey 2012




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in Zambia in terms of…, on a ten point scale?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between locations

When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which TWO of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                       Lusaka          Central         Southern         Western          Copperbelt       Other
 (Responses Combined)                                           Province        Province         Province         Province          Province      Provinces
 The World Bank works too slowly                                  15.1%          12.5%              4.2%            0.0%             47.1%          11.8%
 The World Bank does not reach out enough to non-state
                                                                  21.0%          16.7%             29.2%           11.8%             29.4%          35.3%
 actors
 The Government works inefficiently                               25.8%          16.7%             37.5%           35.3%             17.6%          11.8%
 There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                  24.7%          20.8%             41.7%           29.4%             23.5%          29.4%
 participation
 Poor donor coordination                                           5.9%           8.3%             16.7%            5.9%              0.0%          5.9%
 The World Bank does not do adequate follow
                                                                   4.8%          16.7%              4.2%           17.6%              0.0%          0.0%
 through/follow-up
 Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government              19.4%          20.8%              8.3%            0.0%             11.8%          23.5%
 Political pressures and obstacles                                21.0%          12.5%              8.3%           11.8%             23.5%          17.6%
 Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                                  24.2%          20.8%             12.5%           29.4%             17.6%          11.8%
 challenges
 Support not in the right area                                     5.4%           0.0%              4.2%           11.8%              5.9%          17.6%
 Inadequate consultation                                           9.7%          25.0%             12.5%            0.0%              5.9%          29.4%
 The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social
                                                                  11.8%          20.8%             16.7%           41.2%             11.8%          5.9%
 realities on the ground
 Other                                                             2.7%           4.2%              0.0%            0.0%              5.9%          0.0%




                                                                             99
The World Bank                                                              Zambia                                                          Country Survey 2012




C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Zambia, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between locations




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in Zambia, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                                             100
The World Bank                                                              Zambia                                                            Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge
How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research (e.g., data, analysis, reports) in the work you do?
                                                             Lusaka            Central           Southern         Western             Copperbelt       Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                  Province          Province           Province        Province              Province      Provinces
 Weekly                                                       7.3%              4.0%                0.0%            0.0%                 5.9%          0.0%
 Monthly                                                     13.1%              4.0%                4.2%            0.0%                 0.0%          5.9%
 A few times a year                                          43.5%             24.0%               33.3%           11.1%                17.6%          23.5%
 Rarely                                                      22.0%             28.0%               29.2%           27.8%                41.2%          17.6%
 Never                                                       14.1%             40.0%               33.3%           61.1%                35.3%          52.9%

When thinking about the development challenges in Zambia, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and
   knowledge efforts in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 Percentage of Respondents                                     Lusaka         Central        Southern          Western        Copperbelt          Other
 (Responses Combined)                                         Province       Province        Province          Province         Province        Provinces
 Public sector reform                                          11.5%          24.0%           12.5%              5.3%            11.8%             5.9%
 Gender                                                         4.7%           0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             5.9%             0.0%
 Education                                                     28.6%          40.0%           45.8%             52.6%            29.4%            35.3%
 Domestic private sector development                           24.0%           4.0%           12.5%             10.5%            41.2%            23.5%
 Foreign direct investment                                      4.2%           4.0%            8.3%              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Water and sanitation                                           9.4%           8.0%           20.8%             26.3%             5.9%            11.8%
 Trade and exports                                              8.9%           8.0%            4.2%              0.0%             5.9%             5.9%
 Inclusive economic growth                                     13.0%           8.0%            0.0%              5.3%            17.6%             5.9%
 Energy                                                        10.9%           8.0%           20.8%              0.0%            17.6%             5.9%
 Disaster management                                            1.0%           0.0%            0.0%              5.3%             5.9%             0.0%
 Livestock sector development                                   3.6%           0.0%           16.7%             26.3%            11.8%             0.0%
 Governance (building strong institutions/government
                                                               13.5%          12.0%           20.8%             10.5%            17.6%            11.8%
 effectiveness)
 Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
                                                                2.6%          12.0%            4.2%              5.3%             5.9%            11.8%
 assistance)
 Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                  3.6%           8.0%            4.2%              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Poverty reduction                                             24.5%          24.0%           29.2%             36.8%            17.6%            17.6%
 Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                        1.6%           0.0%            0.0%              5.3%            11.8%             0.0%
 Anti-corruption                                                6.3%          12.0%            4.2%              0.0%             5.9%             5.9%
 Financial markets                                              3.1%           0.0%            0.0%              5.3%             0.0%             0.0%
 Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                         6.3%           4.0%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%             5.9%
 Urban development                                              0.5%           0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Crime and violence                                             0.0%           0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Regional integration                                           0.5%           0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Information and communications technology                      2.1%           0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
 Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)               8.9%           0.0%            0.0%              5.3%             0.0%             5.9%
 Agricultural development                                      31.3%          16.0%           20.8%             15.8%            11.8%            35.3%
 Access to finance                                              7.8%           8.0%           16.7%              5.3%             5.9%            11.8%
 Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)           6.8%           0.0%            4.2%              0.0%             5.9%            17.6%
 Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure,
                                                                2.6%           4.0%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%            11.8%
 fiscal system reform)
 Job creation/employment                                       22.4%          40.0%            8.3%              5.3%            11.8%            17.6%
 Health                                                         8.3%          28.0%           12.5%             31.6%            17.6%            23.5%
 Rural development                                             14.1%          20.0%           20.8%             36.8%             0.0%            23.5%
 Global integration                                             0.5%           0.0%            4.2%              0.0%             5.9%             5.9%
 Food security                                                  2.1%           0.0%            4.2%              0.0%             5.9%             0.0%
 Environmental sustainability                                   2.6%           8.0%            4.2%              0.0%            11.8%             0.0%
 Regulatory framework                                           2.1%           0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             5.9%             0.0%
 Basic infrastructure                                           4.2%           0.0%            0.0%              5.3%             5.9%             0.0%
 Communicable/non-communicable diseases                         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%

How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at… in Zambia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                             101
The World Bank                                                                     Zambia                                                                Country Survey 2012




D. The World Bank’s Knowledge (continued)

To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research... in Zambia ? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between locations




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective; 1-To no degree at all,
10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                     102
The World Bank                                                              Zambia                                                             Country Survey 2012




E. Working with the World Bank
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations




F. The Future Role of the World Bank in Zambia




(1-Not a significant role at all, 10-Very significant role)
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                     Lusaka           Central        Southern        Western               Copperbelt         Other
 (Responses Combined)                                        Province          Province        Province        Province               Province        Provinces
 Improve the quality of its experts as related to Zambia's
                                                               36.2%             26.9%          34.8%           38.9%                  29.4%            35.3%
 specific challenges
 Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing       51.9%             38.5%          47.8%           38.9%                  35.3%            41.2%
 Focus primarily on advocacy issues                             8.1%              7.7%           4.3%            5.6%                  11.8%            5.9%
 Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to
                                                               14.6%             15.4%          21.7%           11.1%                  23.5%            11.8%
 markets
 Ensure greater selectivity in its work                        15.1%             15.4%          13.0%            5.6%                  23.5%            11.8%
 Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                               20.5%             42.3%          30.4%           16.7%                  11.8%            23.5%
 statistics/figures on Zambia's economy
 Offer more innovative financial products                      15.1%             11.5%          17.4%           27.8%                  17.6%            35.3%
 Offer more innovative knowledge services                      14.1%             23.1%          13.0%           16.7%                   5.9%            17.6%
 Increase availability of Fee-Based services                    0.5%              7.7%           4.3%            5.6%                   0.0%            0.0%
 Work faster                                                    8.6%              7.7%          13.0%           11.1%                  29.4%            5.9%
 Other                                                          5.9%              0.0%           0.0%            5.6%                   5.9%            5.9%




                                                                              103
The World Bank                                                              Zambia                                                           Country Survey 2012




G. Communication and Information Sharing
Where do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                   Lusaka          Central         Southern        Western       Copperbelt                 Other
 (Responses Combined)                                       Province        Province         Province        Province       Province                Provinces
 Local newspapers                                             75.9%          57.7%            83.3%           68.4%          64.7%                    64.7%
 International newspapers                                      4.2%           3.8%             0.0%            0.0%           5.9%                    5.9%
 Local radio                                                  15.7%          34.6%            33.3%           57.9%          23.5%                    35.3%
 International radio                                           2.6%           7.7%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                    0.0%
 Local television                                             27.2%          46.2%            25.0%           47.4%          47.1%                    35.3%
 International television                                      6.8%          15.4%             4.2%            5.3%           5.9%                    11.8%
 Periodicals                                                  13.1%           0.0%             4.2%            0.0%           5.9%                    5.9%
 Internet                                                     42.9%          15.4%            37.5%           15.8%          41.2%                    29.4%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                     3.7%          11.5%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                    0.0%
 Blogs                                                         0.0%           0.0%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                    0.0%
 Mobile phones                                                 0.0%           3.8%             4.2%            0.0%           0.0%                    0.0%
 Instant messaging                                             0.0%           3.8%             0.0%            0.0%           0.0%                    0.0%
 Other                                                         4.2%           0.0%             4.2%            0.0%           0.0%                    5.9%

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                    Lusaka          Central      Southern               Western         Copperbelt          Other
 (Responses Combined)                                        Province        Province      Province               Province         Province         Provinces
 World Bank website                                           45.0%           23.1%         30.4%                  10.5%            29.4%             17.6%
 Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face
                                                              21.5%           23.1%         34.8%                   31.6%            41.2%            52.9%
 meetings/discussions)
 e-Newsletters                                                31.4%           19.2%         21.7%                   10.5%            11.8%            29.4%
 Instant messaging                                             1.6%            7.7%          0.0%                    5.3%             5.9%            0.0%
 World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences                    29.8%           57.7%         30.4%                   36.8%            52.9%            29.4%
 World Bank Public Information Center                         14.7%           15.4%         17.4%                   15.8%            17.6%            11.8%
 World Bank publications and other written materials          36.1%           26.9%         26.1%                   26.3%            29.4%            35.3%
 Mobile phones                                                 3.7%            7.7%         13.0%                   26.3%             0.0%            0.0%
 Social media (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube)                     8.9%           11.5%         17.4%                   21.1%             0.0%            5.9%
 Blogs                                                         1.0%            0.0%          4.3%                    0.0%             0.0%            0.0%
 Other                                                         2.6%            3.8%          4.3%                    0.0%             5.9%            11.8%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of
exceptions?*
                                                                Lusaka          Central         Southern         Western          Copperbelt           Other
  Percentage of Respondents                                    Province        Province         Province        Province           Province         Provinces
  Yes                                                           24.7%           13.0%              4.8%            0.0%             47.1%             17.6%
  No                                                            75.3%           87.0%             95.2%          100.0%             52.9%             82.4%
*Significantly different between locations

Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
                                                               Lusaka             Central        Southern         Western         Copperbelt          Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                    Province           Province        Province         Province         Province         Provinces
 Yes                                                            20.1%              4.5%           19.0%            16.7%            37.5%             18.8%
 No                                                             79.9%             95.5%           81.0%            83.3%            62.5%             81.3%

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                                 Lusaka           Central        Southern         Western         Copperbelt          Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                      Province         Province        Province         Province         Province         Provinces
 Yes                                                             80.0%             0.0%           75.0%            66.7%            80.0%             33.3%
 No                                                              20.0%             0.0%           25.0%            33.3%            20.0%             66.7%

Do you have access to the Internet?*
                                                                 Lusaka           Central        Southern         Western         Copperbelt          Other
  Percentage of Respondents                                     Province         Province        Province         Province         Province         Provinces
  Yes                                                            97.2%            66.7%           95.2%            77.8%            94.1%             81.3%
  No                                                              2.8%            33.3%            4.8%            22.2%             5.9%             18.8%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you use/have used the World Bank website?*
                                                                 Lusaka           Central        Southern         Western         Copperbelt          Other
  Percentage of Respondents                                     Province         Province        Province         Province         Province         Provinces
  Yes                                                            72.0%             8.3%           23.8%             0.0%            41.2%             57.1%
  No                                                             28.0%            91.7%           76.2%            100.0%           58.8%             42.9%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                             104
The World Bank                                                              Zambia                                                       Country Survey 2012




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Which do you primarily use?*
                                                                 Lusaka           Central         Southern         Western     Copperbelt         Other
  Percentage of Respondents                                     Province         Province         Province         Province     Province        Provinces
  The World Bank's country website                               28.9%            100.0%           36.4%            100.0%       28.6%            11.1%
  The World Bank's main website                                  71.1%             0.0%            63.6%             0.0%        71.4%            88.9%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Zambia?*
                                                              Lusaka             Central          Southern         Western     Copperbelt         Other
  Percentage of Respondents                                  Province           Province          Province         Province     Province        Provinces
  Yes                                                          21.6%              9.1%             16.7%             5.3%        46.7%            5.9%
  No                                                           63.8%             54.5%             66.7%            52.6%        26.7%            76.5%
  I don’t know what a PIC is                                   14.6%             36.4%             16.7%            42.1%        26.7%            17.6%
*Significantly different between locations

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations




H. Background Information
Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
                                                                Lusaka           Central          Southern         Western     Copperbelt         Other
 Percentage of Respondents                                     Province         Province          Province         Province     Province        Provinces
 Yes                                                             61.8%           54.2%             36.4%            10.5%        35.3%            35.3%
 No                                                              38.2%           45.8%             63.6%            89.5%        64.7%            64.7%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Percentage of Respondents                                      Lusaka          Central       Southern        Western          Copperbelt         Other
 (Responses Combined)                                          Province        Province       Province       Province           Province        Provinces
 Observer                                                       26.8%           54.2%           52.6%          80.0%             52.9%            43.8%
 Use World Bank reports/data                                    31.7%           16.7%           31.6%          26.7%             41.2%            25.0%
 Engage in World Bank related/sponsored
                                                                40.4%           45.8%           15.8%          20.0%             29.4%            50.0%
 events/activities
 Collaborate as part of my professional duties                  35.0%           25.0%           10.5%           0.0%             17.6%            18.8%
 Use World Bank website for information, data, research,
                                                                27.9%           20.8%           31.6%          20.0%             5.9%             25.0%
 etc.




                                                                              105
The World Bank                                                                      Zambia                                                  Country Survey 2012




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions by Year1
    FY ’04 Response Number = 208  FY ’07 Response Number = 319  FY ’12 Response Number = 312
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar; 1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different between country surveys.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in Zambia, on a ten point scale?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.



C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Zambia, on a ten point scale?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between country surveys.



1
    Only those questions that were asked in the FY ’04, FY ’07 and FY ’12 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.



                                                                                     106
The World Bank                                                              Zambia                                                   Country Survey 2012




E. Working with the World Bank

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between country surveys.



G. Communication and Information Sharing

Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                    FY 2007               FY 2012
 Yes                                                                           54.2%                 56.2%
 No                                                                            45.8%                 43.8%

Which do you primarily use?*
  Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY 2007               FY 2012
  The World Bank's country website (www. worldbank.org/zambia)                 13.3%                 31.8%
  The World Bank's main website (www.worldbank.org)                            86.7%                 68.2%
*Significantly different between country surveys.

Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in Zambia?
 Percentage of Respondents                                                  FY 2007                 FY 2012
 Yes                                                                         26.6%                   19.7%
 No                                                                          55.6%                   61.0%
 I don’t know what a PIC is                                                  17.8%                   19.3%




                                                                              107
The World Bank                                                                                        Zambia                                                                       Country Survey 2012




Appendix E: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank
                                                 H3. Currently, do you
                                                                              H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Zambia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              professionally collaborate/
                                              work with the World Bank?             Observer            Use WB reports/data   Engage in WB activities       Collaborate          Use WB website

Indicator Question                             No Mean         Yes Mean     No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean     Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                 5.78            6.27        6.19              6.01       6.08        6.25      6.15          6.10       6.17         6.05      6.12         6.15
World Bank’s effectiveness in Zambia.
The World Bank’s financial instruments
                                                 5.41            6.04        5.79              5.85       5.78        5.87      6.05          5.43       5.85         5.71      5.81         5.79
meet the needs of Zambia
The World Bank meets Zambia’s needs for
                                                 5.96            6.48        6.36              6.11       6.13        6.59      6.24          6.33       6.37         6.05      6.34         6.10
knowledge services
Overall the World Bank currently plays a
                                                 6.82            7.52        7.37              6.84       7.10        7.39      7.15          7.26       7.16         7.28      7.20         7.18
relevant role in development in Zambia
The World Bank’s work is aligned with
what I consider the development priorities       5.93            6.93        6.65              6.09       6.44        6.49      6.48          6.43       6.44         6.51      6.47         6.42
for Zambia
Responsiveness                                   6.03            6.23        6.19              6.07       6.03        6.41      6.27          5.94       6.12         6.24      6.11         6.27
Openness (sharing data and other
                                                 5.90            6.58        6.42              6.07       6.05        6.85      6.32          6.27       6.31         6.27      6.26         6.40
information)
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                 5.90            6.65        6.27              6.35       6.23        6.45      6.34          6.24       6.23         6.48      6.51         5.79
Government
Collaboration with the Government                7.74            8.34        8.18              7.91       7.95        8.40      8.04          8.15       8.13         7.99      8.12         7.99
Collaboration with other donors                  7.71            7.89        7.76              7.96       7.63        8.26      7.93          7.65       7.93         7.58      7.83         7.81
To what extent does the World Bank’s work
help to achieve development results in           6.36            6.75        6.69              6.37       6.49        6.79      6.59          6.55       6.60         6.53      6.57         6.60
Zambia?
Are adaptable to Zambia's specific
development challenges and                       5.86            6.36        6.17              6.06       5.96        6.49      6.31          5.84       6.12         6.16      6.19         6.00
circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do
you believe the World Bank’s knowledge
and research make to development results         6.71            6.84        6.83              6.70       6.67        7.04      6.72          6.89       6.83         6.68      6.82         6.69
in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the World Bank’s                      7.42            7.59        7.74              7.20       7.53        7.61      7.46          7.70       7.50         7.68      7.48         7.76
knowledge/research?
Where country systems are adequate, the
World Bank makes appropriate use of              6.78            6.79        6.69              6.79       6.60        7.00      6.73          6.71       6.87         6.42      6.84         6.35
them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.




                                                                                                       108
The World Bank                                      Zambia                                      Country Survey 2012



Appendix E: Zambia FY 2012 Questionnaire




                             World Bank Country Survey FY12 – ZAMBIA


The World Bank is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in ZAMBIA or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey is meant to give the World Bank’s team that works in ZAMBIA, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank uses to assess the views of its critical stakeholders. With this
understanding, the World Bank hopes to develop more effective strategies, outreach and programs that support
development in ZAMBIA. The World Bank commissioned an independent firm to oversee the logistics of this
effort in ZAMBIA. This ensures anonymity and confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid. To complete the survey,
please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion. If you prefer not to answer a
question, please leave it blank.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING ZAMBIA

 A1. In general would you say that ZAMBIA is headed
                                                        Economically       Politically        Socially
 in ... ?
 1    The right direction                                     [ ]             [ ]                [ ]
 2    The wrong direction                                     [ ]             [ ]                [ ]
 3    Not sure                                                [ ]             [ ]                [ ]




                                                     109
     The World Bank                                            Zambia                                       Country Survey 2012



     SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING ZAMBIA (CONT...)
A2. When considering development priorities, which ONE development priority below is the most important in
ZAMBIA? Which ONE is the second most important priority? Which ONE is the third most important priority?
                                                                    FIRST priority     SECOND priority      THIRD priority
Choose only ONE for each column                                   (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)   (Choose only ONE)
1     Rural development                                                                                      
2     Education                                                                                              
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
3                                                                                                            
      assistance)
4     Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                                       
5     Poverty reduction                                                                                      
6     Public sector reform                                                                                   
7     Regional integration                                                                                   
8     Gender                                                                                                 
9     Domestic private sector development                                                                    
10    Access to finance                                                                                      
11    Foreign direct investment                                                                              
12    Water and sanitation                                                                                   
13    Anti-corruption                                                                                        
14    Livestock sector development                                                                           
      Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure,
15                                                                                                           
      fiscal system reform)
16    Job creation/employment                                                                                
      Governance (building strong institutions/government
17                                                                                                           
      effectiveness)
18    Financial markets                                                                                      
19    Urban development                                                                                      
20    Environmental sustainability                                                                           
21    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                                 
22    Health                                                                                                 
23    Energy                                                                                                 
24    Food security                                                                                          
25    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                          
26    Agricultural development                                                                               
27    Trade and exports                                                                                      
28    Crime and violence                                                                                     
29    Inclusive economic growth                                                                              
30    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                                
31    Regulatory framework                                                                                   
32    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                                 
33    Basic infrastructure                                                                                   
34    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                                   
35    Global integration                                                                                     
36    Disaster management                                                                                    
37    Information and communications technology                                                              




                                                                110
The World Bank                                               Zambia                      Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING ZAMBIA (CONT...)

 A 3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to
 reducing poverty in ZAMBIA? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Water and sanitation
 2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 3    Access to finance
 4    Inclusive economic growth
 5    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Disaster management
 7    Regional integration
 8    Gender
 9    Rural development
 10   Urban development
 11   Education
 12   Regulatory framework
 13   Basic infrastructure
 14   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 15   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 16   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 17   Crime and violence
 18   Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 19   Information and communications technology
 20   Anti corruption
 21   Domestic private sector development
 22   Foreign direct investment
 23   Global integration
 24   Energy
 25   Public sector reform
 26   Livestock sector development
 27   Governance (building strong institutions/government effectiveness)
 28   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 29   Environmental sustainability
 30   Health
 31   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 32   Agricultural development
 33   Job creation/employment
 34   Financial markets
 35   Trade and exports
 36   Food security




                                                              111
The World Bank                                               Zambia                    Country Survey 2012



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING ZAMBIA (CONT…)

 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic
 growth in ZAMBIA? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy
 2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 3    Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 4    Global integration
 5    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Anti corruption
 7    Disaster management
 8    Rural development
 9    Access to finance
 10   Foreign direct investment
 11   Urban development
 12   Water and sanitation
 13   Education
 14   Information and communications technology
 15   Regulatory framework
 16   Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 17   Trade and exports
 18   Public sector reform
 19   Regional integration
 20   Domestic private sector development
 21   Job creation/employment
 22   Agricultural development
 23   Food security
 24   Governance (building strong institutions/government effectiveness)
 25   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 26   Livestock sector development
 27   Gender
 28   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 29   Environmental sustainability
 30   Health
 31   Basic infrastructure
 32   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 33   Crime and violence
 34   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 35   Financial markets




                                                              112
The World Bank                                              Zambia                                                Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank in ZAMBIA, on a ten point scale?
          1             2       3       4       5       6       7        8           9               10

 Not familiar at all                                                                         Extremely familiar




 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank’s effectiveness in ZAMBIA, on a
 ten point scale?
          1             2   3       4       5       6   7      8     9                10                  

 Not effective at all                                                              Very effective    Don't know




 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank's staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help ZAMBIA solve its most complicated development challenges, on a ten
 point scale?
          1             2   3       4       5       6   7      8     9                10                  
                                                                             To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                 Don't know
                                                                                          degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                             113
The World Bank                                               Zambia                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank can have the most impact on development
 results in ZAMBIA, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank should focus most
 of its attention and resources in ZAMBIA? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Rural development
 2    Education
 3    Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 4    Governance (building strong institutions/government effectiveness)
 5    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 6    Poverty reduction
 7    Public sector reform
 8    Regional integration
 9    Gender
 10   Crime and violence
 11   Domestic private sector development
 12   Foreign direct investment
 13   Water and sanitation
 14   Energy
 15   Livestock sector development
 16   Access to finance
 17   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 18   Job creation/employment
 19   Financial markets
 20   Urban development
 21   Environmental sustainability
 22   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 23   Health
 24   Global integration
 25   Food security
 26   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 27   Agricultural development
 28   Trade and exports
 29   Inclusive economic growth
 30   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 31   Regulatory framework
 32   Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 33   Basic infrastructure
 34   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 35   Anti corruption
 36   Information and communications technology
 37   Disaster management




                                                              114
The World Bank                                               Zambia                                 Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and
 which activity is of second greatest value in ZAMBIA?
                                                                         Greatest Value    Second Greatest Value
                                                                  (Choose only ONE)       (Choose only ONE)
 1    Financial resources                                                                         
 2    Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                  
 3    Technical assistance                                                                        
 4    Policy advice                                                                               
 5    Donor coordination                                                                          
 6    Data                                                                                        
 7    Training/capacity building                                                                  
 8    Studies/analyses                                                                            
 9    Convening/facilitating                                                                      
      Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 10                                                                                               
      knowledge sharing)
 11   Other (please specify):_________________________                                            



 B6. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in ZAMBIA? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 4    Staff too inaccessible
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not client focused
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Not enough public disclosure of its work
 11   World Bank processes too slow and complex
 12   Not aligned with country priorities
 13   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 14   Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 15   Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in ZAMBIA
 16   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________




                                                              115
The World Bank                                               Zambia                                                Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B7. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in ZAMBIA? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8    Don’t know



 B8. Which World Bank instruments do you believe are LEAST effective in helping to reduce
 poverty in ZAMBIA? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 2    Capacity development
 3    Policy based lending / Budget support to the Government
 4    Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8    Don’t know



 B9. To what extent do you believe the World Bank SHOULD seek to influence the global
 development agenda as related to “global public goods” (e.g., climate change, communicable
 diseases, international financial systems, trade, etc.), on a ten point scale?
         1           2       3      4       5       6       7         8    9                10                
 To no degree at                                                                              To a very
                                                                                                          Don't know
 all                                                                                 significant degree




                                                                116
The World Bank                                             Zambia                                            Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 B10. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor,
 which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank collaborate with more in your
 country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     NGOs
 2     Local Government
 3     Beneficiaries
 4     Private sector
 5     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 6     Donor community
 7     Foundations
 8     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 9     Parliament
 10    Media
 11    Faith based organizations
 12    Other (please specify): __________________________



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank’s work in ZAMBIA, on
 a ten point scale?
                                                                 Strongly                                Strongly   Don't
                                                                 disagree                                   agree   know
        Overall the World Bank currently plays a relevant
 B11                                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        role in development in ZAMBIA
        The World Bank’s work is aligned with what I
 B12                                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        consider the development priorities for this country
        The World Bank supports programs and strategies
 B13                                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        that are realistic for ZAMBIA
        The World Bank treats clients and stakeholders in
 B14                                                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        ZAMBIA with respect




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                               117
The World Bank                                                Zambia                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK (CONT...)

 To what extent is the World Bank an effective development partner in ZAMBIA, in terms of each of the
 following?
                                                                   To no                                 To a very
                                                                                                                      Don't
                                                                   degree at                            significant
                                                                                                                      know
                                                                   all                                     degree
 B15     Responsiveness                                               1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank’s products
 B16                                                                  1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       
         and services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B17                                                                  1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       
         circumstances)
 B18     Being inclusive                                              1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       

 B19     Openness (sharing data and other information)                1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       

 B20     Staff accessibility                                          1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       

 B21     Straightforwardness and honesty                              1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       
         Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B22                                                                  1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       
         Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B23     Collaboration with the Government                            1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       

 B24     Collaboration with other donors                              1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       

 B25     Follow through over time                                     1   2    3   4   5    6   7   8   9     10       



 B26. When World Bank assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank works too slowly
 2     The World Bank does not reach out enough to non-state actors
 3     The Government works inefficiently
 4     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 5     Poor donor coordination
 6     The World Bank does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 7     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 8     Political pressures and obstacles
 9     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 10    Support not in the right area
 11    Inadequate consultation
 12    The World Bank is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 13    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                118
The World Bank                                               Zambia                                               Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
 development in ZAMBIA, on a ten point scale?
                                                                 Not effective                                   Very    Don’t
                                                                 at all                                      effective   know
  C1    Anti corruption                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C2    Information and communications technology                   1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C4    Crime and violence                                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C6    Urban development                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C7    Environmental sustainability                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C8    Regulatory framework                                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  C9    Basic infrastructure                                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C10    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C11    Poverty reduction                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C12    Gender                                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C13    Domestic private sector development                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C14    Foreign direct investment                                   1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C15    Water and sanitation                                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C16    Trade and exports                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C17    Economic growth                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C18    Energy                                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C19    Disaster management                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C20    Monitoring and evaluation                                   1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Public financial management (e.g., public
 C21                                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 C22    Job creation/employment                                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C23    Financial markets                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C24    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C25    Health                                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C26    Rural development                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C27    Global integration                                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Governance (building strong
 C28                                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        institutions/government effectiveness)
 C29    Food security                                               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C30    Education                                                   1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 C31                                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        assistance)
 C32    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C33    Public sector reform                                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C34    Regional integration                                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C35    Agricultural development                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 C36    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                              119
The World Bank                                              Zambia                                                     Country Survey 2012



SECTION C: WORLD BANK EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS (CONT...)

 C37. To what extent does the World Bank’s work help to achieve development results in
 ZAMBIA, on a ten point scale?
         1           2      3       4      5       6        7         8       9               10               
 To no degree at                                                                               To a very
                                                                                                           Don’t know
 all                                                                                  significant degree




 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank in ZAMBIA, on a
 ten point scale?
                                                        Strongly                                            Strongly      Don’t
                                                        disagree                                               agree      know
        The World Bank’s financial instruments (i.e.,
        investment lending, Development Policy
 C38                                                    1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9    10         
        Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.)
        meet the needs of ZAMBIA
        The World Bank meets ZAMBIA’s needs for
 C39    knowledge services (e.g., research, analysis,   1        2        3   4   5       6    7     8     9    10         
        data, technical assistance)




                                                                120
The World Bank                                    Zambia                                      Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE

 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank knowledge and research (e.g., data, analysis,
 reports) in the work you do?
 1    Weekly
 2    Monthly
 3    A few times a year
 4    Rarely
 5    Never




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                   121
The World Bank                                               Zambia                             Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 D2. When thinking about the development challenges in ZAMBIA, where do you believe it
 would be most valuable for the World Bank to focus its research and knowledge efforts in the
 next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Public sector reform
 2    Gender
 3    Education
 4    Domestic private sector development
 5    Foreign direct investment
 6    Water and sanitation
 7    Trade and exports
 8    Inclusive economic growth
 9    Energy
 10   Disaster management
 11   Livestock sector development
 12   Governance (building strong institutions/government effectiveness)
 13   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 14   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 15   Poverty reduction
 16   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 17   Anti corruption
 18   Financial markets
 19   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 20   Urban development
 21   Crime and violence
 22   Regional integration
 23   Information and communications technology
 24   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 25   Agricultural development
 26   Access to finance
 27   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 28   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 29   Job creation/employment
 30   Health
 31   Rural development
 32   Global integration
 33   Food security
 34   Environmental sustainability
 35   Regulatory framework
 36   Basic infrastructure
 37   Communicable/non-communicable diseases




                                                              122
The World Bank                                                 Zambia                                                    Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 How effective do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and research are at … in ZAMBIA?
                                                          Not
                                                                                                                       Very    Don’t
                                                          effective
                                                                                                                   effective   know
                                                          at all
 D3    Raising your awareness of the particular topic      1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
 D4    Stimulating public debate/dialogue                  1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
 D5    Enhancing your knowledge and/or skills              1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
 D6    Contributing to good policy making                  1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
       Providing support for program
 D7                                                        1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
       implementation



 To what extent do you believe that the World Bank’s knowledge and research … in ZAMBIA?

                                                          To no                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                               Don’t
                                                          degree at                                             significant
                                                                                                                               know
                                                          all                                                      degree
  D8     Are timely                                        1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D9                                                       1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to ZAMBIA’s development
 D10                                                       1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         priorities
 D11     Provide feasible recommendations                  1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
 D12                                                       1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         understand)
         A source of relevant information on global
 D13                                                       1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         good practices
 D14     Are adequately disseminated                       1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
 D15     Are appropriately translated                      1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         Are adaptable to ZAMBIA’s specific
 D16     development challenges and country                1        2        3   4   5    6     7       8      9        10      
         circumstances



 D17. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank’s knowledge and
 research make to development results in your country, on a ten point scale?
           1              2    3     4      5         6        7         8       9         10                   

 Not significant at all                                                              Very significant       Don’t know




                                                                   123
The World Bank                                          Zambia                                       Country Survey 2012



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK’S KNOWLEDGE (CONT...)

 D18. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank’s knowledge/research,
 on a ten point scale?
         1              2       3       4       5   6    7       8   9           10                  
 Very low                                                                Very high technical
                                                                                                 Don’t know
 technical quality                                                                   quality




 D19. Overall, how effective is the World Bank at providing linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e.,
 South-South knowledge sharing, etc.)?
          1             2       3       4       5   6    7       8   9           10                  

 Not effective at all                                                         Very effective     Don’t know




 D20. To what extent do you believe that ZAMBIA received value for money from the World Bank’s
 products/services that were paid for on a fee for service basis?
             1              2       3       4   5   6    7       8   9           10                   
                                                                         To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                             Don’t know
                                                                                      degree




                                                         124
The World Bank                                             Zambia                                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements, on a ten point scale?
                                                       Strongly                                 Strongly   Don’t
                                                       disagree                                    agree   know
  E1    The World Bank disburses funds promptly        1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        The World Bank effectively monitors and
  E2    evaluates the projects and programs it         1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        supports
        The World Bank’s approvals and reviews are
  E3                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        done in a timely fashion
        The World Bank’s “Safeguard Policy”
  E4                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        requirements are reasonable
        The World Bank imposes reasonable
  E5                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        conditions on its lending
        Working with the World Bank increases
  E6                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        ZAMBIA’s institutional capacity
        The World Bank ensures consistency and
  E7                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        continuity through staff changes
        The World Bank’s teams and visits are well
  E8                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        coordinated
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
        financial management, etc.) are adequate,
  E9                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        the World Bank makes appropriate use of
        them
        The World Bank provides effective
 E10    implementation support (i.e., supervision of   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        projects)




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                            125
The World Bank                                                Zambia                                             Country Survey 2012



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK IN ZAMBIA

 F1. How significant a role do you believe the World Bank SHOULD play in ZAMBIA’s
 development in the near future, on a ten point scale?
         1           2       3       4         5    6     7            8   9           10               
 Not a significant                                                               Very significant
                                                                                                    Don’t know
 role at all                                                                                 role



 F2. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank do to make itself of greater value in
 ZAMBIA? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Improve the quality of its experts as related to ZAMBIA’s specific challenges
 2    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank financing
 3    Focus primarily on advocacy issues
      Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, and other
 4
      terms)
 5    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 6    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on ZAMBIA’s economy
 7    Offer more innovative financial products
 8    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 9    Increase availability of Fee-Based services
 10   Work faster
 11   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________




                                                               126
The World Bank                                              Zambia                                      Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues
 in ZAMBIA? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________



 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank?              (Choose no
 more than TWO)
 1    World Bank website
 2     Direct contact with World Bank (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Public Information Center
 7    World Bank publications and other written materials
 8    Mobile phones
 9    Social media (Facebook, Twitter, Youtube)
 10   Blogs
 11   Others (please specify): ______________________________________________



       Are you aware of the World Bank’s Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will
 G3                                                                                               Yes        No
       now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank on its activities in the past year?
 G4                                                                                               Yes        No
       (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                  Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                        Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank website?                                           Yes        No




                                                             127
The World Bank                                              Zambia                                          Country Survey 2012



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING (CONT...)

 G8. Which do you primarily use?
 1     The World Bank’s country website (www.worldbank.org/zambia)
 2     The World Bank’s main website (www.worldbank.org)



 G9. Do you use/have you used the World Bank’s Public Information Centers (PICs) in
 ZAMBIA?
 1     Yes
 2     No
 3     I don’t know what PIC is



 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements, on a ten point scale.
                                                                     Strongly                           Strongly   Don’t
                                                                     disagree                              agree   know
         I use more data from the World Bank as a result of the
 G10                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         organization’s Open Data policy
         The World Bank’s PIC is a valuable source of
 G11     information related to development in ZAMBIA. (Only         1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used the PIC)
         I find the World Bank websites easy to navigate. (Only
 G12                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         answer if you have used a World Bank website)
         I find the information on the World Bank’s websites
 G13     useful. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank          1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         website)
         When I need information from the World Bank I know
 G14     how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach them,    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         etc.)
         The World Bank is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                              128
The World Bank                                            Zambia                                         Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?         (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   Local citizens
 22   Other (please specify): ________________________




                                                           129
The World Bank                                               Zambia                   Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Please mark only ONE
 response)
 1    Agricultural development
 2    Anti corruption
 3    Basic infrastructure
 4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5    Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 6    Crime and violence
 7    Disaster management
 8    Domestic private sector development
 9    Economic growth
 10   Education
 11   Energy
 12   Environmental sustainability
 13   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
 14   Financial markets
 15   Food security
 16   Foreign direct investment
 17   Gender
 18   Global integration
 19   Governance (building strong institutions/government effectiveness)
 20   Health
 21   Information and communications technology
 22   Job creation/employment
 23   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 24   Monitoring and evaluation
 25   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 26   Poverty reduction
 27   Public financial management (e.g., public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 28   Public sector reform
 29   Regional integration
 30   Regulatory framework
 31   Rural development
 32   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)
 33   Trade and exports
 34   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 35   Urban development
 36   Water and sanitation
 37   Other (please specify): _____________________________________________




                                                              130
The World Bank                                               Zambia                           Country Survey 2012



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION (CONT...)

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No



 H4. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in ZAMBIA?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank website for information, data, research, etc.



 H5. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Northern province
 2    North western province
 3    Muchinga province
 4    Luapula province
 5    Copperbelt province
 6    Western province
 7    Eastern province
 8    Central province
 9    Southern province
 10   Lusaka province




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               131
