                          88600

A POLITICAL ECONOMY ANALYSIS OF
TURKEY'S HEALTH TRANSFORMATION
            PROGRAM
DISCUSSION PAPER        JULY 2014




Jesse B. Bump
Susan Powers Sparkes
    A POLITICAL ECONOMY ANALYSIS OF
TURKEY’S HEALTH TRANSFORMATION PROGRAM




     Jesse B. Bump and Susan Powers Sparkes




                   July 2014
         Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice. The papers in this
series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are
entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its
affiliated organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they
represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take into account this
provisional character.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor, Martin
Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2014 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                                 ii
         Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

              A POLITICAL ECONOMY ANALYSIS OF TURKEY’S HEALTH
                          TRANSFORMATION PROGRAM:

                       Jesse B. Bump a and Susan Powers Sparkes b

a Department   of International Health, Georgetown University
b   Department of Global Health and Population, Harvard School of Public Health



Abstract: Beginning in 2003, Turkey initiated a series of reforms under the Health Transformation
Program (HTP) that over the past decade have reshaped the health system. Understanding the
political economy of this process is important for the future of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) in
Turkey, and also for many other countries and the development agencies that assist them. This
report analyzes the historical context and complex political economy challenges of the reform. Our
findings are based on stakeholder interviews and a review of literature. First, we identified five
contextual factors that were important in bringing health reform to the policy agenda in Turkey, and
were helpful in sustaining the reform during adoption and implementation: (1) a long history of
reform plans and attempts; (2) fiscal pressure to reform the social sectors; (3) public support for
health reform; (4) strong economic growth; and (5) favorable demographic conditions. Second, we
assessed four political economy challenges central to the reform and the strategies used by the
Ministry of Health (MoH) to overcome them. First, the MoH built public support for reform among
the broad base of beneficiaries by focusing on highly visible and fast changes. Second, the MoH
overcame well-organized interest group opposition to the reforms by splintering their support or
delegitimizing their views. Third, Turkey asserted its own domestic priorities over those of the IMF
and World Bank in cases of direct conflict. Fourth, the MoH circumvented potential political and
institutional opposition to the large expansion of benefits and coverage through a carefully
sequenced adoption and implementation plan that could be executed mostly without requiring the
support of other ministries. This analysis also highlights important trade-offs made by the MoH with
respect to the redistribution of resources, quality of care, financial sustainability, and physician
satisfaction, which will all have to be considered as Turkey enters its next phase of health system
development.

Keywords: Universal Health Coverage, health systems, Turkey, political economy, health reform


Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in the paper are entirely those
of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the
countries they represent.

Correspondence Details: Jesse B. Bump, Department of International Health, Georgetown
University, 37th and O Streets, Washington DC 20057. jbb77@georgetown.edu
Susan Powers Sparkes, Department of Global Health and Population, Harvard School of Public
Health, 665 Huntington Ave, Boston MA 02115. sps187@mail.harvard.edu




                                                     iii
                                                   Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................. 5
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ................................................................................................................. 7
PART I – INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................. 8
PART II – CONTEXTUAL OVERVIEW ......................................................................................... 11
       A History of Health Reform .................................................................................................... 11
       Mounting Financial Pressure to Reform the Social Sectors .................................................. 11
       High Public Support for Reform ............................................................................................. 12
       Increased Fiscal Space for Health ......................................................................................... 12
       Favorable Demographics and Low Expectations .................................................................. 13
PART III – POLITICAL ECONOMY CHALLENGES IN THE TURKISH HTP (2003-2012) ......... 14
       Challenge #1: Engaging Beneficiaries to Build Support for Reforms .................................... 14
       Challenge #2: Managing the Influence of Opposing Interest Groups ................................... 16
       Challenge #3: The IMF, the World Bank, and Domestic Politics ........................................... 19
       Challenge #4: Covering the Poor and Unifying Benefit Systems .......................................... 20
PART IV – DISCUSSION .............................................................................................................. 24
PART V – CONCLUSIONS ........................................................................................................... 26
PART VI – IMPLICATIONS ........................................................................................................... 27
REFERENCES .............................................................................................................................. 29
ANNEX I: STAKEHOLDER MAPS ............................................................................................... 32
ANNEX II: INTERVIEW GUIDE .................................................................................................... 43
ANNEX III: STATISTICAL ANNEX ............................................................................................... 44




                                                                  4
                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Beginning in 2003, Turkey initiated a series of reforms under the Health Transformation Program
(HTP) that over the past decade have reshaped the health system. Understanding the political
economy of this process is important for the future of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) in Turkey,
and also for many other countries and the development agencies that assist them.
This report analyzes how the senior leadership of the Ministry of Health (MoH) was able to navigate
complex political economy challenges that were central to the HTP’s adoption and implementation,
as opposed to previous work that has emphasized what happened in the reform. Our findings are
based on a review of published and unpublished literature and stakeholder interviews.
We identified five contextual factors that were important in bringing health reform to the policy
agenda in Turkey, and were helpful in sustaining the reform during adoption and implementation.
First, in 2003 the MoH was able to begin reforms quickly because some components had already
been developed, dating back at least to World Bank-supported planning in the early 1990s. Second,
very high government spending on the social sectors was an important factor underlying the
economic crises of 1999 and 2001, which created economic and political pressure to reform the
health and pension systems. Third, the 2002 parliamentary elections delivered a legislative majority
for the AK Party (Justice and Development Party), ending decades of coalition governance in
Turkey. This majority was important because it limited the ability of other parties and special interest
groups to block the reform process. Fourth, strong economic growth during adoption and
implementation of the HTP increased the fiscal space available for health without imposing cuts
elsewhere. Fifth, Turkey had a relatively young population with low expectations of the health
sector. This meant Turkish citizens demanded fewer and lower cost interventions than would be
needed for an older population, and their positive impressions of the reform were easier to create
than would have been the case in a population with higher expectations.
We then assessed four political economy challenges central to the reform and the strategies used
by the Turkish MoH to overcome them while adopting and implementing the HTP between 2003
and 2012. First, the basic political economy of reform favors opponents because the costs tend to
be concentrated on elite, well-organized groups and potential beneficiaries, although more
numerous, tend to have few economic or political resources. The MoH overcame this challenge by
quickly building support among the HTP’s broad base of beneficiaries, whose greater numbers
translated into electoral power once engaged. To do so, the MoH concentrated on highly visible,
fast reforms, such as refurbishing waiting rooms, ending unpopular existing policies, and greatly
expanding the ambulance network. These initial moves built popular support for more difficult
reforms to come, including changing provider payment systems, closing underperforming facilities,
and merging social security systems. Second, interest groups tend to exercise strong influence on
reforms because they are well-organized and seek to protect their interests. Early in the HTP, the
Minister of Health and his senior leadership team developed specific strategies to persuade or
overcome opposition groups. In some cases, the reform plans were adapted to accommodate
concerns. In other cases, the MoH and AK Party leadership worked to neutralize the influence of
opponents by splintering their support or delegitimizing their views. Third, by choice or necessity,
often countries engage the IMF and World Bank in policy reforms, which can produce tensions
between desiring resources from the institutions and wanting to remain in full control of the
domestic policy agenda. Despite deep ties to the two institutions, Turkey asserted its own priorities,
including in at least two cases of direct conflict by ensuring agreement among all ministries and by
asserting national sovereignty in negotiations. Fourth, expanding coverage and integrating benefit
packages represents an enormous challenge of political economy because the redistribution
required to cover low-income groups implies a potential reduction in formal sector workers’ benefits
and/or the use of some of their contributions for others. To overcome this problem, the MoH worked
around obstacles to postpone or avoid potential opposition. For instance, the MoH used the existing




                                                 5
Green Card Program 1 as its primary vehicle for scaling up coverage for low-income households in
part because modifying a program did not require parliamentary approval. The MoH consolidated
control over the process by moving the Green Card program under their auspices and stimulated
demand by expanding the benefits package, increasing the number of Green Cards in circulation,
and making concurrent supply side improvements.
We conclude with a brief discussion of the implications our analysis holds for Turkey’s current and
future health agenda, and for other countries seeking to learn from this example.




1 The Green Card Program for the Poor was launched in 1992 to expand access to health services for the
     poor and underserved. The Yesil Kart, Green Card, was a non-contributory health insurance scheme for
     the poor. Under the HTP this program was one of the four consolidated under one social insurance
     program which signified a substantial increase in financial protection for the poor.



                                                 6
                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report was produced at the request of the Turkish Ministry of Health under a consulting
agreement with the World Bank. The authors are grateful to the World Bank for publishing this
report as an HNP Discussion Paper. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the Japan Trust
Fund, Task Team Leaders Rekha Menon and Claudia Rokx, and the World Bank-Japan
Partnership Program on Universal Health Coverage. Also at the World Bank in Washington we
thank Norosoa Andrianaivo and Sreypov Tep. At the World Bank office in Ankara we thank Ahmet
Levent Yener and Elif Yonca Yükseker. At the Ministry of Health we thank Banu Ayar, Volkan
Çetinkaya, and Uğur Dilmen. We are particularly grateful to Drs. Ayar and Çetinkaya for arranging
and attending our interviews, facilitating our data requests, and reviewing our report. At the Harvard
School of Public Health we thank Michael Reich and Marc Roberts. We extend special thanks to
our interviewees.




                                                7
                                      PART I – INTRODUCTION
1. Beginning in 2003, Turkey initiated a series of reforms under the Health Transformation
Program (HTP) that has few—if any—parallels in scope and speed. Understanding the political
economy of this process is important for the future of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) in Turkey,
and in light of the great interest in UHC schemes globally, is important for many other countries
and the development agencies that assist them.2
2. Before the reforms, Turkey’s aggregate health indicators lagged behind those of OECD
member states and other middle-income countries. Less than 70 percent of the population was
insured and even those with insurance did not have adequate access to timely health services
(Akdağ 2011). The health financing system was fragmented, with four separate insurance schemes
and a “Green Card” program for the poor, eac h with distinct benefit packages and access rules.
Both the Ministry of Labour and Social Security (MoLSS) and Ministry of Health (MoH) were
providers and financiers of the health system, and four different ministries were directly involved in
the public health care delivery system.
3. Turkey’s reform efforts were designed to rectify these problems and virtually all aspects of the
country’s health system were affected, although the outcomes attributable to these changes are
under debate. A recent high-profile article by Atun et al (2013) reports many positive effects of the
HTP, roughly in line with previous work by many of the same authors. They find, for example, (i)
insurance coverage increased from 64 to 98 percent between 2002 and 2012; (ii) the share of
pregnant women having four antenatal care visits increased from 54 to 82 percent between 2003
and 2010; and citizen satisfaction with health services increased from 39.5 to 75.9 percent between
2003 and 2011 (see Annex III for additional statistics) ( Akdağ 2011; Atun, Aydın et al. 2013).
However, many points made by Atun et al. attracted critical responses. 3
4. In part, these different views reflect the complicated political economy of health reform and
wider disagreements about the future of Turkey. In this report we focus on four political economy
problems central to health reform and analyze the approaches used by the Minister of Health and
his senior leadership team to overcome them. Our report differs from the recent contribution of Atun
et al (2013) on the same reform. Atun et al. examine what happened in the reform; they place it in
historical context, concentrate on an analysis of its effect on many indicators, and extract lessons
concerning what facilitating factors were most important. By contrast, we do not analyze the effect
of the reform on any health indicators or outcomes. Instead, we analyze how the senior leadership
of the MoH was able to navigate complex political economy challenges that were central to the
reform’s adoption and implementation. The difficult and contentious elements of this process
underlie some of the differences that remain between the account of Atun and colleagues and other
observers. Our focus is on assessing these challenges in political economy terms to explicitly
recognize the importance of both factors in shaping the distribution of resources for health. We
discuss the basic dynamics of why these political economy challenges arise in health reform and
then present our analyses of how they were overcome in the Turkish reform. Atun et al (2013)
employ political concepts in their analysis, particularly political stability and political commitment.
We view these as important, but they are not by themselves sufficient to overcome obstacles to


2
    In recent years, policymakers in many low and middle-income countries (LMICs) have taken steps toward
    universal health coverage (UHC), including Brazil, China, Mexico, Rwanda, Thailand, and Vietnam.
    Pannarunothai, Patmasiriwat, et al. 2004. Ekman, Liem, et al. 2008. Hu 2008. Logie, Rowson, et al. 2008.
    Damrongplasit, and Melnick 2009. Frenk, Gómez-Dantés, et al. 2009. Paim, Travassos, et al. 2011.
    Tangcharoensathien, Patcharanarumol, et al. 2011.
3   Fourteen authors in ten letters questioned the reliability and interpretation of the data, arguing that the quality
     of Turkish data has declined (Aksakoglu 2014), that inequality has increased instead of decreased
     (Hamzaoglu 2014), that other data sources show a less favorable view of the HTP (Pala 2014), that
     physician satisfaction has deteriorated under the HTP (Tanik 2014), that the HTP has had the effect of
     privatizing health care (Civaner 2014, Kilic 2014), that the Atun et al. report systematically overlooked
     shortcomings of the HTP (Aktan, Pala et al. 2014), among other issues.



                                                         8
reform, as seen in many unsuccessful attempts in many countries, including the Clinton health
reform attempt in the United States.
5. Following this introduction we discuss our analytic methods and their limitations. We begin
our analysis with an assessment of five contextual factors that were favorable to the reform,
including Turkey’s growing economy and young population. These factors provided a window of
opportunity, of which the MoH and the AK Party took full advantage to adopt and implement reforms
under the HTP. We then discuss four political-economy challenges that were pivotal to the
trajectory of the reform. These four challenges were identified though a review of the literature on
health reform and an analysis of our interviews with stakeholders involved with Turkey’s reform.
We present them in roughly chronological order, although the sequences we describe overlap
substantially. These challenges are: (i) engaging beneficiaries to gain support for reform; (ii)
managing the influence of opposing groups; (iii) managing the influence of the IMF and World Bank
on domestic politics; and covering the poor and unifying benefit packages. We provide an analysis
of the strategies employed by the Turkish MoH to overcome each of these challenges in the
adoption and implementation of the HTP between 2003 and 2012. We then discuss some of the
implications of the chosen strategies for the future of the Turkish health system and for countries
studying this example.
6. Neither the evidence we gathered nor our method of analysis is intended to support a
normative or ethical analysis of the policy design. All design choices have consequences and where
we clarify the effects of those choices it is to explain what happened and why; this report does not
evaluate whether policy choices were “good” or “bad” b y any external standard. Health reform is a
fundamentally political process because it affects the distribution of resources, rights, and
responsibilities. It is also an economic phenomenon because health spending is typically several
percent of GDP and reform influences when and to whom this money flows.
Stakeholder Analysis
7. For this investigation we employ the political economy technique of stakeholder analysis,
which is a structured method for assessing the “behavior, intentions, interrelations, agendas ,
interests, and the influence or resources” of relevant actors concerning a particular policy or issue
(Brugha and Varvasovszky 2000). An assessment of these factors can be used to map supporters
and opponents and inform strategies for increasing the likelihood of success, for instance by
identifying possible coalitions of supporters or opportunities to diminish the commitment of
opponents. Stakeholder analysis typically involves specifying the players relevant to an issue —
those engaged and those potentially engaged—evaluating their stance on the issue, and forming
judgments about their relative power to reach a calculus of political feasibility and develop
strategies toward the desired aim (Reich 1995; Varvasovszky and Brugha 2000; Roberts, Hsiao et
al. 2008).
8. Stakeholder analysis has been applied by many global health scholars to understand the
politics of policy design and implementation, particularly in recent years. It provides a cross-
sectional picture of actors, positions, and power at particular point in time. It can be used as a
forward-looking exercise to guide planned or prospective activities, including health reforms for
universal coverage (Gilson, Erasmus et al. 2012), health insurance premium change in Ghana,
immunization campaigns in the same country, alcohol control policy in a Russian region, or
Ugandan maternal and child health program, for instance (Gil, Polikina et al. 2010; Sarr 2010;
Gilson, Erasmus et al. 2012; Abiiro and McIntyre 2013; Namazzi, Kiwanuka et al. 2013). Also,
stakeholder analysis can be used retrospectively as a tool of historical analysis to understand and
explain the processes that govern success and failure in policymaking, as Akinci et al (2012) have
done with health reform in Turkey, and Bump and colleagues have done with diarrheal disease and
the global health agenda (Akinci, Mollahaliloglu et al. 2012; Bump, Reich et al. 2012). In this study,
we employ stakeholder analysis to assess the position, role, objectives and strategies of relevant
actors concerning the design and adoption of the HTP between 2002 and 2004 (stakeholder tables
included in Annex I). We also conducted a separate stakeholder analysis on the expansion of the
Green Card Program between 2003 and 2012, as it was identified as the key vehicle used to
achieve UHC in Turkey (Green Card Program expansion stakeholder tables included in Annex I).



                                                9
Data Collection and Analysis
9. We chose stakeholder analysis as our primary method for assessing the political economy of
Turkey’s HTP because of its strengths in str ucturing and clarifying the complex politics of health
reform and the welter of important contextual factors that shape the interaction of payers. We
hypothesized that important stakeholders in the Turkish health reform would be roughly similar to
the stakeholder groups important in other health reforms. Based on a literature review and
experiences in other countries, we constructed a preliminary list of these stakeholders, which we
then refined according to published articles on Turkey and the views of our counterparts at the
General Directorate of Health Research of the MoH in Turkey, and at the World Bank’s office in
Ankara and at its headquarters in Washington, DC. The individuals and institutions identified
through this process were then approached by our counterparts to the MoH and asked to participate
in key informant interviews. To help ensure consistency and completeness, we developed a semi-
structured interview guide (attached as Annex II). We used the guide along with our stakeholder
table in our interviews with informants. As we conducted our interviews and improved our
understanding of the relevant actors, we adjusted the stakeholder table. In about half the
interviews—particularly these conducted later in the process—we shared a blank copy of table with
interviewees. Senior officials and academics agreed that the group of important actors represented
on our table is accurate and reasonably complete.
10. We conducted our key informant interviews in Ankara and Istanbul, Turkey in late March and
early April of 2013. Interviews were conducted in English, in a mix of Turkish and English, and in
Turkish with professional interpretation, as dictated by circumstances. Each interviewee was
informed of the purpose of the study, our intention to take detailed notes of each interview, and our
process for handling interview data. Permission was requested to take notes and to report quotes
attributed to a general affiliation. We shared a draft report for comment with all interviewees, the
World Bank, and the Government of Turkey. We revised the report to reflect comments and
sensitivities. Detailed notes were taken during and immediately after each interview.
11. Those interviewed included current and former government officials in the MoH, the
Undersecretariat of Treasury, the MoLSS, the Ministry of Development Planning (formerly State
Planning Organization), the Ministry of Family and Social Policy, the Turkish Statistical Agency,
and members of Parliament. We also interviewed representatives of non-governmental interest
groups, including provider groups such as the Turkish Medical Association, the Turkish Midwifery
Association, the Turkish Nurses Association, hospital administrators, university faculty, and
university administrators. In May of 2013 in Washington, DC we interviewed current and former
World Bank officials who had been involved with the reforms.
12. Our use of stakeholder analysis to investigate the political economy of health reform in Turkey
allows us to identify which actors were influential in the reform, to analyze their positions, and to
explore their motivations and strategies. This approach is valuable for explicating the broad political
economy challenges behind the observed outcomes. The use of interviews gives us access to
stories, personalities, and details unlikely to be captured in written sources. These advantages let
us construct a realistic picture of how the reform was designed and provides some insight into
implementation strategies.
Limitations
13. Stakeholder analysis based on published articles and reports allows for the synthesis and
evaluation of a great volume of qualitative information, but it achieves this scope at the expense of
the very fine detail, nuance, and the contextual richness typical of historical accounts based on
archival materials such as correspondence, confidential memos, verbatim transcripts, or other
internal documents. Among the most important limitations of our methods is the choice of
interviewees. In a process as large as health reform there are tens of millions of affected parties
and our method of selecting interviewees could not possibly capture all perspectives. Undoubtedly,
we did not interview all of the most important players, nor did we cover all details in the interviews
we conducted. Our account is also limited by recall bias because it concerns events well in the
past. Furthermore, our interviews were facilitated by the MoH and included only central-level
stakeholders and interest groups, both of which would influence the perspectives we obtained.


                                               10
                       PART II – CONTEXTUAL OVERVIEW
14. Health reform is a complex process that is influenced by contextual factors, including history,
politics, economics, and the characteristics of the population to be served by the health system.
These factors were important in bringing health reform to the policy agenda in Turkey, and were
helpful in sustaining the reform during adoption and implementation. From the accounts of our
interviewees and the written evidence we reviewed, we identified five contextual factors that were
favorable to the political and economic viability of reform. First, in 2003 the MoH was able to begin
reforms quickly because many components of the reform could be based on plans developed as
part of earlier efforts dating to the early 1990s. Second, very high government spending on the
social sectors was an important factor underlying the economic crises of 1999 and 2001, which
created economic and political pressure to reform the health and pension systems for the Ministerial
agencies in charge of financial and economic affairs. Third, the 2002 parliamentary elections
delivered a legislative majority for the AK Party, ending decades of coalition governance. This
majority was important because it limited the ability of other parties and special interest groups to
block the process. Fourth, strong economic growth during adoption and implementation of the HTP
increased the fiscal space for health without imposing cuts elsewhere. Fifth, Turkey had a relatively
young population with low expectations of the health sector. This meant the primary demand was
for fewer and lower cost interventions than would be needed for an older population, and that
positive impressions of the reform were easier to create than would have been the case in a
population with high expectations. These five factors were all favorable between 2003 and 2012,
when the reforms took place.
A History of Health Reform
15. The AK Party acted quickly on health reform to capitalize on the popular support it enjoyed
following the 2002 elections. The MoH reduced the time needed to develop its policies by drawing
largely from health reform plans that had been carefully devised and analyzed throughout the
1990s. Previously, various coalition and military governments, working under World Bank loan
agreements, had developed reform plans, but had been unable to gain the broad support required
to adopt and implement them (Tatar, Mollahaliloglu et al. 2011). Beginning with the 1990 Health
Sector Plan, the MoH and the State Planning Organization had proposed a health system model
based on; (i) purchaser-provider split, (ii) universal health insurance, (iii) a rational policy for human
resources and payment on the basis of performance, and (iv) the establishment of a family
practitioner model (Tatar, Mollahaliloglu et al. 2011; Yasar 2011). These reform proposals had not
been fully adopted under the coalition governments. Upon taking power in 2003, Minister Akdağ
and his reform team adopted them for their own use. This reform team was in place from 2003 to
2013, when Minister Akdağ stepped down as Minister of Health (Atun, Aydın et al. 2013). This team
of trusted colleagues worked closely with the Minister on all aspects of the design, adoption and
implementation of the reform. According to interviews with current and former senior officials closely
involved with the process, the reform team drew on the technical expertise of those who had
devised these reforms and in parallel developed a politically viable communications strategy to
present and promote the HTP.
Mounting Financial Pressure to Reform the Social Sectors
16. The financial crises of 1994 and 2000–1 were caused in part by high government spending
on the social sectors, but before the AK Party came into power none of the coalition governments
had been able to effect reform. The crises punctuated a decade of economic volatility, high and
increasing public sector borrowing requirements, high interest rates, and increasing public sector
deficits (Ertugrul and Selcuk 2001; International Monetary Fund 2002; Tatar, Mollahaliloglu et al.
2011). The weak economy undermined government efforts to provide resources for the health and
the social security systems just as political fractiousness undermined attempts at reform. IMF
standby agreements highlighted inefficiencies and spending on the social security and health
systems (International Monetary Fund July 2002). Prior to the 2002 parliamentary elections,
ministerial leadership spear-headed by the Minister in charge of Economic Affairs and Treasury
Kemal Derviş, developed plans to address deficit issues, but the weak coalition governments could



                                                 11
muster neither the leadership nor the political support to fully implement reforms (Boulton and Wolf
2002; Akyüz and Boratav 2003). The IMF was concerned that the social security deficit was growing
unsustainably, which in retrospect seems to have been accurate. The social security deficit grew
from 1.9 percent of GDP in 2000 to more than 4 percent of GDP by 2005, the last year before
reforms took effect in 2006 (World Bank 2006). Upon taking power, the AK Party inherited urgent
problems in social security and health spending, and also was bound by commitments made by
previous governments with the IMF to reduce government spending and stabilize the economy.
High Public Support for Reform
17. A wave of anti-government sentiment and public support for reform were important factors in
the AK Party’s victory in the 2002 elections. As political outsiders, the AK Party drew support from
public dissatisfaction with the inaction of coalition governments, a series of high profile corruption
scandals, and economic instability, including the crisis of 2000 –1 (Heper 2003). Crucially, the
legislative majority won by the AK Party afforded it the power to pass reforms unilaterally and
obviated the need to broker agreement between coalition partners.
18. After coming to power the AK Party was under intense public pressure to act on two fronts.
One was to reform the economy. The other was to improve health service delivery, particularly in
rural and poorer regions of the country where the party’s political base was centered. Inaction on
either of these two fronts carried the risk of backlash in future elections (Özbudun 2006; Baris,
Mollahaliloglu et al. 2011). Over the ten years of AK Party control covered by this report, health
became an increasingly crucial element of the party’s political success. According to interviews with
current and former senior party strategists, they initially viewed health as a way to address equity
issues and send resources to their political base. As the magnitude of problems in the health sector
became apparent, they began to appreciate how many citizens were in need. They also became
increasingly aware of the potential electoral advantage that could be garnered by improving
peoples’ access to quality health services. According to preliminary calculations, as many as 20
million people lacked basic services. Once the AK Party understood this need, its leadership put
its full weight behind the HTP’s prompt adoption and implementation. As one inte rviewee formerly
working as a senior strategist at the MoH characterized the sequence, “In the beginning the
politicians chose health, but by the end health chose the politicians.”
Increased Fiscal Space for Health
19. Favorable economic conditions increased the availability of resources for health sector, which
the AK Party used to fund and implement the HTP. Enabling much of this expansion of fiscal space
for health was strong overall economic growth that increased GDP by two-thirds in real terms, and
real GDP per capita by 70 percent, from US$ 5952 to US$ 8493 between 2002 and 2011 (Figure
1) (World Bank 2012).However, the share of GDP spent on health remained at 5.3 percent between
2003 and 2011 (OECD 2013). Calculated over the same period on a per capita basis in constant
2005 dollars (PPP) health spending grew by 109 percent (OECD 2013).
             Figure 1: GDP per capita in Turkey, 1990-2012 (constant 2005 US$)

                       10000

                        8000

                        6000

                        4000

                        2000

                            0
                                1990
                                       1992
                                              1994
                                                     1996
                                                            1998
                                                                   2000
                                                                          2002
                                                                                 2004
                                                                                        2006
                                                                                               2008
                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                             2012




                                  Source: World Development Indicators



                                                            12
Favorable Demographics and Low Expectations
20. The young Turkish population required relatively basic, primary care services as compared to
expensive, hospital-based treatments for older populations. In 2002, 30 percent of Turkey’s
population was under 15 years of age and only 6 percent was over 65 years of age (World Bank
2012). In addition to these favorable demographics, after years of failed attempts to reform the
public health system, Turkish citizens had low expectations for the delivery of even these basic
services. In 2003, only 39.5 percent of the population indicated that they were satisfied with the
quality of care (OECD, WHO et al. 2008; Bleich, Özaltin et al. 2009). This scenario gave the MoH
an opportunity to make quick gains in patient satisfaction with relatively small improvements to the
system.




                                              13
       PART III – POLITICAL ECONOMY CHALLENGES IN THE
                     TURKISH HTP (2003-2012)
21. Health reform is a politically charged process because it involves the reallocation of resources
and responsibilities. Common goals of health reform are to increase equity, improve access for the
poor, and to establish some minimum basket of services for all citizens. These goals all require the
redistribution of resources, which raises the prospect that the process will generate winners and
losers. Typically, groups that are well-off before the reform perceive discussions of policy change
as potential threats to their benefits. This leads to a collective action problem because although a
reformed system could become more efficient and provide more benefits for everyone, it is typically
contested by small, well-organized groups whose interests would be impacted by a reform,
including physicians, other providers, and groups with generous benefits, such as civil servants.
Those who have the most to gain from reform are those who receive few or no services, but these
groups tend to be unorganized and unengaged in the reform process, even if they are large in
number. As Mancur Olson (1971) wrote, a collective action problem arises because “rational, self -
interested individuals will not act to achieve their common or group interests,” unless the number
of individuals in a group is small, or there is some incentive that makes individuals act in their
common interest. Small groups will act towards a collective goal because they face relatively low
costs to organize due to more uniform, individual interests and will reap high potential benefits per
capita. Whereas large groups will face relatively high costs when seeking to organize for collective
action and the potential benefits per capita may be small because they are distributed across many
members.
22. For these reasons, health reform is typically a contentious, difficult process. In the subsections
below, we discuss four political economy challenges, including engaging beneficiaries to build
support for reforms, managing the influence of opposing interests, managing the influence of the
IMF and World Bank on domestic politics, and covering the poor and unifying benefit systems.
Challenge #1: Engaging Beneficiaries to Build Support for Reforms
23. The basic political economy of reform favors opponents rather than potential beneficiaries
because the costs tend to be concentrated on well-organized groups with high access to political
and economic resources, which they can use to impede, dilute, or otherwise influence the process
in their favor. By contrast, although potential beneficiaries tend to be far more numerous, they have
few economic or political resources and are not likely to be engaged or organized in support of
reforms. Successfully adopting and implementing reform requires strategies for overcoming this
challenge. In most settings, opponents include the urban elite: physicians and other health workers
whose rights, responsibilities, and pay are often directly affected by reform, and formal-sector
workers, whose taxes can be used to finance services for the poor and whose benefits might be
reduced accordingly. Potential beneficiaries are usually poor, reside in rural areas, and are
underserved by the health system. The lopsided distribution of political and economic resources
favors reform opponents in almost every way. A central challenge of reform is to somehow change
or overcome this imbalance to generate sufficient popular support to overcome any remaining
opposition.
24. In the Turkish Case: An important aspect of MoH’s overall strategy was to quickly build
support among the intended beneficiaries of reform, whose large numbers represented a potentially
enormously powerful political force if organized behind the HTP. Those with no or limited access
were the bulk of Turkey’s citizens, living in the East and South in smaller cities and rural areas.
Their support was important to the AK Party in general and would be required for more difficult
aspects of the reform, which urban elites and organized interest groups would oppose, according
to political analysis commissioned by the MoH (Rossetti 2004). The same analysis also showed
that in Turkey’s recent past, political parties attempting reform had faced a backlash in subsequent




                                               14
elections; to avoid this fate the AK Party would have to demonstrate results before the next general
election, in 2007 at the latest.4
25. The MoH built public support reform very quickly by focusing its early efforts on highly visible
changes to the existing health system, acting first in the areas with the least services. Many
interviewees with experience in the reform related this emphasis on immediate and noticeable
improvements with the dual purpose of improving service delivery and patient satisfaction, while
bolstering the political viability of the HTP. A recent World Health Organization report discusses the
Minister of Health’s approach as similar to how a team of medical doctors treats a trauma patient,
first treating the most life-threatening problems before moving onto systemic and long-term issues
(Johansen and Guisset 2012). For instance, among the first changes ordered by the senior
leadership team was the abolishment of the unpopular practice of holding patients in facilities until
their bills were paid. In our analysis, the choice to focus on this issue shows a nuanced assessment
of the priority of reforms. Holding patients as pawns until families could settle bills no doubt deterred
some care-seeking, but this practice was employed after care was delivered, meaning that its
primary consequences were probably in creating extremely negative feelings toward the health
system and imposing financial distress on families. Ending the practice showed sensitivity to the
moral and political dimensions of health care and not only to the medical issues, as implied by the
trauma team analogy. We emphasize this point because generating support for reforms inside the
short election cycle required changes that could improve popular impressions immediately.
26. In fact, regardless of their public rhetoric on trauma teams, the senior leadership of the MoH
realized that citizen impressions of the health system were formed mainly by primary-care
experiences, rather than in secondary or tertiary care, according to current and former officials who
were engaged in formulating the HTP strategy. Initial reform efforts sought to improve these
impressions, for instance by refurbishing waiting rooms, conducting outreach activities to make
patients feel welcome, and converting break rooms to exam rooms to increase the capacity to
deliver services. As one senior MoH official related as a generalized example, prior to the reform a
health facility might have had a staff of 30 health workers but care would be provided in only three
rooms. Other rooms were dedicated to other purposes, including separate break rooms for each
type of employee—physicians, nurses, technicians, and others. Some were used as private offices,
but MoH calculations estimated organizational and infrastructural inefficiencies limited productivity
of these facilities to about 30 percent of their potential capacity. These calculations indicated that
far more of the demand for health services could be met in public facilities if existing employees
were motivated to work there and existing infrastructure were reoriented around the primary
purpose of care delivery. The MoH therefore concentrated initially on making more efficient use of
its existing resources, which it could do quickly, and did not prioritize the slower, more costly task
of building new facilities. To overcome the resistance of some health workers, the Minister of Health
and his team personally visited facilities and directly ordered the consolidation of break rooms and
other space-saving measures to increase care delivery capacity.
27. The senior leadership also rapidly expanded emergency transport services, increasing the
number of ambulances and extending the system’s reach with specially equipped boats and fixed -
and rotary-wing aircraft to serve remote areas and afford fast transport for critical cases. A senior
MoH official involved in the design and implementation of the HTP estimated that these
enhancements led to an approximately 5-fold increase in the number of emergency transport
vehicles in the country over the first 10 years of reform. Again, this was a choice made on several
grounds, only one of which was the technical consideration of bringing more people to care in times
of need. Senior officials stressed to us that the ambulances were powerful, eminently visible
symbols of a health system that cared for its citizens. Particularly for rural citizens covered for the
first time, the emergency transport system was a compelling demonstration of the responsiveness
of the MoH and the AK Party. An interviewee involved in these policy decisions described the initial



4
    General elections are held at least every five years, but they are often held earlier at the request of parliament or if
    parliament is dissolved by the president.



                                                            15
phase as capacity building. He said the leadership in the early stages did not want to build new
infrastructure, and focused instead on increasing capacity of the existing system.
28. These relatively simple changes improved public support for the reform and helped create the
political momentum for more difficult, large-scale changes to the system planned for future years.
Rapid and publicly-visible changes to improve the accessibility of the system appear to be reflected
in the percentage of people reporting problems making an appointment for an examination or
analysis, which dropped from 59.59 percent in 2003 to 29.30 in 2005 (Turkish Statistical Institute
2003-2012). Over the same period—the first two years of the HTP—citizen satisfaction with health
services overall rose from 46.17 percent to 55.27 percent (Turkish Statistical Institute 2003-2012).
These satisfaction rates were reflected by public support for the AK Party in both the 2007 and
2011 elections. In these the AK Party continued to build on its electoral majority by placing its health
reform achievements as a centerpiece of the party platform (Bryant 2010).
Challenge #2: Managing the Influence of Opposing Interest Groups
29. Interest groups, including physicians and beneficiary groups, tend to exercise strong influence
on reforms because they are well organized, have high access to political and economic resources,
and are usually closely engaged in the process because it directly affects their interests. Physicians
tend to view government insurance programs as a threat to their autonomy and are therefore likely
to oppose such reforms using their political influence and their authority within the health system
(Immergut 1990). Trade unions and formal sector workers typically have health benefits under pre-
reform systems. Often, health reform threatens their interests because extending coverage to low-
income groups means redistribution, which might be expressed as a reduction in their benefits or
a diversion of their funds. For instance, formal sector workers in Ghana were initially opposed to
health reform in 2003 because increased access for the poor was partly funded through a 2.5
percentage point diversion of their pension contributions (Rajkotia 2007). Organized beneficiary
groups also tend to oppose the integration of other health insurance schemes into their own
because theirs is typically the best funded and unification therefore means a dilution of resources
available for their uses. Unifying benefit systems can be desirable from an efficiency perspective
because it has the potential to simplify administration and reduce overhead, which would free more
resources for the provision of services. But the political economy of unification is extremely difficult
because its redistributive elements impose immediate costs on small, organized, and powerful
interest groups. On the other side, the benefits are abstract, would occur in the future, and would
accrue to the poor, who, in most cases, are not organized to provide support because they have
few economic and political resources, and are not likely to be engaged in the process. Organized
interest groups often pose significant opposition to reforms, as they have in the United States and
Mexico, for example (Hacker 1998; Lakin 2010).
30. In the Turkish Case: In the initial stages of the HTP, the Minister of Health and his senior
leadership team identified groups important to the reform and developed strategies to persuade or
overcome those expected to oppose it. Plans to manage this opposition were then incorporated
into the reform strategy. After delineating stakeholder groups, the Minister of Health and his senior
leadership team began to engage opposition groups to gauge the possibilities to win their support.
In some cases, the reform plans were adapted to accommodate concerns. In other cases, the MoH
and AK Party leadership worked to neutralize the influence of opponents by splintering their support
or delegitimizing their views.
31. Political analysis played an important role in the management of opposition groups. Several
interviewees directly involved with the reform mentioned the influence of a stakeholder analysis
report and a then-recently published book, Getting Health Reform Right, which stresses the
importance of politics in determining both the trajectory and outcome of reform (Roberts, Hsiao et
al. 2003; Rossetti 2004). The authors note that “astute policy developers begin political analysis
early in the policy cycle.” The MoH also had the book translated into Turkish so it would be more
accessible to a greater proportion if its staff. The stakeholder analysis was commissioned in 2003
to provide a roadmap to the politics of the reform in Turkey and a guide to dealing with opposition.
The report analyzed the positions and influence of stakeholders involved, assessed future electoral
ramifications, and proposed strategies to manage interest groups during the implementation phase



                                                16
of the reform (Rossetti 2004). The report identified public providers, members of the social security
institutions, and the central government bureaucracy and civil servants as key actors opposed to
the HTP. By understanding the influence opponents were expected to have and the reasons for
their positions, the government could plan how to manage the politics of policy adoption and
implementation.
32. Trade unions were one of the most influential beneficiary groups opposed to reforms. Senior
Government staff, including representatives from the MoLSS held a long series of meetings with
union representatives to discuss how the reforms would affect the benefits of their membership.
The MoH prepared numerous analyses to forecast benefits under various assumptions to reassure
representatives that in no case would benefits decrease under the HTP, and that in most cases
benefits would increase. Several informants involved in designing the reform reported that the inter-
ministerial working group had initially planned a basic benefit package with options for
supplementary care. However, as the group continued its discussions, equity emerged as an
increasingly important consideration. In its final form, the reform’s long -term goal objective was to
provide all citizens with the same benefits as retired civil servants, who had the most generous of
all pre-reform packages. This strategy dramatically increased the resources required for reform,
but it helped ensure that most organized beneficiary groups would not oppose the reform. To
address financial sustainability, the reform included cost control in the form of a family physician
gatekeeper and capitation system. These mechanisms were expected to reduce the potential for
physician induced demand and limit overuse of secondary and tertiary care. However, the MoH
was not able to implement the capitation system. The gatekeeper function was not implemented
due to public opposition and also because there were not enough family physicians to serve in that
role, anyway. Once beneficiary groups understood the benefits they would gain, they began
supporting the reform and influenced its design to enhance their benefits.
33. A second influential opposition group was white collar civil servants, who opposed the reform
for two general reasons. First, as the beneficiaries of the most generous entitlement package, they
feared that reform would diminish their benefits. Second, most of these elite civil servants were
secularists and tended to oppose the AK Party politically. They were also concerned about the
implications of the concurrent social security reform, particularly for the retirement age, which stood
at 48 years of age for women and 52 years of age for men. The MoH and MoLSS leadership first
deployed a persuasion strategy in an attempt to convince the white collar civil servants that their
benefits would not decrease. But the attempts were not successful, and elite civil servants appealed
to President Sezer to block the reform. To overcome their opposition, the MoH and MoLSS decided
to exempt all existing civil servants from the reform, agreeing to apply new rules only to those hired
in the future.
34. Health workers are typically amongst the most influential groups in health reform because
they are called upon to deliver health services, are well organized, have an influential position in
society, and usually have access to political resources (Immergut 1992). The role of health workers
in the reform was identified in the political analysis report, and likely was intuitive to the Minister
and senior officials because almost all of them had long experience in the health system. The
Minister and his team engaged in dialogue with health workers in the early stages of the HTP and
devised strategies to manage their interests. The participation of health workers in the planned
reforms was essential to improving service delivery, since health workers are the ones who actually
deliver the services. But one of the biggest problems in increasing delivery was a shortage of
trained professionals; for instance, Turkey’s ratio of physicians per population was only about one -
third the EU average when the HTP began (Tatar, Mollahaliloglu et al. 2011). For the reform to
succeed, the workforce would have to operate at higher capacity. The MoH provided incentives for
health workers to deliver more services by linking pay with the quantity of services provided and
patient satisfaction. This system dramatically increased the salaries of physicians providing
services in the public sector. The pay-for-performance scheme was used as a way to allocate
additional pay to physicians and nurses, and had the additional advantage of avoiding the
cumbersome bureaucracy and legal obstacles, associated with adjusting pay under the formal civil
service regulations. The MoH also brought more delivery capacity into the public sector facilities by
ending so-called dual practice arrangements, under which physicians would spend some of their



                                               17
time in public facilities, but also see patients in private practices. The increased pay available under
the pay-for-performance scheme was intended to compensate physicians for the remuneration they
could no longer earn in private practice, draw them into public service full time, and incentivize
them to provide more care. In the view of senior officials we interviewed, the pay-for-performance
scheme was an important motivating factor for health workers, who have faced heavy workloads
under the increased demand created by the HTP. Some interviewees also referenced this policy
as a critical factor in decreasing dual practice, even before the MoH was able to pass the Law on
Full-Time Practice, which prohibited MoH physicians from also working in the private sector.
35. The pay-for-performance system pleased physicians primarily engaged in service delivery,
but it did not change the opposition of all physicians or other health workers. With groups that
remained opposed the MoH worked to marginalize their influence. These opponents included the
Turkish Medical Association (TMA) and the Turkish Nurses Association. The government
accomplished the reform without the support of these powerful groups by fracturing their
membership and swaying popular opinion against their leadership. Remaining opposed were the
medical elite—far fewer in number and limited to specialized facilities in major cities. Although the
membership of the TMA was unified in opposition at the beginning of the reform, much of its
membership was primarily engaged in service delivery and became supportive because of the
incentives available under pay for performance. The organization’s leadership, those in specialized
roles, and members of the academic elite remained opposed, but were relatively few in number. A
senior TMA official observed that the many specialists in staunch opposition had had little influence
on the reforms, citing vast public support for the Ministry’s plans and publicity campaigns against
the medical elite. Our interviews with senior officials at these organizations and in academic
medicine revealed intense dissatisfaction with the reform, and a deep distrust of the MoH
leadership. As the pay-for-performance system does not include allowances for teaching or
research, those interested in these activities felt personally punished, in the assessment of those
we interviewed. These people expressed dissatisfaction with personnel allocation policies, as well.
After graduating from medical school, all new physicians perform two years of public service. Before
the reforms, the best students with academic interests were assigned to leading medical schools
as assistant professors. But under the reforms, nearly all graduates are now assigned to public
facility roles, to MoH hospitals, or to new medical schools with close relationships to the MoH. As
a result, there are few younger faculty trained in what were formerly the most prestigious places.
Specialist physicians we interviewed explained their discontent with a long list of problems.
Because of cost controls, they are not always able to procure the supplies they need to serve
patients, they said. Because the scheduling system makes appointments that are 15 minutes in
length, there is too little time to adequately diagnose problems or provide lifestyle guidance, we
were told. Because of these and other problems, many faculty have left —some for private practice,
some for other countries, and some to retirement. The capacity to perform complex procedures at
leading medical centers has been severely reduced, we were told. Our interviewees also expressed
concerns for the quality of care under the HTP because quality assurance rests on patient
satisfaction, but in many cases patients are not well informed about what care is appropriate. As
complaints from patients to the MoH constitute a serious issue for providers, the physicians we
interviewed expressed concerns for the loss of autonomy and a compromised doctor-patient
relationship.
36. To neutralize the threat to the reforms posed by opposition groups, a new union of health
workers was established to draw supporters away from existing professional associations and
undermine their support base. By creating factions within health workers, they reduced the power
of TMA and Turkish Nurses Association to act as a united voice for all providers. A similar strategy
was employed to counter resistance from YÖK – the organization responsible for supervising all
Turkish universities, and which at the beginning of the HTP was still controlled by appointees of
previous governments and distrusted the AK Party. Interviewees from elite universities voiced
concern that the reforms had channeled resources away from their institutions, as a political tool
by the AK Party leadership to undermine their influence. The government worked around this
opposition until 2008, when the newly-elected President Gül was able to appoint a new head of
YÖK friendly to the AK Party. These tactics allowed the MoH and AK Party to overcome the
resistance from previously strong interest groups that remained in staunch opposition to the reform.


                                                18
37. The MoH ensured that the central components of the HTP were adopted and implemented by
engaging those groups likely to oppose the reforms. Some they persuaded to support the reforms
and others they were able to neutralize or overpower.
Challenge #3: The IMF, the World Bank, and Domestic Politics
38. By choice or necessity, many countries engage the IMF and World Bank in policy reforms, but
the relationship between these institutions and domestic political economy processes can be
complicated. The power dynamics can be especially complex at times of crisis when countries are
at the most need of assistance. The IMF’s role in economic stabilization and fiscal reform as a
lender of last resort gives it very high political and economic power. The World Bank’s engagement
is particularly notable in social sector reform because of its strengths in project design and
implementation, as well as its role in discussions between various ministries, including both those
that provide finances and those that deliver services. Both international institutions become
involved in the policy reform process through their lending activities and technical expertise. Middle-
income countries can strategically use financial and technical resources available from both the
IMF and World Bank. However, there is the potential for tension between the policies and advice
of the international institutions and the direction of the domestic policy agenda.
39. In the Turkish Case: The Turkish Government sought support from the World Bank and IMF
over the course of the HTP (2003–2012). Both institutions were closely engaged in the Turkish
economy and health sector when the AK Party took office in late 2002, including through IMF
standby agreements relating to the economic crises of 2000/2001 (International Monetary Fund
July 2002). As part of these agreements, Turkey had pledged to reduce inflation and bring its public
sector debt under control (Alper and Alper 2003). The MoH had a long-standing relationship with
the World Bank dating to the first health policy loan agreement in 1990. These ties strengthened
under the AK Party government; in 2004 the MoH signed a US$ 75M loan agreement for hiring
technical expertise to support the design and implementation of the HTP (Republic of Turkey and
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 2004). The MoH was able to benefit from
the financial and technical resources as well as crucial political support for the Washington
institutions, while maintaining its own leadership over the full course of the reform’s design,
adoption, and implementation. The MoH drew on the Bank’s support to improve the reforms’
legitimacy in domestic politics, and the AK Party government re lied on the IMF’s approval of
domestic budgets and financial affairs to help calm markets at home and abroad.
40. AK Party leadership and several ministries relied on IMF standby agreements to stabilize the
economy and public support by IMF representatives to reassure financial markets. As part of these
agreements, IMF representatives were intimately involved in policy discussions that surrounded
expenditures and revenues. One of Turkey’s most important pledges under the IMF standby
agreements was to control social sector spending. A major part of the underlying fiscal problem
was uncertainty that had resulted from several years of incorrectly low forecasts and subsequent
actual expenses that were far higher, which led to budget overruns and large deficits. The Minister
of Health and his team worked to convince IMF officials of the fiscal soundness of the health reform
proposal by presenting detailed forecasting models of the potential for long-term cost saving under
a UHC system that promoted primary care, even if some short-run costs might be higher. These
discussions could be highly contentious because of divergent interpretations of the forecasts and
because of the potential conflict between providing universal coverage and reducing the country’s
high public sector debt. In these discussions Minister Akdağ relied on the strong support of the
Prime Minister for the HTP to advance the reform proposal despite reservations by some parties.
41. The MoH had a long-standing relationship with the World Bank and continued to work closely
with it over the course of the reform. The well-established working relationship with the World Bank
on health system improvements allowed the Minister of Health and the inter-ministerial working
group to quickly access flexible, external resources as needed. Working group members
interviewed for this study recalled that the Government agreed to a relatively small World Bank
loan (US$ 75M) specifically to gain access to the expertise of the Bank’s staff and its international
network of consultants. The capacities gained this way were augmented by hiring into the Ministry
many of the consultants who had worked for the World Bank in Turkey in support of health projects



                                               19
in the 1990s. Many of our interviewees recalled the importance of advice and strategies contributed
from these sources, including about a dozen background papers funded by Japan via a World Bank
trust fund. One of these papers analyzed the politics of the proposed reform, the stakeholders
involved, its future electoral ramifications, and proposed strategies to manage interest groups
during the implementation phase of the reform (Rossetti 2004). The MoH used the loan proceeds
to commission reports and implement programs to support the design and implementation of the
HTP with much greater flexibility than would have been possible with government revenues.
42. Interviewee accounts referenced the largely, positive working relationship between the MoH
and World Bank throughout the reform process. However, at times MoH plans did not fit within
typical World Bank timelines, or processes, or procedures. In these cases, staff members of the
MoH and the World Bank worked together to find mutually acceptable solutions. For instance,
Minister Akdağ proposed hiring teams of Field Coordinators to directly manage the implementation
of the HTP in each of Turkey’s 81 provinces. The purpose of these teams would be to communicate
directly with the Minister, providing him with detailed and timely information from the front lines of
the reform. As recounted by several interviewees directly familiar with the establishment of the Field
Coordinating Teams, the hiring process was politically complex. Each team was to be led by an
advisor personally known and trusted by the Minister, a requirement designed to limit local influence
on the information, which might have downplayed problems or overly emphasize progress. The
Minister was particularly concerned about obtaining accurate information to ensure that local
committees were performing according to MoH policy. This was potentially contentious because it
asserted MoH authority over some matters that local committees had sometimes handled
themselves. Green card distribution had in some cases been a local patronage opportunity, for
instance.
43. But there were significant challenges to hiring the Field Coordinators as envisioned by the
Minister. First, he needed to entice trusted staff to take leave from their current jobs in Ankara to
work in outlying provinces. Second, he needed a way to ensure that Field Coordinators would still
have jobs available to them when their tenure was over. Third, he needed to work within World
Bank procurement guidelines to place both qualified and loyal staff in these positions. The basic
tension arose between the Turkish government regulation that civil service slots could be held open
indefinitely only for employees leaving for international agencies, and the World Bank’s standard
guidance against sole-source, or non-competitive contracting, which was preferred by the Ministry
because of its concern for hiring trusted and loyal Field Coordinators. Ultimately to introduce the
Field Coordinators into the health system and overcome these obstacles, the Minister and his
leadership team succeeded in negotiating these bureaucratic constraints with a creative mixture of
funding and hiring through different multilateral agencies. Putting loyal staff in a front-line monitoring
role extended the Ministry’s centralized authority deep into the field with accurate information from
the local level and a much greater ability to intervene when complexities or problem threatened the
reform’s progress.
44. The Minister of Health and his team learned from the history of interactions between the IMF,
World Bank, and the Turkish Government to use the institutions’ valuable resources to their utmost
advantage. Their leadership skills are demonstrated by their resolute commitment to the central
objectives of the HTP and figuring out mechanisms to effectively achieve them, as well as their
willingness to accept and benefit from the technical expertise of the World Bank.
Challenge #4: Covering the Poor and Unifying Benefit Systems
45. Many countries have attempted to create UHC systems by expanding entitlement programs
for low-income groups, but in recent years only Turkey has succeeded in then integrating the
entitlement programs into a unified system covering all citizens. Ghana, Mexico, and Thailand, for
instance, have all undertaken reforms to move toward UHC. These countries have all been
successful in expanding coverage, particularly for the poor. But merging the subsidized programs
for low-income households with existing schemes for formal sector workers has remained elusive
(Hughes and Leethongdee 2007; Agyepong and Adjei 2008; Knaul, González-Pier et al. 2012).
Combining coverage plans for the poor with those for formal sector employees is very difficult
because it represents an enormous challenge of political economy. Formal sector workers tend to



                                                 20
be well organized and influential politically, and usually enjoy the most comprehensive benefit
package, at least in part because they usually contribute the most resources to the system. Formal
sector workers therefore have high economic and political power. Reform usually threatens their
interests because the redistribution required to cover low-income groups implies a potential
reduction in their own benefits and/or the use of some of their contributions for others. Formal
sector beneficiaries have resisted integration efforts for these reasons. Low-income groups whose
members stand to benefit from reform tend to have relatively little economic power and are usually
not engaged in the electoral process, where their large numbers could constitute substantial
political power. This generic political economy is thus very unfavorable for reform because its likely
opponents have direct interests at stake and have access to political and economic resources,
while potential proponents are likely to be unorganized, disengaged, and have limited access to
either political or economic resources.
46. In the Turkish Case: To expand coverage and move towards a unified UHC system, the MoH
worked around obstacles to postpone or avoid potential opposition. We highlight three important
steps: First, the MoH decided to use the existing Green Card Program as its primary vehicle for
scaling up coverage for low-income households in part because modifying a program did not
require parliamentary approval, whereas starting a new program would have. The MoH simply
adapted the Green Card Program to fit the policy objectives of the HTP under its own authority.
Second, the Minister of Health and his senior leadership team brought the Green Card Program
under the Ministry’s auspices so they could control it completely. Third, they stimulated demand for
the Green Card Program by expanding the benefits package, increasing the number of Green
Cards in circulation, and making concurrent supply side improvements. Throughout this process
the MoH carefully monitored the program’s progress in implementation. This progress t owards
expanding coverage was embraced by low-income households in rural areas of Turkey. And as the
benefit package expanded and the cost of the program grew the MoH reduced the potential for
opposition to an integrated system by social security beneficiaries—because the discrepancies
between benefits was shrinking—and financing authorities because the marginal cost of doing so
was also shrinking.
47. Once UHC was identified as the primary objective of the HTP, senior leaders at the MoH
debated several policy options before settling on the Green Card, according to several interviewees
who participated in the process. They chose to work with an existing program, rather than creating
an entirely new scheme for low-income households, which would have required legislative
approval. The Green Card Program was chosen because it was the only part of earlier attempts to
create a universal, general health insurance scheme that had been passed by the parliament and
implemented. But before the HTP, the Green Card program had significant limitations. It provided
coverage for low-income households only for inpatient expenses incurred in public facilities, and it
was widely regarded as unsuccessful because of corrupt enrollment procedures, a limited benefit
package, and poor public service quality (Karadeniz 2012; Menon, Mollahaliloglu et al. 2013).
Estimates based on the 2003 Household Budget Survey show that there were only 2.5 million
beneficiaries and of those households enrolled only 31 percent were in the poorest decile (Aran
and Hentschel 2012). But these problems aside, the Green Card program did exist in law and did
operate, even if imperfectly, both of which gave the Minister of Health and his leadership team an
avenue for delivering services, expanding entitlements, advancing their policy goals, and
generating public support without having to enter the parliamentary process and sustain the
attendant delays.
48. As a second step, the MoH drew on the strong support of the Prime Minister to bring the
budget and administration of the Green Card Program under its own auspices. Prior to the reforms,
Social Solidarity Foundations under the Prime Minister’s Office ran the Green Card Program. In
2004, the MoH requested direct control of the program so that it could then oversee its expansion
efforts and work to address bottlenecks in implementation without needing approval from other
ministerial entities. Because the Social Solidarity Foundations were under the Prime Minister’s
control, he was able to easily transfer the Green Card P rogram to the MoH based on the Minister’s
request. Interviewees involved in this process reported that a first step in gaining administrative




                                               21
control of the Green Card Program was to replace the “green cards” with new “green booklets” as
a mechanism to make all enrollees report to local authorities, where they could be counted.
49. The MoH gained administrative and budgetary control of the Green Card Program in 2004;
however, avoided creating local opposition by initially refraining from changing any enrollment
procedures, which would have affected patronage relationships at the local level between local
committees and enrollees. Local committees continued to be responsible for processing
applications; however, the MoH had direct monitoring and reporting mechanisms to ensure their
policy objectives were followed. In doing so, they avoided opposition from local committees, which
were accustomed to making eligibility determinations. Instead, the government waited and
incorporated eligibility determination into the Ministry of Family and Social Policies’ IT system in
2012 only after enrollment abuses arose in the public discourse (Hurriyet Daily News 2010).
50. Third, once the administrative arrangements for Green Card reform were in place, the MoH
worked to increase demand for the program by expanding the benefits package and improving the
public sector delivery system. The MoH expanded the benefit package, adding coverage for
outpatient services in 2004 and coverage for outpatient medicines in 2005 (Menon, Mollahaliloglu
et al. 2013). The MOH needed to increase demand for the Green Card Program to power the
enrollment required to raise coverage rates and ultimately to secure the requisite electoral support
for the reforms from low-income households residing in rural areas. Many key informants described
an explicit MoH policy to distribute as many Green Cards as possible to bring more people into the
health system. This was both technically and politically expedient because it provided more benefits
to citizens, empowered local committees to facilitate the process, and increased the electoral
support for the AK Party amongst its base. Their efforts to stimulate demand proved successful as
the number of Green Card holders increased from 2.5 million in 2003 to 9.1 million in 2011 (Figure
2) (OECD and World Bank 2008, Turkey MoH 2012).
                  Figure 2: Number of Green Card Beneficiaries, 2003                               2011

                                12
                                                                 9.4    9.3    9.6     9.4   9.1
                                10                        8.3
                                             6.9    7.3
                                 8
                     Millions




                                 6
                                 4   2.5
                                 2
                                 0
                                     2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
                                           Source: Menon, Mollahaliloglu et al. 2013

51. These expansion efforts required additional funding. A member of the senior leadership team
reported that by gradually expanding both the benefits and beneficiaries of the Green Card
Program, the MoH was able to desensitize those within the government responsible for financing
the reform. But viewed over several years, expenditure on the Green Card Program increased
dramatically—from 3.8 percent of public health expenditures in 2003 to 10.8 percent in 2007 and
8.4 percent in 2009. Green Card expenditures as a percent of total public expenditures increased
from 0.4 percent in 2003 to 1 percent in 2009, and from 0.2 percent of GDP in 2003 to 0.4 percent
of GDP in 2009 (Menon, Mollahaliloglu et al. 2013).
52. Concurrent with efforts to maximize Green Card enrollment, the MoH also invested in
improvements to the public health delivery system. It focused its efforts on rural and poorer areas
of the country, where Green Card eligible individuals resided. In an interview, Minister Akdağ
explained that providing financial protection for poor households was not enough, and that the MoH
also had to ensure they had access to health services (Baris, Mollahaliloglu et al. 2011; Johansen
and Guisset 2012). The family medicine program, conditional cash transfers for maternal health
services, pay for performance scheme, and merging the SSK hospitals into the MoH system, were


                                                           22
all reforms that directly benefitted Green Card enrollees. These supply-side efforts, combined with
the expanded benefit package, were used as enticements to increase demand for the Green Card
Program.
53. By the time the MoLSS and MoH required approval by the Turkish Parliament to merge the
social security institutions and create a unified social security scheme in 2006, the MoH had already
greatly expanded the benefits and increased the number of Green Card beneficiaries. Despite this
progress, unification and integration efforts were still delayed. First, the MoLSS and MoH had to
overcome a Constitutional Court challenge to the unified system from President Sezer, who was
generally opposed to AK Party initiatives, on the grounds that it would disadvantage civil servants.
Once provisions were made to ensure that current civil servants could keep their existing benefits,
delays in integrating the Green Card Program were caused by difficulties in creating a rigorous
means-tested eligibility determination system. Several interviewees reported abuse in the
enrollment system and the lack of capacity within the MoH and MoLSS to effectively implement an
income-determination system. There had also been popular backlash against the Green Card
Program based on news reports of abuse and over-enrollment. The MoH responded with promises
to reform the system and conduct more rigorous income tests (Hurriyet Daily News 2010).
Interviewees reported that in response to this public disagreement the MoH began a formal review
of Green Card enrollees to reduce abuse in the system and worked to ensure premium support
was provided only to eligible households.
54. By the time actual integration of Green Card holders into the General Health Insurance System
commenced in January 2012, the hard work of increasing benefits, expanding coverage, and
standardizing enrollment systems had already been done. On January 1, 2012 the newly formed
Ministry of Family and Social Policies (MoFSP) took over responsibility for determining eligibility for
premium support from the MoH (Menon, Mollahaliloglu et al. 2013). Green Card beneficiaries had
12 months to reapply to receive premium support, which led to the official abolishment of the Green
Card Program. In the first year of the new system, 7.5 million people were eligible for full premium
support, and an additional 4.5 million were eligible for reduced premium payments (Ministry of
Family and Social Policies May 2013). Under this new system, the MoFSP determines eligibility,
the Ministry of Finance pays the premiums for beneficiaries directly to the Social Security Institution,
the Social Security Institution pays for the health services, and the MoH delivers the health services
to the beneficiaries.
55. This incremental approach to expanding coverage and unifying all health coverage schemes
allowed the MoH to provide benefits and get the support of low-income households for the health
reform without stirring up opposition from financing agents over the program’s fiscal implications.
As we discuss under contextual factors, it certainly helped that the Turkish economy grew during
the reforms. Exempting the highest entitlement group from reform neutralized their opposition, and
as rising benefits for the poor narrowed and eventually closed the gap in benefits eliminated
resistance from other high-benefits groups.




                                                23
                                PART IV – DISCUSSION
56. In this section we discuss some of the most significant strategies used by the MoH to
overcome the four political economy challenges as identified through our interviews, and in our
subjective judgment. We organize our discussion according to the political economy challenges we
identified above.
57. Building support among beneficiaries: To build support among beneficiaries of the reform,
MoH leadership prioritized service delivery improvements for underserved populations over
investments in other areas of importance to the health system. For instance, the quality of care,
research, teaching, and specialized medicine did not receive the attention or resources dedicated
to primary care. In the short run, the redistribution of resources was designed to address inequities
in the system and build political support for the reforms, although the relative neglect of specialists
and academic medical centers poses grave risks to the future of the system, as we mention in the
next section. Building support among beneficiaries required improving popular attitudes toward the
health system and attracting more people to public facilities. Recast, the problem was to encourage
citizens to consume more health services. The success of the HTP in increasing patient visits and
citizen satisfaction testifies to the efficacy of these efforts. However, no country has been able to
provide as many health services as are demanded by citizens. The imbalance of unlimited demand
for health services and finite resources is addressed through rationing systems. As the demand for
health services continues to rise, fiscal concerns will require Turkey to consider ways to limit the
care-seeking or ration care provided—problems that arise because of the HTP’s success and
whose solution is essential to the long-term financial sustainability of the system.
58. Managing the influence of opposition of groups: The MoH succeeded in winning the
support of some of the groups that initially opposed the HTP, but even ten years into the reforms
some groups remain vehemently opposed. Many specialist physicians, the elite ranks of nurses
and midwives, and some other health workers have been marginalized and our interviews reveal
highly negative feelings among some of these professions toward the MoH and the policies that
guide the health system. Satisfaction surveys of urban physicians conducted by the TMA, for
instance, show very negative views of current job satisfaction and low expectations for future
improvements (Tanik, Bilaloğlu et al. 2013). These sentiments may undermine the profession by
discouraging physicians from staying in practice and deterring students from entering medical
school. Similarly, among nurses, midwives, and other health professionals low satisfaction
threatens the performance of current workers and may diminish the number of people choosing to
train in these areas. These dynamics threaten the supply and quality of services the system can
provide.
59. Managing the influence of the World Bank and IMF on domestic politics: The MoH’s
strategic management of its relationships with the IMF and World Bank carries risks and reflects
the importance of negotiating a united front between ministries. The MoH is not typically a strong
ministry in domestic politics and therefore tends not to have as much leverage as other in its
negotiations with International Financial Institutions, particularly not with the IMF, which focuses on
macroeconomic issues. The Ministry of Finance and the Undersecretariat of Treasury are usually
the ministerial bodies with the most bargaining power in these interactions due to their role in the
fiscal affairs of their country. The creation of an inter-ministerial working group to devise the HTP
comprised of members from the financially-oriented ministries, as well as those most concerned
with service provision, gave the MoH a far stronger position compared with planning on its own.
This ministerial coordination, along with the complete support of the Prime Minister, allowed the
Minister of Health and his team to take an aggressive position with both organizations to fully
leverage their resources in support of the HTP.
60. Covering the poor and unifying benefit systems: The sequenced approach taken to
expanding the Green Card Program shows one way to incorporate a targeted entitlement program
for low-income groups into a unified UHC social security system covering the whole population with
a harmonized benefit package. The MoH’s decision to use the exist ing Green Card Program as the
key vehicle to achieve UHC allowed it to avoid legislative delays or roadblocks associated with



                                               24
creating an entirely new social security scheme for low-income households. The gradual expansion
of benefits and coverage built public support and momentum behind the concept of UHC so that
the unified system was politically palatable by the time Green Card beneficiaries were to be
integrated with the social security institution. By the time the Green Card Program was replaced by
the premium assistance scheme and fully integrated with the social security institution in 2012,
political opposition and the prospect of increased expenditure were no longer important issues.
These obstacles had already been overcome by the incremental approach to expanding coverage.




                                              25
                              PART V – CONCLUSIONS
61. We have attempted to shed light on how the Minister of Health and his leadership team
addressed political economy conflicts at the heart of Turkey’s comprehensive reforms. Our analysis
complements many previous studies of the technical aspects of Turkey’s reform and its results by
showing how, political economy challenges are inherent in different aspects of health reform and
explicating the approaches used in this case to address them. We believe that although the specific
presentation of these challenges does reflect factors particular to Turkey at the time of the reforms,
the basic conflicts are likely to arise in many settings because they reflect groups and interests
common in societies around the world. Similarly, we believe that the core elements of the solutions
employed by the Minister and his leadership team could be adapted to other settings because they
reflect forces common to politics in most places. Building support quickly; persuading, neutralizing,
or marginalizing opposition groups; asserting domestic priorities in engagements with the IFIs, and
carefully sequencing reforms to avoid or limit potential problems are sufficiently general
propositions as to be relevant in most democracies. These conclusions, however, do not guarantee
success in all cases. For instance, the speed and scope of the Turkish reforms reflects many
capacities developed over decades and required substantial monetary resources, even by the
standards of the world’s 15th largest economy. Turkey’s reforms were based largely on
redistribution and took place in a time of economic expansion, which presents different challenges
than does resource creation or reforms undertaken in worse economic conditions.




                                               26
                                PART VI – IMPLICATIONS
62. Turkey’s current and future health agenda reflects both benefits and consequences of the
HTP. All design choices have implications for the future; we discuss them because of their
importance for Turkey, and for other countries hoping to glean lessons from the Turkish experience.
Based on our stakeholder interviews, we identified four issues with important implications for the
future of the Turkish health system. These include the redistribution of resources, financial
sustainability, quality of care, and dissatisfaction among medical specialists are paramount to the
maintenance and improvement of the health system.
63. Redistribution of resources: The political importance of acting quickly and the technical
decision to greatly increase benefits for most citizens led to the practical imperative to redistribute
existing resources and also increase total allocations for health. In general, resources were diverted
away from elite urban institutions and devoted instead to the provision of health services in
secondary cities and rural areas. In the short run, this choice increased the availability of
inexpensive, basic services, which have a high return on investment and tend to benefit younger
populations, as compared to the high-cost interventions typically required later in the life cycle. The
reform also targeted resources towards Green Card beneficiaries, which helped enroll low-income
households that had had little or no coverage in the past.
64. Although this redistribution addressed inequities, it appears to have weakened some parts of
the health system. For example, the rapid establishment of the family medicine model and a robust
primary care system was achieved in part by rechanneling resources. For example, tertiary care
centers did not receive their customary allocation of assistant professors because those physicians
were assigned to public hospitals in service delivery roles. Unless remedied, the development of
fewer highly trained specialists will endanger the quality and availability of tertiary care. Additionally,
the pay for performance system encourages the reallocation of time toward service delivery, but
does not reward teaching, mentoring, or research—all crucial activities for academic medical
centers that provide the most advanced services, develop new techniques, conduct research, and
train specialists. As the HTP continues to unfold, resources will be required for research,
specialized care, and specialist training. Reinvigorating these areas is essential for the long-term
performance of the health system and is also important for Turkey’s goal of becoming a medical
tourist destination.
65. Quality of care: The HTP focused in large part on increasing the use of the public healthcare
system and introducing private initiatives at the same time. The next phase of health reform will
need to focus on quality and safety in healthcare to both maintain demand and continue to improve
the health of the Turkish population (Ministry of Health Turkey 2012; Atun, Aydın et al. 2013). The
pay for performance system is designed to encourage greater service delivery, but it is not well
suited to evaluate the quality of those services. The system should be reevaluated to include more
mechanisms to ensure high quality care. Patient feedback systems partially address this concern,
but patients are not necessarily able to accurately judge the quality of care they receive. Over-
reliance on patient perception as a quality indicator can undermine the quality of services by
reducing provider authority and compromising the clinician-patient relationship.
66. Financial sustainability: The financial sustainability of the health system will be an ongoing
concern as Turkey’s population ages, the prevalence of chronic diseases increases, and economic
growth forecasts weaken. The initial design of the HTP included checks on future health spending,
but these have yet to be implemented. HTP planners included way to limit the growth of government
spending on health by using a family physician gate keeping system, and offering a basic
guaranteed benefit package that could be supplemented with additional insurance, but both of
these measures were abandoned as politically unviable. Without these mechanisms, the decision
to offer extensive benefits through the General Health Insurance Scheme carries with it long-run
cost pressures. Thus far, policymakers have prioritized coverage expansion, improved service
delivery, and equity over concerns about cost increases under the HTP. As the demand for higher-
cost services rises, the politically difficult task of introducing some form of rationing will be required
to permit long-term sustainability.



                                                 27
67. The pay for performance system carries additional financial risks due to its potential to
promote induced demand. The financial incentives for clinicians encourage the excess provision of
medical services, and patients are typically willing recipients because they usually want more care.
The HTP set out to increase demand for health services among citizens who previously had not
met their needs through the public system. As the health system transitions from focusing on the
quantity of services to also emphasize the quality of care, the MoH will need to manage utilization
patterns to ensure effective and efficient care-seeking behavior.
68. Dissatisfaction among medical specialists: The expansion of service delivery and
increases in utilization both translated to greatly increased workloads for healthcare providers. For
physicians satisfied to work in service delivery roles, the pay-for-performance system has yielded
generously commensurate pay increases. However, these pay increases have not fully assuaged
all provider groups. Many providers do not want the majority of their salaries to be derived from
performance bonuses (Tanik 2014). Dissatisfaction remains extremely high among elite specialists
and academicians, and tensions between these groups and the MoH are very high regarding
professional autonomy, institutional independence, dual practice laws, compensation policies, and
other areas. Also, nurses, midwives, pharmacists, and other provider groups have not received pay
increases as large as those for physicians, and wage-related dissatisfaction is acute for some of
their members. The dissatisfaction among providers —particularly specialists—is an extremely
important threat to the integrity and capacities of the health system because it drives top performers
into private practice, curtails research, and weakens teaching capacity, all of which can have
negative influences on the future because they have the potential to push new college graduates
to choose other professions. The MoH will need to work with provider groups to improve relations,
and restore cooperation in all areas of the health system. It should carefully monitor the numbers
and quality of students choosing health and medical education and where they choose to practice
during their careers.




                                               28
                                      REFERENCES
Abiiro, G. A. and D. McIntyre. 2013. "Universal Financial Protection through National Health
         Insurance: A stakeholder Analysis of the Proposed one-time Premium Payment Policy in
         Ghana." Health Policy Plan 28(3): 263-278.
Agyepong, I. and S. Adjei. 2008. "Public Social Policy Development and Implementation: A Case
         Study of the Ghana National Health Insurance Scheme." Health Policy and Planning 23:
         150 - 160.
Akdağ, R. 2011. Turkey Health Tranformation Program Evaluation Report 2003-2010. Ministry of
         Health.
Akinci, F., S. Mollahaliloglu, et al. 2012. "Assessment of the Turkish Health Care System
         Reforms: A Stakeholder Analysis." Health Policy 107(1): 21-30.
Akyüz, Y. and K. Boratav. 2003. "The Making of the Turkish Financial Crisis." World Development
         31(9): 1549-1566.
Alper, C. E. and Z. Ö. Alper. 2003. "Emerging Market Crises and the IMF: Rethinking the Role of
         the IMF in Light of Turkey's 2000–2001 Financial Crisis." Canadian Journal of
         Development Studies/Revue canadienne d'études du développement 24(2): 267-284.
Aran, M. A. and J. S. Hentschel. 2012. Protection in Good and Bad Times? The Turkish Green
         Card Health Program. Washington, DC, World Bank. Policy Research Working Paper
         6178.
Atun, R., S. Aydın, et al. 2013. "Universal Health Coverage in Turkey: Enhancement of Equity."
         The Lancet 382(9886): 65-99.
Baris, E., S. Mollahaliloglu, et al. 2011. "Healthcare in Turkey: from Laggard to Leader." BMJ 342.
Bleich, S. N., E. Özaltin, et al. 2009. "How does Satisfaction with the Health-care System Relate
         to Patient Experience?" Bulletin of the World Health Organization 87(4): 271-278.
Boulton, L. and M. Wolf. 2002. Turkey's Ailment: The Country's Chances of Controlling Public
         Debt and Securing Economic Reecovery could be Jeopardised by the Ill-health of the
         Prime Minister. Financial Times. London.
Brugha, R. and Z. Varvasovszky. 2000. "Stakeholder Analysis: A Review." Health Policy Plan
         15(3): 239-246.
Bryant, S. 2010. Erdogan Seeks Re-elections as Turkish Healthcare Plan Trumps Headscarves.
         Bloomberg News.
Bump, J. B., M. R. Reich, et al. 2012. "Diarrhoeal Diseases and the Global Health Agenda:
         Measuring and Changing Priority." Health Policy Plan.
Damrongplasit, K. and G. A. Melnick 2009. "Early Results From Thailand's 30 Baht Health
         Reform: Something To Smile About." Health Aff 28(3): w457-466.
Ekman, B., N. T. Liem, et al. (2008). "Health Insurance Reform in Vietnam: A Review of Recent
         Developments and Future Challenges." Health Policy Plan. 23(4): 252-263.
Ertugrul, A. and F. Selcuk. 2001. "A Brief Account of the Turkish Economy, 1980--2000." Russian
         andEast European Finance and Trade 37(6): 6.
Frenk, J., O. Gómez-Dantés, et al. 2009. "The Democratization of Health in Mexico: Financial
         Innovations for Universal Coverage." Bull World Health Organ 87(7): 542-548.
Gil, A., O. Polikina, et al. 2010. "Alcohol Policy in a Russian Region: A Stakeholder Analysis." Eur
         J Public Health 20(5): 588-594.
Gilson, L., E. Erasmus, et al. 2012. "Using Stakeholder Analysis to Support Moves Towards
         Universal Coverage: Lessons from the SHIELD Project." Health Policy Plan 27 Suppl 1:
         i64-76.
Hacker, J. S. 1998. "The Historical Logic of National Health Insurance: Structure and Sequence
         in the Development of British, Canadian, and U.S. Medical Policy." Studies in American
         Political Development 12(01): 57-130.
Heper, M. 2003. "The Victory of the Justice and Development Party in Turkey." Mediterranean
         Politics 8(1): 127-134.
Hu, S. 2008. "Universal Coverage and Health Financing from China's Perspective." Bulletin of the
         World Health Organization 86(11): 819-819.




                                              29
Hughes, D. and S. Leethongdee. 2007. "Universal Coverage In The Land Of Smiles: Lessons
         From Thailand’s 30 Baht Health Reforms." Health Affairs 26(4): 999-1008.
Hurriyet Daily News (2010). Turkey to Halve Number of Green Card Holders by 2012. Hurriyet
         Daily News. Istanbul.
Immergut, E. M. 1990. "Institutions, Veto Points, and Policy Results: A Comparative Analysis of
         Health Care." Journal of Public Policy 10(4): 391-416.
_____. 1992. Health Politics: Interests and Institutions in Western Europe. Cambridge;New York,
         Cambridge University Press.
International Monetary Fund. 2002. Turkey Article IV Consultation. Washington, DC.
_____. July 2002. Turkey: Request for Standby Agreement. Washington, DC. IMF Country
         Report No. 02/136.
Johansen, A. and A.-L. Guisset. 2012. Successful Health Systems Reforms: The Case of Turkey.
         Copenhagen, World Health Organization Europe.
Karadeniz, O. 2012. "Extension of Health Services Coverage for Needy in Turkey: From Social
         Assistance to General Health Insurance." Journal of Social Security 2: 103-123.
Knaul, F. M., E. González-Pier, et al. 2012. "The Quest for Universal Health Coverage: Achieving
         Social Protection for all in Mexico." The Lancet 380(9849): 1259-1279.
Lakin, J. 2010. "The End of Insurance: Mexico’s Seguro Popular, 2001 – 2007." Journal of Health
         Politics Policy and Law 35(3).
Logie, D. E., M. Rowson, et al. 2008. "Innovations in Rwanda's Health System: Looking to the
         Future." The Lancet 372(9634): 256-261.
Menon, R., S. Mollahaliloglu, et al. (2013). Towards Univeral Coverage: Turkey's Green Card
         Program for the Poor. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Ministry of Family and Social Policy. 2013. Premium Support Eligibility 2012 and 2013.
         Government of Turkey. Ankara.
Ministry of Health Turkey. 2012. Strategic Plan 2013 - 2017. Ankara.
Namazzi, G., N. Kiwanuka, et al. 2013. "Stakeholder Analysis for a Maternal and Newborn Health
         Project in Eastern Uganda." BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth 13(1): 58.
OECD, WHO, et al. 2008. OECD Reviews of Health Systems: Turkey. Paris.
Olson, M. 1971. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups.
         Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Özbudun, E. 2006. "From Political Islam to Conservative Democracy: The Case of the Justice
         and Development Party in Turkey." South European Society and Politics 11(3-4): 543-
         557.
Paim, J., C. Travassos, et al. 2011. "The Brazilian Health System: History, Advances, and
         Challenges." Lancet 377(9779): 1778-1797.
Pannarunothai, S., D. Patmasiriwat, et al. 2004. "Universal Health Coverage in Thailand: Ideas
         for Reform and Policy Struggling." Health Policy 68(1): 17-30.
Reich, M. R. 1995. "The Politics of Health Sector Reform in Developing Countries: Three Cases
         of Pharmaceutical Policy." Health Policy 32(1-3): 47-77.
Republic of Turkey and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 2004. Loan
         Agreement: Health Transition Project. Loan number 4737 TU.
Roberts, M., W. Hsiao, et al. 2003. Getting Health Reform Right: A Guide to Improving
         Performance and Equity. New York, Oxford University Press.
_____. 2008. Getting Health Reform Right: A Guide to Improving Performance and Equity. New
         York, Oxford University Press.
Rossetti, A. G. 2004. Republic of Turkey Health Transformation Program: Strategic Options for
         the Implementation of the Health Sector Transformation in Turkey Ankara, Ministry of
         Health and the World Bank.
_____. 2004. Republic of Turkey Health Transformation Program: Strategic Options for the
         Implementation of the Health Sector Transformation in Turkey. Ankara, Ministry of Health
         and the World Bank.
Sarr, F. 2010. "Efficiency of Immunization Service in the Gambia: Results of a Stakeholder
         Analysis." East Afr J Public Health 7(1): 68-73.




                                             30
Tangcharoensathien, V., W. Patcharanarumol, et al. 2011. "Health-financing Reforms in
        Southeast Asia: Challenges in Achieving Universal Coverage." Lancet 377(9768): 863-
        873.
Tanik, F. A., E. Bilaloğlu, et al. 2013. "The Greatest Motivation: Assurance of Practicing the
        Profession with Dignity. Motivational State of Physicians in Turkey." World Medical
        Journal 59(3).
Tatar, M., S. Mollahaliloglu, et al. 2011. Turkey Health System Review. Health Systems in
        Transition. E. O. o. H. S. a. Policy.
Turkish Statistical Institute. 2003-2012. Life Satisfaction Survey. Ankara. G. o. Turkey.
Varvasovszky, Z. and R. Brugha 2000. "A Stakeholder Analysis." Health Policy Plan 15(3): 338-
        345.
World Bank. 2006. Turkey Public Expenditure Review. Washington, DC. Report No. 36764-TR.
_____. 2012. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC.
World Health Organization. 2013. Turkey National Health Accounts - Health Expenditure Series.
Yasar, G. Y. 2011. "‘Health Transformation Programme’ in Turkey: An Assessment." The
        International Journal of Health Planning and Management 26(2): 110-133.




                                            31
                          ANNEX I: STAKEHOLDER MAPS
                     TABLE 1: GOVERNMENTAL STAKEHOLDERS IN HTP DESIGN AND ADOPTION (2002–4)
  STAKEHOLDER                  ROLES                                OBJECTIVES                       STRATEGIES
                                                GOVERNMENTAL
   Ministry of       Designed HTP                Improve the delivery of       Make simple, highly visible
    Health           Leader of inter-             medical services with a        improvements first to generate
                      ministerial working          focus on rural and poor        support for more difficult
                      group                        populations.                   reforms.
                                                  Unify fractured financing     Use political support of Prime
                                                   and delivery systems.          Minister to win budgetary
                                                  Convince government to         increases over objections of
                                                   spend more on health,          other ministries.
                                                   reorient system around        Use inter-ministerial working
                                                   primary care and service       group to coordinate objectives,
                                                   delivery, improve equity,      strategies and policies with
                                                   increase citizen               Treasury, Finance, SSK, IMF
                                                   satisfaction, and build        and World Bank.
                                                   more infrastructure.          Sought to increase electoral
                                                                                  support by improving service
                                                                                  delivery, reducing opposition
                                                                                  by fragmenting
                                                                                  physician/health worker
                                                                                  groups, and advocating for
                                                                                  increased training of health
                                                                                  workers.
Ministry of Labor    Part of inter-ministerial  Increase retirement age        Use increased health access
   and Social         working group.               from 50 (average) to 65 to     and benefits as compensation
 Security (SSI)      Leader of social security    reduce burden on               to workers for extending
                      component of overall         government expenditure.        retirement age.
                      reform effort.              Protect existing benefits     Work to exempt existing
                     Concerned that HTP           for social security            retirees from new regulations.
                      could increase health        beneficiaries.                Apply political pressure to keep
                      expenditure.                Require referral system        own hospital system.
                                                   for secondary or specialist
                                                   care.
  Ministry of        Part of inter-ministerial  Manage long-term cost of       Model economics of reform
 Development          working group.               reform.                        and cooperate with
(formerly State      Concerned about long-       Accurately forecast            international agencies and
    Planning          run expansion of costs       growth in expenditure and      consultants to incorporate
 Organization)        in a reformed health         potential savings from         interests into policy.
                      system because of need       efficiency gains.             Help guide the inter-ministerial
                      to build more               Increase revenues from         working group.
                      infrastructure and           more comprehensive
                      deliver more services.       enrollment.




                                                    32
   Ministry of       Part of the inter-           Reform health sector so        Use domestic political power
    Finance           ministerial working           expenditures did not            and pressure from IMF to limit
                      group.                        exceed revenues.                MoH budget.
                     Allocated financial          Improve efficiency of
                      resources for the entire      government health
                      Turkish government.           spending.
                     Worked closely with          Limit expenditure growth
                      IMF in implementing           by requiring referrals for
                      standby agreement.            specialist care.
                     Worked with MoH and          Increase revenues by
                      Ministry of Labor and         offering supplementary
                      Social Security to            insurance.
                      concurrently reform
                      health and social
                      security systems to
                      improve long-term
                      financial sustainability.
Under Secretariat    Part of inter-ministerial    Promote efficiency and         Worked through inter-
  of Treasury         working group.                cost control measures to        ministerial working group to
                     Involved in reforming         limit long-run spending.        forecast costs and plan reform.
                      both health and              Comply with IMF standby        Used IMF concerns as a way to
                      pension system to             agreement.                      voice cost control agenda.
                      control spending.
                     Special projects unit
                      working on health
                      reform for over a
                      decade.
Prime Minister:      Controlled                   Increase equity and access     Support MoH over other
  Abdullah Gül        governmental agenda           to health services to make      ministries in negotiations with
  (2002-2003)        Introduced social sector      good on campaign                IMF, World Bank and inter-
Prime Minister:       reforms aligned with AK       pledges.                        ministerial working group.
  Recep Tayyip        Party agenda.                Solidify electoral success
 Erdoğan (2003                                      of AK Party by increasing
March – Present)                                    voter satisfaction.
   Parliament        Controlled by AK Party       Support Prime Minister         Use normal legislative
     (Health          and worked to                 and Minister of Health to       processes to support reform
  Commission,         implement its agenda          deliver more health             when parliamentary approval
   Budget and         and policy initiatives.       services and as a result        was needed (primarily as of
    Planning                                        increase electoral              2006).
  Commission)                                       satisfaction and gain          Submitted legislation for
                                                    reelection.                     approval to implement HTP.
President Ahmet      Concerned that reform        Maintain benefits for civil    Delay reform by sending it to
  Necdet Sezer        would diminish benefits       servants.                       Constitutional Court (2006).
                      for civil servants.
 Constitutional      Did not support AK           Preserve traditional           Use institutional authority of
    Court             Party initiatives.            secular elite power.            the court to block parts of
                                                                                    reform and delay
                                                                                    implementation.

    Strongly               Supportive                       Neutral                 Opposed            Strongly
   supportive                                                                                          opposed




                                                     33
            TABLE 2: HEALTH CARE PROVIDER STAKEHOLDERS IN HTP DESIGN AND ADOPTION (2002–4)
STAKEHOLDER               ROLES                                   OBJECTIVES                     STRATEGIES
                            PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS AND INTEREST GROUPS
  Turkish      Represented Turkish                   Supported objectives of  Leadership attempted to
  Medical       physicians as a private     expanding access to services.        influence reform in dialogue
Association     sector licensing             Leadership concerned with          with MoH.
                requirement.                  preserving autonomy due to
                                              mistrust of AK Party agenda.
                                             Did not want to see a negative
                                              impact on income, quality of
                                              services, autonomy of
                                              profession, or decline in
                                              research and teaching capacity
                                              in elite universities.
                                             Leadership wanted to preserve
                                              the status quo.
  Dentists     Represented all dentists  Sought to increase income and        Cooperated with the MoH in
                in the country.               availability of dental care in     designing the dental
                                              public system.                     component of the HTP.
                                             Wanted to increase insurance
                                              coverage for dental services and
                                              increase business for dentists.
Pharmacists  Represented all                Wanted to preserve autonomy       Resisted MoH efforts.
                pharmacists, who were         and income level.                 Sought to increase benefits
                all independent                                                  for medicines and
                practitioners.                                                   reimbursement rates from
                                                                                 MoH.
  Turkish      Represented all nurses       Wanted to improve stature and     Worked with Turkish
  Nurses        in the country.               income.                            Medical Association to
Association                                  Did not want to lose autonomy.     influence MoH plans.
                                             Feared that privatization would
                                              take place under the HTP
                                              insurance model and instead
                                              wanted a National Health
                                              Service model.
 Midwives      Represented all              Promoted midwifery as a central  Attempted to influence MoH
                midwives in the               element in home-based care and     through dialogue.
                country.                      community-level outreach.
               Maintained primary role  Wanted to have a central role in
                in childbirth, particularly   family physician care model.
                in rural areas.
                                                  ACADEMIC
  Higher        In charge of allocating      Did not want to cooperate with         Attempt to outlast AK Party
 Education       funds for university          AK Party or join its initiatives.       influence by delaying action
  Council        hospitals and approving      Preserve traditional, secular elite     in hopes of future electoral
   (YOK)         new training                  power.                                  results.
                 opportunities for health     Resist perceived Islamist
                 workers.                      influence.
                Aligned with opposition
                 groups to the AK Party.
  Medical       Primary providers of         Preserve existing system.              Attempt to influence the
faculties of     high-end, specialty care.    Maintain autonomy and high-             reform and mitigate its
   elite        Trained health workers.       end specialty care provision and        impact.
universities    Aligned with opposition       training.                              Hope to outlast AK Party
                 groups to AK Party.                                                   influence by delaying action
                                                                                       and diminishing AK Party
                                                                                       influence in future elections.



                                                    34
  Medical       Stood to benefit from    Gain financial, infrastructure and    Cooperated and worked
faculties of     reform, but unsure of     training resources.                    with MoH to support
   other         consequences for         Increase prominence of                 reforms and allocate
 university      themselves.               institutions and staff.                resources to their
                                                                                  universities.

 Strongly             Supportive                       Neutral                   Opposed        Strongly
supportive                                                                                      opposed




                                                35
                         TABLE 3: ORGANIZED BENEFICIARY GROUPS IN HTP DESIGN AND ADOPTION (2002–4)
    STAKEHOLDER                       ROLES                        OBJECTIVES                      STRATEGIES
Active civil servants        Important                    Preserve existing benefits     Negotiated that new social
                              representation in policy      and retirement age.             security age limit would
                              making entities.                                              only apply to new hires as
                             Historically aligned with                                     of 2008.
                              opposition.
  Blue and white             Large share of pop.          Wanted to increase             Did not organize
  collar workers              and represented               access, benefits and            independently of SSI.
(received benefits            majority of formal            improve health services.
   through SSK)               sector workers.
    Retired civil            Strong voting block          Maintain existing benefits.    Lobbied for exemption from
servants (received                                                                          HTP provisions.
 benefits through                                                                          Ensure support of President
 Emekli Sandıği )                                                                           to make sure they would
                                                                                            not have benefits reduced.
Self-employed and            Lack of enrollment in        Increase access to services    Did not organize
artisans (eligible for        Bağ-Kur meant the             and increase benefit            independently.
 benefits through             MoH needed increased          package.
      Bağ-Kur)                enrollment amongst           Ensure financial
                              this population.              protection.
  Labor Union for            Large voting bloc.           Wanted to preserve and         Cooperated with the MoH.
Transportation and                                          augment benefits.
    Construction
      Workers
  Labor union for            Focus on public sector       Preserve the status quo.       Cooperated with the MoH
   private health             delivery meant they                                           and promoted beneficial
 workers (Saglik-Is           were not the targeted                                         contracting arrangements.
   under Turk-Is)             group of the HTP.
                             Contracted with MoH
                              to augment services.
 Labor union for             Frontline implementers       Wanted increased pay and       Formed to represent
  public health               of reform.                    improved terms of work.         workers who supported the
workers (Saglik-Sen                                        Support AK Party.               reform, thereby reducing
under Memur-Sen)                                                                            the membership of
                                                                                            opposing unions and
                                                                                            professional associations.
  General Public             Voters overwhelming          Urban elites didn’t            Express electoral support by
                              supported                     support AK Party                voting for AK Party.
                             AK Party in 2002              initiatives and wanted
                              parliamentary                 them voted out of office in
                              elections.                    future elections.
                             Ability to change            Majority of population
                              leadership in future          supported reform to the
                              elections.                    social sectors and
                                                            improvements in health
                                                            service delivery.
                                                           Wanted to obtain more
                                                            benefits and improve
                                                            quality of health system.

Strongly supportive                Supportive               Neutral        Opposed              Strongly opposed




                                                          36
               TABLE 4: INTERNATIONAL ACTOR STAKEHOLDERS IN HTP DESIGN AND ADOPTION (2002–4)
STAKEHOLDER                ROLES                            OBJECTIVES                     STRATEGIES
World Bank       Provided funding and          Support Turkish Government        Support MoH and inter-
                  technical assistance for       efforts to design and              ministerial working group
                  the HTP.                       implement a technically sound      with funding and
                                                 reform.                            technical assistance.
                                                Promote UHC as part of the
                                                 reform.
                                                Gain access to the reform
                                                 process.
    IMF          Provided Turkish              Opposed to any increase in        Provided standby
                  Government with                expenditures.                      agreements and funding.
                  standby agreement and         Reduce government debt and        Negotiate with ministries
                  bailout funds after recent     stabilize economy.                 and exert pressure on
                  financial crises.             Improve efficiency of              government actors to
                 Oversaw expenditure            government spending and            constrain spending.
                  reform plans of the            constrain growth in health
                  Turkish Government.            spending.
World Health     Assisted government           Improve the health of Turkish     Respond to requests for
Organization      with health programs.          population and extend basic        technical assistance and
                                                 services to underserved            financing of health
                                                 populations.                       services.
    EU           Negotiating with Turkey       Wanted Turkey to improve its      Used EU membership to
                  on accession into EU.          health system to continue on       require changes in
                                                 its accession process.             Turkey’s social sectors.
                                                Focus on expansion of primary
                                                 care system.

  Strongly              Supportive                Neutral           Opposed             Strongly opposed
 supportive




                                                 37
                    TABLE 5: GOVERNMENTAL STAKEHOLDERS IN GREEN CARD EXPANSION (2003–2012)
  STAKEHOLDER                   ROLES                       OBJECTIVES                          STRATEGIES
Ministry of Health    Leader of inter-         Increase benefits and number        The Minister was careful
                       ministerial group.        of enrollees.                        not to think of Green Card
                      Leader and designer      Merge Green Card Program             enrollees as a burden on
                       of reform effort.         with social security institutions.   the system and rather,
                                                                                      stressed their right to
                                                                                      basic health services.
                                                                                     As citizen satisfaction grew
                                                                                      for the reforms, it was
                                                                                      increasingly difficult for
                                                                                      those concerned about the
                                                                                      cost of the program to
                                                                                      openly oppose it.
                                                                                     Ministry pushed to provide
                                                                                      as many Green Cards as
                                                                                      possible to citizenry.
 Ministry of Labor    Part of inter-           Become primary purchaser of         Difficulties in merging
and Social Security    ministerial group.        health services for all Turkish      Green Card with other
        (SSI)         Social Security           population.                          social security schemes
                       Institution to be        Concerned about cost of              and in determining
                       housed under its          integrating Green Card               eligibility.
                       auspices and to act       beneficiaries at higher coverage  Needed to figure out
                       as purchaser in the       levels and rates.                    mechanism for general tax
                       system.                                                        revenue to pay for Green
                      Green Card                                                     Card premiums.
                       beneficiaries to be                                           Delayed integration of
                       merged into Social                                             Green Card Program with
                       Security Institution.                                          SSI.
   Ministry of        Newly formed in          Implement an effective and          Quickly built IT capacity to
Family and Social      2011 and previously       rigorous income testing tool.        determine eligibility and
       Policy          was Social Solidarity                                          regain control over this
                       Foundations.                                                   process.
                      Had been in charge
                       of Green Card
                       Program prior to
                       2004 and took over
                       eligibility
                       determination in
                       2012.
 Local Committees     Responsible for          Maintain political power in         Kept ability to give out
                       ultimately                giving out Green Cards.              Green Cards, but given
                       determining              Give out as many Green Cards         scrutiny had to be more
                       eligibility for Green     as possible.                         transparent about it.
                       Card Program until                                            Huge push to give out
                       2012.                                                          Green Cards allowed them
                                                                                      to provide maximize
                                                                                      benefits given out to
                                                                                      constituencies.




                                                    38
   Ministry of         Part of inter-           Manage long-term cost of            Model economics of
  Development           ministerial working       reform.                              reform and cooperate with
 (formerly State        group.                   Accurately forecast growth in        international agencies and
     Planning          Concerned about           expenditure and potential            consultants to incorporate
  Organization)         long-run expansion        savings from efficiency gains.       interests into policy.
                        of costs in a            Increase revenues from more         Help guide the inter-
                        reformed health           comprehensive enrollment.            ministerial working group.
                        system because of
                        need to build more
                        infrastructure and
                        deliver more
                        services.
        SSI            Under pressure to        In favor of integrating Green       Delayed integration of
                        integrate Green Card      Card scheme and having a             Green Card Program with
                        holders under             unified system.                      SSI.
                        General Health           However, ability to determine       Eventually allowed
                        Insurance Scheme.         eligibility and merge                Ministry of Family and
                                                  participants was a challenge.        Social Policy to take over
                                                                                       eligibility responsibility
                                                                                       and then received
                                                                                       premiums from Ministry of
                                                                                       Finance derived from
                                                                                       general tax revenues.
Ministry of Finance    Part of the inter-       Understood political                Pushed for concurrent
                        ministerial working       importance of expanding the          efficiency improving
                        group.                    Green Card Program, but              measures that would help
                       Had to allocate           concerned about fiscal impact.       offset the costs of
                        funds for health                                               increased benefits for
                        sector.                                                        Green Card holders. These
                                                                                       included a referral chain
                                                                                       and supplementary
                                                                                       insurance with a basic
                                                                                       benefit package that did
                                                                                       not go through.
Under Secretariat      Part of inter-           Understood political                Stressed importance of
  of Treasury           ministerial working       importance of expanding the          efficiency measures along
                        group.                    Green Card Program, but              with coverage expansion.
                       Had to allocate funds     concerned about fiscal impact.
                        for health sector.
      AK Party         Had to approve all       Saw the number of votes        Supported increased benefits
 parliamentarians       health reform             they could garner               and numbers of Green Cards,
                        legislation.              through increased Green         particularly in advance of
                                                  Card enrollment and             elections.
                                                  benefits.
    Opposition         Ideologically against    Against overall reform         Did not want Green Card votes
 parliamentarians       the AK Party              but difficult to go against     to go to AK Party.
                        government.               general message of the
                                                  reforms.

     Strongly               Supportive                 Neutral            Opposed          Strongly opposed
    supportive




                                                    39
                   TABLE 6: NON-GOVERNMENTAL STAKEHOLDERS IN GREEN CARD EXPANSION (2003–2012)
STAKEHOLDER                              ROLES                                    OBJECTIVES               STRATEGIES
                                                BENEFICIARY GROUPS
Green Card eligible  Highly dissatisfied          Wanted expanded             Enrolled in Green Card Program in
                        with current benefits,      benefits and more            greater numbers and voted for
                        quality of health           transparent system.          the AK Party.
                        services and level of      Greatly expanded
                        financial protection in     benefits and improved
                        health system.              health service delivery
                       Needed to voluntarily       system were important
                        enroll in system to         selling points.
                        achieve UHC.               Supported greater
                       Important voting bloc       scrutiny, so there was
                        for AK Party.               less ability for the local
                                                    committees to give card
                                                    based on political favor.
    Green Card         Highly dissatisfied        Wanted improved             Voted for the AK Party. Those that
     enrollees          with current benefits,      services and expanded        were enrolled that were not
                        quality of health           benefits.                    technically eligible could continue
                        services and level of      Greatly expanded             to game the system until merging
                        financial protection in     benefits and improved        under General Health Insurance
                        health system.              health service delivery      Scheme.
                       Needed this                 system were important
                        population to have          selling points.
                        improved access to         Those who were enrolled
                        quality services to         but not technically
                        achieve better health       eligible based on income
                        outcomes.                   criteria would eventually
                       Important voting bloc       lose out on benefits.
                        for AK Party.
Non-eligible Green  Benefitted from lack          Do not want to lose         Continued to use Green Card
  Card enrollees        of control of Green         benefits of Green Card       benefit, which contributed to
                        Card Program                and may have to pay          delays in integrating it with
                        enrollment.                 premiums for social          General Health Insurance Scheme.
                                                    security institution.
    Uninsured          Cannot take                Do not want to pay          Some took advantage of
    population          advantage of illegal        health insurance             expanded Green Card program
                        use of Green Cards.         premium but do want          and became beneficiaries.
                       Were now pressured          improved access to          Others were induced to join SSI.
                        to join social security     quality health services.    A small percentage remains
                        institution and pay                                      uninsured and has chosen to
                        premiums.                                                remain without coverage.
  Social security      Large share of             Did not want to pay for     They were appeased as long as
   beneficiaries        population that could       expanded                     they did not have to sacrifice any
                        block the reform if         benefits/enrollees or see    benefits and instead were given
                        they were in                their benefits diminished    more benefits and better access
                        organized and vocal         in any way.                  to health services.
                        opposition.                                             They negotiated for
                                                                                 improvements in their own
                                                                                 benefits instead of working
                                                                                 against the Green Card Program
                                                                                 expansion.




                                                    40
  High-income         Small share of the        Do not want to have to      Remained in opposition parties
 without public        population that was        dedicate additional tax      and continued to pay for private
   insurance           primarily in               revenue to pay for           healthcare services.
                       opposition to AK           increased benefits for
                       Party.                     Green Card enrollees.




                                             HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
  MOH hospital        Had workload             Want increased pay and      Increasing numbers worked for
   physicians          increased due to          ability to have dual         MoH.
                       expanded coverage.        practice.                   Took advantage of increased pay
                      Hoped that more          Wanted better access         in family medicine practice and
                       Green Card patients       and quality of services      other P4P oriented profession.
                       would go to family        for Green Card holders.     Lobbied against parts of reforms
                       physician clinics with   Did not want increased       that increased their workload and
                       outpatient coverage       workload.                    did not allow for dual practice.
                       inclusion.               Supported referral
                                                 requirement.
  MOH general         Central role in          Wanted increased pay.       Many became family practitioners
  practitioners        implementing             Supported efforts to         and benefitted from P4P scheme.
                       primary care focus of     promote preventive and      Lobbied against increased
                       the reform.               primary care.                workload has placed a large
                      Had to meet the                                        burden.
                       increased demand for
                       outpatient services
                       due to expanded
                       benefits coverage.
   SSI hospital       Became part of the       Against not being able      Increasing numbers worked for
    physicians         MOH and in favor of       to have dual practice.       MoH.
                       increased pay from       Now had to treat both       Took advantage of increased pay in
                       P4P.                      social security and          family medicine practice and other
                                                 Green Card patients and      P4P oriented profession.
                                                 wanted increased pay.       Lobbied against reforms.
Private physicians    Still able to see        Did not want to see a       Continue charging patients OOP in
                       patients who are able     decline in their paying      the private sector.
                       to pay.                   patients because more       Start contracting with Social
                                                 coverage for Green Card      Security Institution and charging
                                                 holders means that           extra payments for services
                                                 patients are channeled       provided to social security
                                                 into public sector.          beneficiaries.
                                                In favor of not allowing
                                                 dual practice because
                                                 then there is less
                                                 competition.




                                                  41
    Nurses and         Greater focus on            Approved of increased        Continued to play important role in
     midwives           family medicine              benefits and improved         healthcare and entered into
                        physicians meant a           access to quality health      dialogue to make sure community
                        diminished role for          services for lower            care and home based care were
                        nurses.                      income households.            part of primary healthcare system.
                       Nurses also not part        Wanted an active and
                        of P4P scheme                central role in the new
                        directly and are part        healthcare system,
                        of pooled funds.             including P4P.
                       Increased focus on
                        facility births and role
                        of midwives
                        diminished.
                       In family medicine
                        clinic – now choose a
                        nurse, midwife or
                        health assistant to
                        work with physician.
                                               INTERNATIONAL ACTORS
   World Bank          Had worked with             Recognized need to            Provided technical assistance to
                        Government since             expand coverage and            the MoH, in addition to loans to
                        early 1990s to               benefits of Green Card         design and implement the HTP.
                        propose UHC.                 Program.                      Conducted in depth modeling
                                                    Supported using it as the      exercises to forecast various
                                                     vehicle to achieve UHC.        benefit package and coverage
                                                                                    expansion scenarios.
       IMF             As a creditor to           Wanted to control              Continual negotiations and
                        Turkish Government,         government spending             pressure on MoH and other
                        was concerned about         and decrease                    government actors to reduce
                        fiscal costs of             government debt.                health spending.
                        expanded coverage.
        EU             Working with Turkey        As part of accession           Used public support for EU
                        for it to become a          negotiations, EU was            accession and its negotiating
                        member of the EU.           pushing Turkey to               power to push for primary
                                                    improve its health care         healthcare agenda and universal
                                                    system, expand coverage         health coverage.
                                                    and focus on primary
                                                    health care benefits.

Strongly supportive         Supportive                      Neutral                     Opposed             Strongly
                                                                                                            opposed




                                                     42
                     ANNEX II: INTERVIEW GUIDE
1. Explain project
       a. Asked by MoH and WB to do P-E analysis of health reform
                 i. Fast explanation of P-E
       b. Our focus on some general policy design and then more on policy adoption,
           Green Card implementation
       c. Why? Important for Turkey, LMICs, facilitators
2. Permissions
       a. Can we take notes?
       b. How we will use information
       c. How we handle quotes
3. Personal history
       a. Training, positions, background
       b. What brought interviewee in contact with the reform? When? What capacity?
4. What conditions led to reform?
       a. Why 2003?
       b. What was the impetus?
       c. What factors coalesced?
5. What was the policy design process?
       a. How were the components chosen?
       b. How were they sequenced?
       c. What groups were involved and/or affected?
                 i. What were expected positions?
                ii. Strategies were designed to win support?
       d. Why was the green card program chosen as the primary vehicle for delivering
           more services?
6. Policy adoption
       a. Was the decision to adopt executive or legislative?
                 i. What parts went through the legislature?
                ii. What parts were executed by MoH authority?
       b. What was the legislative process?
       c. Who were the stakeholders?
       d. What strategies were used to build support and overcome opposition?
7. Green Card Program
       a. How did the MoH increase enrollment in to the GC so quickly?
       b. How did enrollment procedures change?
                 i. How were these rules communicated?
                ii. How were they enforced?
       c. How did the central MoH work with local committees to expand enrollment?
                 i. What were reporting and enforcement processes?
       d. Was there any variation in enrollment rates by province?
       e. How were citizens persuaded to enroll in the voluntary system?
       f. Who were the stakeholders and what were their positions?
                 i. What were the strategies used to overcome opposition
       g. How did the MoH plan for the additional services expanded enrollment would
           require?




                                       43
                                 ANNEX III: STATISTICAL ANNEX
                               Table 1: Health Spending in Turkey, 2002–2011

                                   2002   2003   2004       2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012
Total health spending as share      5.4   5.3    5.4        5.4    5.8    6.0    6.1    6.1    5.6    5.3    5.2
         of GDP (%)
Public health spending as share     3.8   3.8    3.8        3.7    4.0    4.1    4.4    4.9    4.4    4.2    4.1
         of GDP (%)
  Private health spending as        1.6   1.5    1.5        1.8    1.8    1.9    1.6    1.1    1.2    1.1    1.1
      share of GDP (%)
Public health spending as share    70.7   71.9   71.2       67.8   68.3   67.8   73.0   81.0   78.6   79.6   79.2
 of total health spending (%)


Public health spending as share     9.1   9.7    10.8       11.2   11.9   12.1   12.8   12.3   11.5   11.4   10.7
of government expenditure (%)


  Out-of-pocket spending as        19.8   18.5   19.2       22.8   22.0   21.8   17.4   14.1   16.3   15.4   15.8
share of total health spending
              (%)

  Total health spending per        466    471    547        622    738    813    913    874    889    901    937
     capita, PPP (constant
 international $ for the year)

              Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators 2014, TURKSTAT 2014




                                                       44
                 Table 2: Use of Health Services Analyzed by Region, Socioeconomic Groups, and Health Insurance (1998-2003)

                              Antenatal visit (%)                     Proportion of births in a health                Proportion of births attended by                 Immunisation uptake (all) (%)
                                                                               facility (%)                                  trained staﬀ (%)
                   1993     1998              2003        2008         1993    1998      2003      2008                 1993     1998      2003     2008                  1993        1998        2003         2008
 Location
   Urban           73·2     74·4              83·6        96·4           73        76·4        84·2        91·8         80·8        81·9        85·1        94·1          74·8        49·5        62·6         78·4
   Rural           48·8     51·2              56·8        87·7          42·2       61·0        60·9        74·1         52·8        67·6        62·2        76·2          52·3        38·3        34·0         63·8
 Region
   West            85·4     83·7              89·7        97·2          80·4       86·7        92·0        93·4         88·0        89·2        90·4        95·8          76·5        50·3        64·3         79·3
   South           75·5     73·6              83·4        95·9          64·0       69·3        79·0        90·1         75·9        84·2        83·4        90·5          81·1        56·8        63·2         75·5
   Central         59·4     71·8              82·1        95·6          64·2       82·6        90·1        94·2         72·2        85·6        91·0        96·1          64·9        52·5        59·7         82·1
   North           63·1     58·5              82·5        93·3          66·8       77·9        87·3        92·2         71·6        83·1        81·6        91·1          62·5        60·0        60·5         77·3
   East            35·1     43·3              54·1        84·0          30·3       47·8        54·1        61·8         41·4        53·4        57·1        65·8          41·6        25·1        35·3         51·9
  Mother’s education
   No              36·9     36·0              45·0        81·7          32·2       41·3        42·7        61·1         42·7        49·8        47·1        65·8          47·8        31·6        22·5         58·0
   education
   Primary         69·7     70·1              78·4        94·1          68·1       75·9        83·6        89·3         76·6        82·3        85·0        91·2          69·9        45·1        59·9         75·5
   education
   Secondar        89·9     91·1              96·2        99·0          86·5       92·5        94·6        93·5         93·5        94·0        91·6        95·1          81·9        61·2        65·3         78·1
   y
   education
   or higher
     Mother tongue
   Non-            39·0     43·9              53·2        86·7          27·7       42·6        50·0        66·8         39·3        51·9        53·9        71·2          37·3        25·7        33·1         59·6
   Turkish
   Turkish         70·0     75·9              86·0        96·4          69·6       83·4        90·4        94·0         77·7        87·9        90·0        95·4          72·2        53·6        62·9         79·3
      Asset quintile
   1               36·1     36·8              44·9        84·1          33·0       45·7        50·4        67·1         43·1        52·2        53·0        70·4          48·0        30·3        29·0         54·9
   5               90·9     94·8              97·0        99·0          90·0       95·1        96·9        92·4         94·0        93·2        93·8        94·6          84·4        70·4        71·1         79·0
     Mother’s health insurance
   SIO             77·0     83·1              91·4        97·0          76·8       85·5        92·6        92·3         83·7        89·5        91·1        93·8          76·4        55·1        67·5         78·7
   Green           29·7     55·6              56·6        87·4          37·8       67·3        63·0        72·2         56·8        71·7        63·0        77·1          20·0        32·7        38·8         60·0
   Card
   None            52·8     55·5              64·3        90·0          47·7       61·1        64·7        83·2         57·9        68·4        68·8        83·5          56·2        41·1        42·5         72·8
 Total             63·0     66·1              74·6        93·4          60·1       70·9        76·3        85·7         69·0        76·8        77·4        88·0          65·0        45·3        53·2         73·7
Atun et al 2013 analysis of data from the Turkish Demographic and Health Survey 1993, 1998, 2003, and 2008 (references 12–15 in appendix and appendix pp 2–13). Sample consists of children younger than 5 years
for the ﬁrst three analyses, and children between 12 months old and 24 months of age for immunisation. A fully immunised child has received the following vaccines: BCG; diphtheria– tetanus–pertussis 1, 2, and 3;
polio 1, 2, and 3; and measles. SIO=Social Insurance Organisation.
Source: Atun et al 2013, p. 20




                                                                                                      45
                               Table 3: Turkey Mortality Indicators, 2002–2012

                                      2002   2003   2004    2005       2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012
   Maternal mortality ratio                                  28                                     20
(modeled estimate, per 100,000
          live births)
Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000
          live births)                26.1   24.1   22.1        20.3   18.5     17   15.6   14.5   13.6   12.9   12.2
  Mortality rate, under-5 (per
       1,000 live births)             31.5   28.8   26.2        23.9   21.8   19.8   18.2   16.9   15.8     15   14.2
                            Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators 2014


                Figure 1: Satisfaction Rate with Public Services in Turkey, 2003–2012




                                    Source: Turkish Life Satisfaction Survey, 2003–2012




                                                           46
Beginning in 2003, Turkey initiated a series of reforms under the Health Transformation Program (HTP) that over
the past decade have reshaped the health system. Understanding the political economy of this process is
important for the future of Universal Health Coverage (UHC) in Turkey, and also for many other countries and the
development agencies that assist them. This report analyzes the historical context and complex political economy
challenges of the reform. Our findings are based on stakeholder interviews and a review of literature. First, we
identified five contextual factors that were important in bringing health reform to the policy agenda in Turkey, and
were helpful in sustaining the reform during adoption and implementation: (1) a long history of reform plans and
attempts; (2) fiscal pressure to reform the social sectors; (3) public support for health reform; (4) strong economic
growth; and (5) favorable demographic conditions. Second, we assessed four political economy challenges central
to the reform and the strategies used by the Ministry of Health (MoH) to overcome them. First, the MoH built public
support for reform among the broad base of beneficiaries by focusing on highly visible and fast changes. Second,
the MoH overcame well-organized interest group opposition to the reforms by splintering their support or
delegitimizing their views. Third, Turkey asserted its own domestic priorities over those of the IMF and World Bank
in cases of direct conflict. Fourth, the MoH circumvented potential political and institutional opposition to the large
expansion of benefits and coverage through a carefully sequenced adoption and implementation plan that could be
executed mostly without requiring the support of other ministries. This analysis also highlights important trade-offs
made by the MoH with respect to the redistribution of resources, quality of care, financial sustainability, and
physician satisfaction, which will all have to be considered as Turkey enters its next phase of health system
development.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated
organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and
the use of material presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies
of papers in this series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries
about the series and submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@
worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                               1818 H Street, NW
                                                                               Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                               Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                               Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                               Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                               E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
