                                        88639



  Supporting Constructive
       Engagement
                 between the
   Government of Yemen and CSOs




Partnership for Development Knowledge Conference

                  March 4–6, 2014
                  Sana’a, Yemen
Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the
governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on
any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement:

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of
this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work and
will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with
complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the
Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax
202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
Contents
Acknowledgements ........................................................................................................ v

Acronyms ....................................................................................................................... vii

Executive Summary ....................................................................................................... ix

Chapter 1. Background ................................................................................................... 1
   Civil Society Organizations in Yemen Today ........................................................................ 1
   Strengths of Yemen’s CSOs ...................................................................................................... 2
   Effective Government-CSO Partnerships: Challenges and Opportunities........................ 3
   Why Government-CSO Partnerships?.................................................................................... 4

Chapter 2. The World Bank Funded Government-CSOs Partnership Project .... 6
   The Partnership for Development Knowledge Conference ................................................ 6
   Knowledge Forum..................................................................................................................... 7

Chapter 3. Experiences from the MNA Region ......................................................... 8
   YEMEN ....................................................................................................................................... 8
       Access to Information Law—A Success Story......................................................................... 8

Chapter 4. International Experiences ........................................................................ 10
   PALESTINIAN TERRITORIES—NGO DEVELOPMENT CENTER ................................ 10
       Improving the Internal Governance of the CSO Sector ......................................................... 10
   INDONESIA............................................................................................................................. 11
       Evolution and Challenges of Civil Society Organizations in Promoting Democratization in
       Indonesia ................................................................................................................................ 11
   GHANA .................................................................................................................................... 12
       Experience with Partnerships between Government and CSOs............................................ 12
   BRAZIL ..................................................................................................................................... 13
       Digital Democracy and Civil Society in Brazil ..................................................................... 13
   INDIA ....................................................................................................................................... 14
       Government-CSO Partnerships and Collaborations: Lessons from India ............................. 14

Chapter 5. Panel Discussion—Bridging the Gap: Building Blocks for a
Sustainable Development ........................................................................................... 16
   Thematic Working Groups .................................................................................................... 17
       Working Group: Enabling Environment ............................................................................... 18
       Working Group: Law of Association ..................................................................................... 20
       Working Group: CSO Governance ........................................................................................ 20
       Working Group: Service Delivery ......................................................................................... 21



                                                          iii
iv ■   Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                        Working Group: Access to Information ................................................................................. 22
                    Sector-Specific Recommendations ......................................................................................... 24

                 Chapter 6. Next Steps after the Conference ............................................................. 25

                 Appendixes .................................................................................................................... 26
                    Appendix A. Yemen Government-CSOs Partnership Project Concept Note .................. 26
                    Appendix B. Conference Agenda .......................................................................................... 30
                    Appendix C. Links to Conference Materials ........................................................................ 35
                    Appendix D. Speaker Biographies ........................................................................................ 36
                    Appendix E. CSO Factsheet.................................................................................................... 41
                    Appendix F. Conference Participants ................................................................................... 43


                 Figures
                 Figure 1.1. Registered CSOs in Yemen and Dates of Establishment ....................................... 2
                 Figure 1.2. CSO Activities in Yemen by Sector .......................................................................... 3
Acknowledgements

The Partnership for Development Knowledge Conference constitutes the first
component of the Yemen Government-CSOs Partnership Project funded by a
grant from the Middle East and North Africa (MNA) Transition Fund. The
conference was organized by a team led by Najat Yamouri (Senior Social
Development Specialist) in close collaboration with the Ministry of Planning and
International Cooperation (MoPIC) and the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor
(MoSAL) in Yemen. Core team members were Mariana Felicio (Social
Development Specialist), Kanishka Senath Balasuriya (Social Development
Consultant), William Stebbins (Senior External Affairs Officer), Ebrahim
Mohammed Yahya Al-Harazi (External Affairs Associate), and Ibraaz Syed
(Research Assistant). The work was carried out under the general guidance of
Franck Bousquet (MNA Sector Manager) and Wael Zakout (Yemen Country
Manager).

The team wishes to thank H.E. Minister Mohammed Saeed Al-Sadi, H.E.
Minister Amat Al-Razzak Ali Hummed, and Deputy Minister Dr. Mohammed
Al-Hawri for their leadership and support during the preparation and
organization of the conference. Additionally, the team benefited greatly from the
valuable inputs from the Technical Teams in MoPIC and MoSAL. Special thanks
are owed to Ahmed Hussain Aljawi, MoPIC Director General for International
NGOs; Nabil Mohammed Al-Tairi, MoPIC Director General for Studies; Mansoor
Ali Al-Bashiry, MoPIC Policies and Reforms Expert; Nasr Shamsan Abdo Al-
Qahiri, MoSAL Director of Information Management for nongovernmental
organizations; and Abdulqader Mohammed Hassan Al-Halili, MoSAL Director
of Legal and Financial Control of nongovernmental organizations.

The team appreciates the valuable contributions from experts who made
presentations and discussed issues with participants throughout the three-day
conference: Mr. Jeff Thindwa, Manager, Social Accountability Practice Group,
World Bank Institute; Dr. Suprayoga Hadi, Deputy Minister for Disadvantaged
Regions, Indonesia; Dr. Tony Aidoo, Head, Policy Evaluation and Oversight
Unit, Office of the President, Ghana; Mr. Federico Fornazieri, Cabinet Secretary
of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil; Mr. George Cheriyan, Director, Center for
Consumer Action, Research and Training, CUTS International, India; Ghassan
Kasabreh, Director, Palestinian NGO Development Center; Dr. Daniel Batidam,
Executive Director, APNAC-Africa, Ghana; Maryati Abdullah, National
Coordinator of Publish What You Pay, Indonesia; Mr. Alyan Ali Al-Haisami,
ANSA-Arab World/Yemen; Rawhi Afghani, UNDP/Yemen; and Mostafa Nasr,
Head of the SEMC/Yemen.


                                v
Acronyms

ANSA        Affiliated Network for Social Accountability
ANSA-Arab   Affiliated Network for Social Accountability in the Arab
World       World
ANSA SAR    Affiliated Network for Social Accountability in the South Asia
            Region
APNAC       African Parliamentarians’ Network Against Corruption
BAPPENAS    Ministry for National Development Planning
CoPSA       Community of Practice on Social Accountability in the South
            Asia Region
CSO(s)      Civil Society Organization(s)
CUTS CART   CUTS Centre for Consumer Action, Research & Training
EITI        Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
GNR         Government of National Reconciliation
GPSA        Global Partnership for Social Accountability (GPSA)
GoY         Government of Yemen
LRDP        Local Rural Development Program
MAF         Mutual Accountability Framework
MNA         Middle East and North Africa
MoPAD       Ministry of Planning and Administrative Development
MoPIC       Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation
MoSAL       Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor
NDC         National Dialogue Conference
NGO(s)      Non-Governmental Organization(s)
OGP         Open Government Partnership
PA          Palestinian Authority
PNGO        Palestinian NGO Network
PMAF        Partnership and Mutual Accountability Framework
PWYP        Publish What You Pay
TWGs        Thematic Working Groups
UNDP        United Nations Development Program
WBI         WBI World Bank Institute




                         vii
Executive Summary

Civil society organizations (CSOs) in Yemen are among the most vibrant and
dynamic in the Middle East and North Africa (MNA) region. The political
transition that is taking place in the country has provided even more
opportunities for CSOs and the government to address collectively the complex
development issues Yemen is facing. The Government of Yemen requested
assistance from the World Bank in helping stakeholders, government, and CSOs
explore and build closer partnerships. Better collaboration can help ensure that
their activities complement and mutually reinforce each other, with the ultimate
objective of improving development results and promoting inclusion. The World
Bank funded Government-CSOs Partnership Project aims to support this process
by facilitating an informed dialogue between government and CSOs. Their
dialogue can help identify gaps and overlap between activities, as well as
complementarities and opportunities for more effective collaboration.

The Government-CSOs Partnership Project aims at providing the space and the
technical assistance for a government-CSOs dialogue. The dialogue will center
both on the broad commitments under the Partnership and Mutual
Accountability Framework (PMAF) and more sector-specific collaboration
between different line ministries and CSOs. In addition, technical assistance
provided under the project would aim to share lessons from comparable
international experiences in creating such partnerships. Finally, the project
would help the government and CSOs to collaboratively develop sector-specific
action plans.

International experience with government-CSOs partnerships was shared at the
Partnership for Development Knowledge Conference and Knowledge Forum,
organized in Sana’a on March 4–6, 2014. The forum brought together
government representatives and CSO leaders from different governorates to
showcase experiences of other countries that have gone through the processes of
establishing constructive partnerships between government and CSOs. The
discussion helped initiate a dialogue on how to implement government–CSOs
partnerships in Yemen. The working groups’ discussions laid a foundation for
the next phase of the dialogue, which will delve into sector-specific collaboration
and partnership.

In addition to presenting international experiences, the event generated a highly
stimulating and productive discussion between government representatives and
CSOs around the broad issues of Enabling Environment, Law of Association, Access
to Information, CSO Governance, Service Delivery, and Citizen Engagement. CSOs


                                 ix
x ■   Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                 were able to highlight some of the day-to-day challenges they faced in
                 performing their core operations, while government representatives were able to
                 point out their concerns and constraints in initiating and sustaining a dialogue
                 with CSOs. Some of the main challenges to government-CSOs partnerships were
                 identified as the weak enforcement of certain laws and regulations, the lack of
                 communications and coordination between government agencies and CSOs, and
                 the absence of a standard code of conduct for CSOs.

                 This report summarizes the discussions that took place during various
                 conference sessions and some of the outcomes and agreements reached.
                 Following a rich and open dialogue, important outcomes of the conference
                 included a set of recommendations jointly formulated by the government
                 technical teams and CSO representatives. They also agreed on a series of future
                 actions, including the following:

                    • Build on working group outcomes and discussions with the Ministry of
                      Planning and International Cooperation to determine the 3–4 priority
                      sectors in which more sector-specific dialogue needs to take place.
                    • Preparations and groundwork for sector-specific dialogue, building on the
                      conference outcomes, will continue via technical discussions with relevant
                      Sector Ministries.
                    • A possible knowledge visit to India by a small government technical team
                      will be explored, with a focus on issues of social accountability.
                    • Sector dialogue sessions will be implemented after Ramadan 2014 and will
                      focus on sectors that were recommended by the working groups.
                    • Dialogue sessions will support the development of sector-specific action
                      plans that identify concrete opportunities for partnership between specific
                      ministries and CSOs operating within the sector.

                 In conclusion, the conference provided an ideal background to prepare for the
                 sector-level dialogue sessions. These sessions will be facilitated under the next
                 phase of the World Bank funded Government-CSOs Partnership Project.
Chapter 1. Background

On January 25, 2014, Yemen’s National Dialogue Conference (NDC) concluded
after more than 10 months of deliberation. The NDC made significant progress
on a range of governance, structural, and social contract challenges. It broke
through political and social barriers to engage a broader scope of political
parties, actors, and civil society—a precedent in Yemen’s recent history and an
example in the Middle East and North Africa (MNA) region. Through the NDC,
Yemenis were able to agree upon a series of guiding principles aimed at
guaranteeing rights and freedoms, decentralized governance structure,
eliminating corruption, and empowering women and youth, among others.

The political transition in Yemen is now entering its post-NDC phase and the
country is looking to implement the agreed-upon principles. Consequently, there
is an urgent need to support institution building to enhance the legitimacy of the
state, and to engage the civic sector in undertaking complex development
challenges that the country is facing. International experience shows that a
constructive partnership between governments and civil society organizations
(CSOs) can improve inclusion and participation and enhance efficiency of service
delivery. The CSO community in Yemen is among the most vibrant and dynamic
in MNA. The ongoing political transition has brought new opportunities for
CSOs to play a greater role on development and service delivery programs.
Similarly, the Government of National Reconciliation (GNR) is keenly interested
in taking advantage of this unique opportunity to engage with CSOs in a
constructive manner. In this context, a formalized government-CSOs partnership
can play a pivotal role in the long-term state-building process and promoting
inclusion and participation.


Civil Society Organizations in Yemen Today
In recent years, CSOs in Yemen have engaged in development projects in various
sectors, and have played a key role in bringing services to the population in a
complementary manner with state institutions. However, the scale of
government-CSO partnership in Yemen has yet to reach its full potential. In 2013,
a World Bank CSO “Mapping and Capacity Assessment” in Yemen 1 found that
although the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor (MoSAL) reported 8,317

1World Bank. 2013. “Yemen Civil Society Organizations in Transition: A Mapping and
Capacity Assessment of Development-Oriented Civil Society Organizations in Five
Governorates.” Washington, DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/16638 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.


                                1
2   ■             Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                                  registered CSOs in 2012, more than 6,000 other CSOs are estimated to be
                                  operating without registration. The assessment also found that most CSOs are
                                  located in the capital city or in the governorate capitals. This makes them less
                                  representative of the remote and lesser-developed areas—home to the most
                                  underserved population.


Figure 1.1. Registered CSOs in Yemen and Dates of Establishment

                          1,200

                          1,000      148
        Registered CSOs




                           800                                                                           187

                           600
                                     965             80               155
                           400
                                                                                         91              696
                           200                       444              412
                                                                                        273
                             0
                                   Sana'a           Aden              Taiz          Hadramout           Hodieda

                                    Establishment Between 1962-2010          Establishment After 2010

Source: Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor (MoSAL) database.


                                  The assessment also found that 24 percent of CSOs were created after 2011. This
                                  increase in civic activity seems to be associated with the new political openings
                                  created during the ongoing transition, the decline in government-supported
                                  service delivery, and increased donor presence in Yemen.


                                  Strengths of Yemen’s CSOs
                                  The following characteristics of Yemeni CSOs help make them valuable and
                                  credible partners in development:

                                    • Strong linkages with their constituencies who are also well represented in
                                      the CSO structure
                                    • Access to a large (although lacking structure and organization) base of
                                      volunteers and growing membership, particularly with youth
                                    • Comprehensive coverage over both rural and urban areas
                                    • An increasing number of CSO members receiving both broad and targeted
                                      capacity building from international and local organizations
                                                                                          Chapter 1. Background ■        3



Figure 1.2 shows CSO activities in different sectors:


Figure 1.2. CSO Activities in Yemen by Sector


                             Poverty Reduction                                                         54%
                                     Education                                                         55%
                                Peace Building                                       34%
               Emeregency & Crisis Prevention                           20%
                             Health & Nutrition                                     32%
                                     Advocacy                                                    48%
                    Governance & Role of Law                                              38%
                                 Human Rights                                                    49%
                  Employment & Labour Issues                  10%
                                  Enviornment                         19%
                                      Migration          5%
                             Entrepreneurship                             23%
                                  Microfinance                    15%
                  Agriculture and food security              7%
               Natural Resources Management                   10%
                                      Minorities                    17%
                    Rurual Areas Development                              22%
                    Urban Areas Development                         15%
  Gender equality and empowerment of women                                                                   60%
                                      Fisheries         2%
                       Persons with Disabilities                  14%
                                                   0%    10%        20%       30%     40%       50%     60%        70%

Source: World Bank 2013.




Effective Government-CSO Partnerships: Challenges and
Opportunities
   • Weak internal transparency and lack of consistent internal policies and
     procedures
   • Poor knowledge-sharing and coordination among CSOs and weak CSO
     networks
   • Good sectoral skill or expertise of CSO staff and members but weak
     administrative and financial accounting skills
   • Weak leadership and professional management skills among CSOs with
     only a few having a clear vision or mission statements
4   ■   Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                     • Generally weak public relations, communications, outreach skills, and
                       monitoring and evaluation capacity of CSOs
                     • Weak CSO registration and record-keeping capacity within MoSAL


                  Why Government-CSO Partnerships?
                  Although collective action can at times be challenging, the process of dialogue
                  and debate often brings about shared vision and ownership of development
                  priorities. The World Bank funded Government-CSOs Partnership Project seeks
                  to support this collaborative spirit and ensure the sustainability of hard-earned
                  gains.

                  At the international level, the development community has led the way in
                  institutionalizing partnerships as an indispensable instrument for achieving
                  sustainable development. The Millennium Development Goals were built on the
                  premise of effective partnership as the main driver. Partnerships for
                  development vary according to the type of goals they try to achieve. Types of
                  partnerships include those that: (i) advance policy goals, (ii) enhance
                  development financing (for example, collaboration between donors and
                  governments); (iii) improve development spending (for example, participatory
                  budgeting); and (iv) enhance local governance (for example, participatory
                  planning, local councils).

                  Global experience shows that some of the key factors that enable government-
                  CSO partnerships include the following:

                     • Government (political) commitment: Government commitment would include
                       support of the evolution of a strong and effective civil society that is at
                       once a development partner, an effective monitor of the public good, and a
                       monitor of government performance.
                     • Transparency: An open government that habitually practices transparency,
                       and where CSOs and citizens have ready access to government-held
                       information, is vital to a strong partnership as it removes suspicion and
                       engenders trust.
                     • Effective CSO governance: Effective internal governance of CSOs
                       incorporates strong board governance and democratic practices in decision
                       making; fiscal transparency; deep outreach to communities, with
                       relationships defined by trust; and effective monitoring and evaluation
                       systems. Governments can benefit from CSOs’ ability to analyze and
                       aggregate the diverse interests of citizens/beneficiaries, and to effectively
                       represent them and channel their demands.
                     • Mutual accountability: Accountability is a two-way process. While “political
                       accountability” requires the elected government to be accountable to
                                                                      Chapter 1. Background ■   5



    citizens on principal, a development partnership calls for both CSOs and
    government to model a relationship of mutual “account giving.” This will
    also help build and strengthen trust.
  • Mutual Trust and Respect: Government’s respect of CSO independence and
    autonomy is necessary for collaboration. At the same time, CSOs must
    embrace constructive approaches to engagement. They must recognize and
    respect the constitutional mandates of a government and supporting it in
    achieving its goals while pursuing the interests of citizens and channeling
    their voice.

The challenges facing Yemen in this critical phase of transition are complex but
not insurmountable. The Yemenis have successfully concluded an important
process of the National Dialogue. All development stakeholders, the
government, CSOs, and Yemen’s development partners are working to advance
national development goals. Government-CSO partnership for development is
crucial to achieve these goals.
                     Chapter 2. The World Bank
                     Funded Government-CSOs
                     Partnership Project

                     Informed by the 2013 CSO Assessment Study, the World Bank funded
                     Government-CSOs Partnership Project in Yemen aims to address some of the
                     challenges facing CSOs. By supporting their efforts to jointly agree on the
                     principles of a Partnership and Mutual Accountability Framework (PMAF), the
                     project aims to promote a constructive collaboration between CSOs and the
                     government and a more inclusive implementation of various sectoral
                     development programs. This project will also help establish sustainable dialogue
                     channels between CSOs and the government, through which they can better
                     articulate and implement development programs.

                     The project has three components. The first component aims at fostering joint
                     learning about effective government-CSO partnerships. This would help create
                     an environment for collaboration. The second component facilitates sector-specific
                     dialogue sessions between the government and CSOs. The goals are to identify
                     sectoral areas for collaboration and partnership, and to support government-CSO
                     development of the PMAF as a mechanism for effective action. The third
                     component will support government-CSO development and implementation of
                     sector-specific action plans under the PMAF.


                     The Partnership for Development Knowledge Conference
                                                      As part of the first component of the
“We encourage CSOs to organize and coordinate         Government-CSOs Partnership Project, the World
their activities through partnerships, alliances,     Bank organized the Partnership for Development
coalitions and development networks. This will        Knowledge Conference in Sana’a on March 4–6,
contribute effectively to the development programs,   2014.    The    conference     brought    together
building CSOs capacity, improving their               government and CSO representatives from
performance and scaling up their operations.”         different governorates in Yemen. It was opened
                                                      by the H.E. Minister of Planning & International
Dr. Amat Al-Razaq Ali Hommad, Minister,
                                                      Cooperation, Dr. Mohammed Al-Saadi, and the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor
                                                      H.E. Minister of Social Affairs & Labor, Dr. Amat
                      Al-Razaq Ali Hommad. H.E. Mr. Moamar Al-Eryani, Minister of Youth & Sports,
                      attended the opening session of the conference. Other attendees included high-
                      level representatives and technical teams from various sectoral ministries.



                                                             6
                       Chapter 2. The World Bank Funded Government-CSOs Partnership Project ■ 7




Knowledge Forum             Multistakeholder Collaboration

In concurrence with the
Partnership Conference, a
Knowledge Forum ran
throughout the three day
event.     It   showcased
information       resources
from each participating
country, from ANSA-Arab
World, the World Bank,
and donors and CSOs. The
Knowledge            Forum
provided space for face-to-
face    discussions    with
international speakers and a way to share knowledge and information resources.
During the forum, participants could meet directly with international speakers
and learn from their experiences of their countries’ political and economic
transitions. Various group discussions provided participants with a deeper
understanding of key factors supporting successful government-CSO
partnerships for development.

   Conference Participants Exploring the Knowledge Forum
Chapter 3. Experiences from
the MNA Region

Yemen

Access to Information Law—A Success Story

Mr. Mustafa Nasr, Head of Studies and the Economic Media Center in Yemen,
shared the Yemeni experience in supporting the Access to Information Law, and
explained the processes that local CSOs went through in working closely with
the government entities to pass this law.

The political transition in Yemen made it possible for various actors to advocate
for a new access to information policy. The policy aimed at improving social
accountability, improving trust between the government and society, and
encouraging CSOs and the media to take up their role of oversight and support
freedom of expression. The key components of the project to advocate for a
reform in access to information were:

  • Build capacity of advocates for reform
  • Exert pressure on legislative institutions (parliaments and decision makers)
  • Raise awareness through information campaigns

The overall strategic objective of the initiative was improving the institutional
and legal framework for accountability. The project’s goals were to (i) establish
the Access to Information Law and (ii) raise awareness of all leaders representing
different parts of society about its existence and the right to information.

In order to build ownership and buy-in for greater transparency through the
right to information and to build an effective coalition for reform (including
youth), a series of meetings between government and nongovernment actors was
organized. A multi-stakeholder advocacy group with 25 members working on
transparency-related issues was also created and the laws were then reviewed
and revised. Building the coalition entailed establishing outreach and negotiation
channels on how to advocate, as well as advocacy training sessions that targeted
youth and women leaders, among others. Outreach to government officials took
the form of (i) targeted meetings with 70 members of parliament; (ii) open
discussions with more than 120 members of parliament on the access to
information law; (iii) bulk text messaging to MPs requesting support to the law;
(iv) reaching out to committees that were specialized, (such as Information and


                                        8
                                                 Chapter 3. Experiences from the MNA Region ■ 9



Culture); and (v) developing short videos, cartoons, and brochures for
government officials on the citizens’ “right to know.”

These joint government-CSO efforts resulted in the Access to Information Law
being passed by parliament in 2012. The law was widely disseminated through a
government circular, and more than 1,000 people directly working on this issue
were involved in awareness-raising activities. Over 1,200 articles were drafted
about Yemen’s Access to Information Law.
                Chapter 4. International
                Experiences

                                             The Partnership Project convened experts and
“The great results achieved in the           practitioners representing governments and CSOs
international experiences were unexpected forfrom Brazil, Ghana, India, Indonesia, and the
us, given Yemen’s context and reality.”      Palestinian Territories. Presenters gave their
                                             countries’ experiences and perspectives on
Refatt Omer Fakirah,                         government-CSO engagement, and described the
Al-zahra Charity Foundation                  enabling factors behind constructive partnerships.
                                             They highlighted the specific roles played by each
              stakeholder in improving development results. It was shown how constructive
              engagement and sustainable dialogue resulted in collaborative ways to address
              countries’ various development challenges. With this background of
              international knowledge, Yemeni participants, including both government and
              CSO representatives, initiated their own conversation, focusing on partnership
              opportunities and challenges in the context of the transition in Yemen. They
              discussed steps toward establishing a joint partnership framework that will
              support and guide their collaboration in development programs.


                PALESTINIAN TERRITORIES—NGO DEVELOPMENT
                CENTER
                Improving the Internal Governance of the CSO Sector

                Since its establishment in 1994, the Palestinian Authority (PA) and CSOs have
                been working together in the Palestinian Territories. Their partnership has been
                quite unique in that the PA depended solely on CSOs to reach out to
                communities. The autonomy of CSOs had to be guaranteed while ensuring that
                their activities align with PA priorities. In addition, most of the funding for CSOs
                came from multi-donor trust funds. Therefore, a strong partnership agreement to
                formalize this delicate relationship between the PA and CSOs was a necessity.

                This led to the creation of the Palestinian NGO network (PNGO)—an umbrella
                organization comprising 92 local CSOs. The PNGO is guided by a mission, where
                the national, developmental, roles of NGOs are pursued alongside the building
                of a Palestinian democratic, civil society based on social justice, the sovereignty
                of law, and the respect of human rights. The PNGO has introduced a code of
                conduct that guides the categorization of CSOs. The CSO categories determine if



                                                        10
                                                           Chapter 4. International Experiences ■ 11



their licenses need to be renewed every one year, two years, or three years. The
licenses of more established CSOs are valid for longer.

Although the PNGO is responsible for the licensing and categorization of CSOs,
the Ministry of Planning and Administrative Development (MoPAD) has some
limited oversight powers. For instance, the minister can object to the licensing of
a CSO only on two specific grounds: if the CSO activities do not align with
national priorities, or if they duplicate a government service. MoPAD also
coordinates a development center that provides technical and financial support
for NGOs and the NGO sector. The limited number of donors and the physical
divide between West Bank and Gaza are seen as some of the main challenges
facing CSOs in the Palestinian Territories.


INDONESIA
Evolution and Challenges of Civil Society Organizations in Promoting
Democratization in Indonesia

The space for collaboration between government and CSOs in Indonesia came
about in the 1998–99 period. As part of the democratic transition at the end of
President Suharto’s New Order regime, Indonesia adopted a decentralized
system that devolved significant power to the districts. This system also
enhanced the role of CSOs in complementing local governments’ actions. Such
changes necessitated that the government and CSOs move beyond mutual
distrust—which characterized their relationship during the New Order rule—to
establish a close partnership based on mutual respect.

The partnership began with CSOs complementing the state’s service delivery
efforts. It quickly evolved into ensuring citizen participation in the budgetary
and annual planning process. The bottom-up planning process required citizen
engagement via a “ladder of participation” and CSOs were required to aggregate
citizens’ interests at each level of government. This increased the role of CSOs in
the legislative process to the point that their endorsement—as representatives of
the civil society—became required before legislation was voted on in parliament.
The advocacy role of CSOs continued to expand to such an extent that they
initiated new laws. For instance, CSO initiatives led to laws on the development
planning process (2005), which guaranteed the participation of citizens and
required members of parliament to have public consultations. CSOs also were
the driving force behind the freedom of information law (2008).

With both the number of CSOs and the scope of their responsibilities increasing,
CSOs in Indonesia also decided to adopt a code of conduct for self-regulation.
Additionally, CSOs resisted accepting money from the government as a way of
12   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                 safeguarding their neutrality. This has changed the government’s perception of
                 CSOs and—because of that—has empowered citizens. However, smaller CSOs
                 still have significant challenges in accessing funds, which often requires them to
                 operate through larger umbrella organizations.


                 GHANA
                 Experience with Partnerships between Government and CSOs

                 Similar to Indonesia, the opportunity for a close partnership between the
                 government and CSOs in Ghana arose as a result of the country’s transition from
                 a military dictatorship under President Jerry Rawlings to a multiparty
                 democracy in the early 1990s. Under pressure from the international community,
                 the provisions of the new constitution had to be decided via a consultative
                 assembly, which ensured extensive consultations among the population. CSOs
                 played a pivotal role in facilitating such consultations. Therefore, by the time the
                 new constitution was introduced in 1992, a culture of consultations had taken
                 root in Ghanaian society, empowering the people and increasing the relevance of
                 CSOs.

                 Question and Answer Session with International Speakers




                 These principles of consultations were in turn enshrined in the new constitution,
                 which elevated the role of CSOs by safeguarding them. The new constitution also
                 created independent state institutions, including a commission of human rights,
                 commission for civic education, and so forth, which further enhanced the
                                                              Chapter 4. International Experiences ■ 13



advocacy role of CSOs. Such a conducive environment led to the emergence of
several public-interest coalitions with CSOs at their helm, including the anti-
corruption coalition, the right to information coalition, and the Extractive
Industry Transparency Initiative. Meanwhile, the consultative and advocacy
culture was not limited to formal CSOs. Tribal groups as well as Christian and
Muslim groups embraced their responsibility and participated in the
consultations representing the interests of their respective constituents. The
National Peace Council emerged organically out of these consultations as a
collective umbrella for the different informal organizations in Ghana.

In addition to human rights and anti-corruption advocacy, the engagement
between government and CSOs extended to environmental protection, economic
and political advocacy, and service delivery, such as education and health.
Despite all this, CSOs still face challenges in fulfilling their responsibilities. These
include political capture, lack of internal governance, and lack of capacity.


BRAZIL
Digital Democracy and Civil Society in Brazil

After decades of being under the rule of military dictatorships, Brazil began to
return to democracy with the enactment of the Amnesty Law in 1979. Civilian
rule emerged in 1985 when José Sarney assumed the presidency. However, he
faced several challenges in trying to control the economic crisis and
hyperinflation inherited from the military regime. Brazilian CSOs have been in
operation since the era of military dictators, although their role during that time
was relatively subdued and limited to charitable initiatives. But, with the
transition to democracy, many social organizations became politically active.
Some CSOs became political parties and their leaders ran for office. CSOs
continued to maintain their dialogue with social movements even after their
leaders won office, giving them the opportunity to act as representatives within
government.

This brought about a very close and active partnership between the government
and CSOs. CSOs often formed councils inside the government—related to
economic and social development—to aggregate interests and to leverage more
weight in their lobbying. CSOs have been directly involved in the participatory
budgeting initiative, which allows citizens to identify and prioritize needs in
their localities.

In the state of Rio Grande do Sul in particular, the partnership between
government and CSOs has grown rapidly with the Digital Democracy Initiative.
The Digital Democracy Initiative was launched under the patronage of the State
14   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                  Secretary of Planning, Management, and Citizen Participation. For the year 2013,
                  1.2 million state residents participated in the budget process. Out of the state’s
                  total budget of 10.6 million reals, 219 million reals were allocated for priorities
                  emerging from citizen participation. This has strengthened the ownership of
                  residents in the state government’s policies. For example, Brazil’s Municipal
                  Heath Councils, which were initially proposed by a Rio Grande do Sul resident,
                  became national law.



     Brazil’s Municipal Heath Councils

     Brazil’s national healthcare system was plagued by rising costs and inefficiency. To fix this
     and to ensure sustainability as the universal health system expands, the national
     government introduced a legal framework that mandated establishment of Health Councils
     across all municipal governments, which exceed 5,000. The council has, by law, equal
     representation of users and service providers, and it is a platform for engaging diverse
     social and political actors: national movements, unions, CBOs, NGOs, and more. Councils
     are given spending oversight, and federal transfers of funding are made conditional on the
     council’s approval of budgets and health plans. A sophisticated system of deliberation and
     voting in conferences at each tier of government enables proposals to be taken up to the
     national level for approval. The program is supported by vast and ambitious training
     programs to equip health counselors with basic information about the health system, health
     budgeting, and their rights as citizens. Every month, conferences connect more than 100,000
     citizens with their state officials to discuss health service delivery, and every four years,
     delegates shape health proposals at national-level conferences. The result is a government-
     civil society partnership where the state is held to account for its commitments, and where
     health is monitored and reported. As a multi-stakeholder forum, the Health Councils
     enhance the legitimacy and effectiveness of the universal health care system.



                  INDIA
                  Government-CSO Partnerships and Collaborations: Lessons from India

                  India has always had a very strong civic culture in accordance with the ancient
                  Sanskrit concept of dhana. The creation of schools and hospitals under Christian
                  missionaries and the establishment of charitable organizations during the
                  colonial period reinforced this concept further and became a basis for inclusion.
                  This also became the basis for the CSO sector. In fact, the Societies Registration
                  Act, which regulates CSOs to this day, was passed into law in 1860. Therefore, at
                  the time of independence, voluntarism and charity was strongly ingrained in
                  India’s national consciousness.
                                                         Chapter 4. International Experiences ■ 15



However, this role of CSOs in India began to change with the country’s
decentralization experience in 1991. The Decentralization Law conceived of
having CSOs at each level complementing government’s capacity constraints in
service delivery. This was the first step toward creating the space for advocacy
for CSOs. This situation was reinforced even further after India achieved middle-
income country status in the early 2000s. With many donors pulling out, the
government had to take over several programs in the rural areas that were
previously run by donors. But given capacity constraints, the government had to
heavily depend on local CSOs to deliver most of these welfare schemes and
programs. This empowered CSOs still more.

The national campaign for right to information started against this backdrop
with CSOs at its helm. When the government offered an Access to Information
Bill in 2002 in response, CSOs flatly rejected it for not being strong enough.
Considering information to be a “right” of the citizens (not a privilege), CSOs
themselves proposed a draft Right to Information Bill, which stipulated strong
penalties on government officials who fail to provide information in a timely
manner. This bill became law in 2004.

Such close collaboration between government and CSOs created the space for an
even more constructive engagement. After some introspection, the CSOs
introduced a code of conduct upon which the central and state governments
based a system of accreditation. One of the most positive outcomes of this
partnership was the automatic introduction of social accountability controls into
government welfare programs.
Chapter 5. Panel Discussion—
Bridging the Gap: Building
Blocks for a Sustainable
Development

A panel consisting of international experts from Ghana, India, Indonesia, the
Palestinian Territories, and Yemen hosted a panel titled “Bridging the Gap:
Building Blocks for Sustainable Development.” The panel featured:

  • Dr. Daniel Batidam, Executive Director, APNAC-Africa, Ghana
  • George Cheriyan, Director, CUTS International, India
  • Maryati Abdullah, National Coordinator of Publish What You Pay
    (PWYP), Indonesia, and Steering Committee Member of the Open
    Government Partnership (OGP)
  • Mr. Alyan Ali Al-Haisami, Yemen Representative, ANSA-Arab World
  • Ghassan Kasabreh, Director, Palestinian NGO Development Center




  From left to right: Mr. Daniel Batidam, Mr. Alyan Ali Al-Haisami, Ms. Maryati Abdullah,
  Mr. Rafat Alakhali, Mr. George Cheriyan




                                                16
      Chapter 5. Panel Discussion—Bridging the Gap: Building Blocks for a Sustainable Development ■ 17



The panel discussed issues relating to an enabling environment for a constructive
government-CSO partnership. They identified a number of cross-cutting issues
that are important an effective partnership:

  • A legal framework to guarantee CSO involvement in policy formulation
  • The importance of transparency, accountability, and monitoring of the
    partnership process
  • The importance of public consultations
  • An enhanced role for the private sector


Thematic Working Groups
Panel participants were divided into five thematic working groups for in-depth
discussion of aspects of a more conducive environment for government-CSO
partnership. These thematic groups were:

  •    Enabling Environment
  •    Law of Association
  •    Access to Information
  •    CSO Governance
  •    Service Delivery



Thematic Working Group Breakout Sessions
 18   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                                             Each thematic group of 25–30 individuals included
“Partnerships mean going together towards    representatives from government and local CSOs. The
one objective, in one path. Partnership is   groups discussed the presentations made during the
very important for development.”             plenary sessions and shared their own experiences
                                             with regard to partnership with government.
Dr. Mohammed Al-Hawri, Deputy                Examples shared by the participants made it clear that
Minister, Ministry of Planning and           local CSOs in Yemen have accumulated considerable
International Cooperation                    experience in creating partnerships with government
                                             at both national and local levels. However, most of
                   these partnerships were made in an ad hoc and piecemeal fashion without an
                   overarching institutional framework. Reports of past experiences revealed that
                   some partnerships had achieved better results than others.


                    Working Group: Enabling Environment

                    The participants in this working group began their discussions by identifying
                    challenges in the CSOs work environment in Yemen. Most CSOs agreed that the
                    lack of financial support was one of the biggest concerns. In addition, having
                    most CSOs concentrated in Sana’a, the capital city, undermined representation of
                    other areas.


      Thematic Working Group Discussions
     Chapter 5. Panel Discussion—Bridging the Gap: Building Blocks for a Sustainable Development ■ 19




Challenges                                                Recommendations

Lack of institution building in both sides of the         Enacting laws and regulations that organize shared
partnership (government and CSOs)                         work

Absence of (or lack of clarity on) a unified vision for   Creating communication channels between CSOs
government and CSOs                                       and government

Weak coordination in partnerships between                 Preparing a manual that regulates government-CSO
government and CSOs                                       partnerships
                                                          Widening participation by creating specialized
                                                          government committees

The presence of many imbalances between                   Adequate representation of government in
government and CSOs                                       partnership programs

Complex government procedures for facilitating the        Reviewing MoSAL laws to ensure they achieve
work of CSOs; weak executive bodies of CSOs               fairness and legality in work programs

Lack of information on some CSOs                          Securing sufficient media coverage or establishing a
                                                          media channel dedicated to CSO work; establishing
                                                          a monitoring and evaluation mechanism

Weak transparency between government and CSOs             Implementing clear and transparent criteria for the
                                                          selection of work groups away from party
                                                          affiliations and regionalism

Low awareness around issues of accountability,            Publishing government-CSO partnership
responsibility, and the concept of professionalism        framework and raising awareness of it through
                                                          media outlets

Absence of networking between related parties, and        Field visits and sector meetings with all
lack of published information                             stakeholders

CSOs concern that the government, instead of              All parties abiding by a code of conduct
coordinating roles and responsibilities, would take
over the work of CSOs under the name of
“partnership”

Weak application of laws and legislations                 Activating the Access to Information Law

Lack of proper criteria and requirements for              Evaluating CSOs and categorizing them by criteria
registration and licensing of CSOs
20   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                  Working Group: Law of Association

                                           Participants indicated that the Law of Associations is
“We would like to be partners, not only    not being applied fully. They called for its amendment
in planning but also in implementing,      to reflect the latest developments in the sector and to
assessing, and supervising. So what is     help CSOs play an effective role in the development
needed is a complete partnership, not a    process. Participants highlighted the importance of
partial partnership.”                      obliging the government to engage CSOs in the
                                           planning and implementation of any projects related to
Taha Yaseen Abdo Ahmed, Yemeni             CSOs activities, as well as in the preparation and
Polling Center                             monitoring of the public budget.

                  Participants recommended the following updates to the law:

                     • Adopting the concept of “partnership” in the law as it is not currently
                       included in a clear way
                     • Adopting the concept of CSO governance as well as governance in the
                       public sector and local authorities
                     • Adopting and regulating the concept of social accountability so that
                       concerned entities are aware of the right of society to hold them
                       accountable
                     • Adopting the concept of monitoring
                     • Clarifying vague clauses in the current law to strengthen the role of civil
                       society

                  In all the above, the participants stressed the importance of broad consultation
                  with CSOs in formulating amendments to the law. Finally, participants also
                  stressed the importance of not adding any new clauses that would restrict the
                  work of CSOs in Yemen.


                  Working Group: CSO Governance

                  This working group discussed many topics related to the capacity of local CSOs
                  and ways of improving such capacity. Many CSO representatives shared their
                  thoughts on the CSO governance concept and their experiences on working with
                  institutional capacity for their own organizations. Recommendations for
                  improving CSO governance in Yemen include the following:

                     •   Completion of institutional and organizational structures of CSOs
                     •   Capacity building to spread the culture of governance
                     •   Preparing an evaluation manual to evaluate capacities of CSOs
                     •   Applying the concept of partnerships
                     •   Building networks and alliances and avoiding bureaucracy
      Chapter 5. Panel Discussion—Bridging the Gap: Building Blocks for a Sustainable Development ■ 21



  •    Activating government’s monitoring and evaluation role of CSOs
  •    Strengthening transparency inside CSOs
  •    Building the capacity of CSOs to practice a monitoring role
  •    Government support to CSOs
  •    Announcing internationally funded projects and allowing CSOs to
       compete in implementing them according to certain criteria
  •    Integrating CSOs plans with government plans
  •    Developing the transparency law
  •    Establishing a union/federation for CSOs to communicate with the
       government
  •    Activating internal and external audits of CSOs
  •    Emphasizing the independence of CSOs
  •    Developing a database of priorities to start addressing issues
  •    Making grants available for everyone according to criteria


Working Group: Service Delivery

Participants in this working group agreed that
CSOs are the best conduit for effective citizen       “We should particularly support partnerships
engagement—especially in the context of the           in remote, rural areas—where the government
ongoing broader transition. They recommended          cannot access no matter how strong it is.”
lifting legal barriers that restrict the work of
CSOs, and issuing/completing executive                Sameera Ali Balah, My Right Organization
regulations for some laws that were passed to         for Development
allow them to become effective.

Other recommendations of the Service Delivery Working Group include the
following:

  • Aid should be based on local needs and not donor wishes (avoid donor-
    driven agendas).
  • Realize that change needs time and effective partnership between
    government and CSOs will take years to materialize.
  • Prepare CSOs and build their capacity to work under the new upcoming
    federal system.
  • Activate partnerships between CSOs and government entities, local
    communities, and other CSOs.
  • Build capacity of CSOs, especially at the local community level.
  • Encourage partnerships between big, well-established CSOs and small,
    newly established ones.
  • CSOs can provide the support and institutional mechanisms for engaging
    citizens as they have access to resources such as planning capacities, halls,
    and so forth.
22   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                    • An integrated approach toward engagement is needed. For example, when
                      working with children, also work with their families and communities to
                      ensure effective results.
                    • Build and encourage volunteerism culture.
                    • Citizen engagement should be in all phases of projects—from planning, to
                      implementation, to operations.


                 Working Group: Access to Information

                 Participants in this working group began by discussing the types of information
                 that they need in order to carry out their responsibilities of monitoring the
                 government and holding it accountable to its citizens. The participants agreed
                 that the following are needed:

                    • Public Budget and its implementation
                    • Tenders
                    • Performance Reports
                    • Minimum requirements and specifications for each government service
                    • Process and procedures of public recruitment
                    • Financial disclosure and data of public employees
                    • Monitoring and Accountability reports
                    • Identifying the types of information and the entities responsible to provide
                      the information
                    • Information about any opportunities in the public sector
                    • Information on all types of government agreements

                 The participants also agreed that all information should be available for everyone
                 without limiting conditions and that the media sector must be engaged in
                 obtaining information.

                 Recommendations

                 The participants then discussed the steps required to improve transparency in
                 Yemen and agreed on the following:

                    • Moving toward e-government
                    • Improving transparency of CSOs
                    • Developing regulations for the relationship between the entity asking for
                      information and the entity providing it
                    • Developing a guide for services
                    • Transparency between government entities and regulatory/monitoring
                      entities
   Chapter 5. Panel Discussion—Bridging the Gap: Building Blocks for a Sustainable Development ■ 23



  • Applying the Access to Information Law to appoint a specialized person at
    each government entity to provide information and applications for
    requesting information
  • Accelerating the issuance of the executive regulations for the Access to
    Information Law
  • Activating sanctions/punishments and rewarding entities that abide by
    transparency measures
  • Training and capacity building on the Access to Information Law for both
    government and civil society
  • Planting the culture of accountability and transparency starting from the
    school system
  • Raising awareness on the importance of information sharing
  • Developing media materials on human rights and creating a social culture
    of anti-corruption (activating the role of media)
  • Credibility in government appointments and engaging CSOs
  • Reviewing legislations that protect financial secrecy, such as the financial
    disclosure law




Thematic Working Group Discussions
24    ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs




                    Sector-Specific Recommendations
                                           The last thematic working group discussion aimed at
     “We need to focus on women’s’         reaching common ground between CSOs and the
     empowerment. This is a cross-cutting  government technical teams for identification of sectors
     issue that we need to discuss in all  to participate in the sector dialogue sessions to be
     projects and also in our dialogue.”   implemented in the next phase of the project. These
                                           sectors were determined based on (i) being considered a
     Ms. Eman Al-Hamami, MoPIC             priority in terms of development programs, (ii) having
                                           previous positive government-CSO experiences, and
                  (iii) considered to have champions on the government side in terms of
                  collaboration with CSOs.

                    The following sectors and subsectors were jointly identified as priority sectors:


                    Sector             Subsector

                                       Maternal health/delivery
                    Health
                                       Disability
                                       Curriculum development
                    Education          Rural education
                                       Girls education
                                       Women’s rights
                    Women
                                       Women’s empowerment
                                       Youth participation
                    Youth
                                       Youth empowerment

                    Social             Social and political rights
                    Protection         Registration of births and ID documentation
                                       Reforming Association Law
                                       Building capacity of CSOs
                    Good
                                       Building CSOs advocacy capacity
                    Governance
                                       Supporting CSOs networks and multi-stakeholder reform coalitions
                                       Improving access to information
Chapter 6. Next Steps after the
Conference

 • Build on the working group outcomes from the conference. Conduct
   discussions with MoPIC to determine the 3–4 priority sectors in which the
   sector dialogue sessions will take place.
 • Before dialogue sessions begin, MoPIC will establish a Web-based system
   that will identify participating CSOs in a transparent, formula-based
   manner.
 • Building on the conference outcomes, preparation for dialogue sessions
   will continue via technical discussions with relevant sector ministries.
 • possibilities for a knowledge exchange to India on social accountability
   with a small government team will be explored.
 • Implement sector dialogue sessions (after Ramadan 2014).
 • Dialogue sessions will support the development of sector-specific action
   plans that identify concrete opportunities for partnership between the
   Government of Yemen and CSOs.




                            25
Appendixes

Appendix A. Yemen Government-CSOs Partnership Project
Concept Note

          YEMEN GOVERNMENT-CSOs PARTNERSHIP PROJECT

             Partnership for Development Knowledge Conference

   “Supporting Constructive Engagement between Government of Yemen and
                                  CSOs”



              Sana’a, Yemen / (Three-day event) March 4-6, 2014

Objective: To allow high-level decision makers and CSOs in Yemen to learn
from each other and international experiences in supporting constructive
engagement between government and CSOs during political and economic
transitions. The enabling factors that supported these partnerships and the roles
played by each stakeholder in improving development results will help Yemeni
stakeholders better understand and contextualize the challenges and
opportunities for partnership for development in the Yemeni context. Over 120
participants are expected, mostly from Yemen.

EVENT CONTENT

Day 1: During Session 1, the Conference will draw lessons from countries
outside the region—Indonesia, Ghana, India, and Brazil—nations that have
supported efforts toward more open societies to reap the benefits of a more
inclusive and sustainable growth pattern anchored in fostering constructive
partnerships between government and CSOs. Issues to be discussed will include:
a legal and regulatory framework to enable a vibrant civil society, institutional
specificities to achieve citizen’s direct involvement in service delivery, and
capacity building for a more responsive and transparent public administration.

Day 2: The morning will highlight experiences from the Middle East and North
Africa (MNA) region. Experiences from the Palestinian Territories and Yemen
will highlight CSO self-regulation and National Dialogue and Access to
Information legislation, respectively. Conference participants will then be



                                       26
                                                                                   Appendixes ■   27



organized into Thematic Working Groups (TWGs) around thematic areas that
will contribute to a more conducive environment for government-CSO
partnerships. These working groups will have facilitated discussions based on
lessons learned from Day 1. The regional experience with ANSA-Arab World
will be presented. Themes will include:

   • Roles that CSOs play in development: advocacy, service delivery, M&E,
     and action research
   • Enabling environment: political, social, legal, and institutional
   • Building CSO capacity and internal governance

Day 3: Based on the outputs from the TWGs during Day 2, Conference
participants will explore opportunities, challenges, and possible risk mitigation
measures to support specific government-CSO partnerships in Yemen.

Conference discussions will be documented, translated into Arabic, and
disseminated widely after the event to benefit a wider audience among
government and CSO representatives in Yemen. Additionally, a note
summarizing the international and regional experiences will be produced and
disseminated in Arabic.

Day 3 will end with a presentation about the Way Forward and the Partnership
Framework, which will involve CSOs in policy making and build the technical
and professional capacities of CSOs.

Knowledge Forum: A Knowledge Forum will be set up throughout the three-
day event. Each participating country, ANSA-Arab World, and the World Bank
and other donors will share knowledge and experiences. An online discussion
through the Web and social media will also be conducted, as well as
dissemination of publications case studies and lessons learned and multimedia
with face-to-face conversations with experts on these topics.

BACKGROUND
A cornerstone of the change process toward sustainable government-CSO
partnerships is learning from international and regional experiences in countries
that have undergone similar transitions. The Government-CSO Partnership
Project will facilitate interactions across different stakeholder groups, which have
traditionally been limited in Yemen, contributing to a certain lack of trust and
collaboration. Bringing different groups together toward a common objective
will help break down barriers and facilitate spaces for dialogue. Lessons learned
from Indonesia, Brazil, India, Ghana, and Palestine will share how they have
28   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                 successfully put in place government-CSO partnerships for development, and
                 will inform discussions to foster government-CSO dialogue in Yemen.

                 Supporting government-CSO partnerships and constructive engagement: One
                 of the key pillars of the World Bank’s support in MNA, and in Yemen
                 specifically, consists of strengthening the governance framework, both on the
                 supply and the demand side. The supply side of governance focuses on
                 supporting government responsiveness, and on issues such as strengthening the
                 rule of law, anti-corruption measures, or public financial management. The
                 demand side focuses on fostering a more engaged citizenry through mechanisms
                 that open government to the people, strengthen the enabling environment for
                 civic participation, use information and communications technology for
                 governance and development, and monitoring service delivery.

                 Implementing government-CSO partnerships as a means to strengthen the
                 social contract between state and non-state actors: Citizens across Yemen—
                 spanning a diversity of ideological, demographic, religious, and ethnic lines—
                 have been demanding a more representative government, an end to elite capture
                 and political and economic marginalization, and establishment of a new social
                 contract between the government and its citizens. The Government of National
                 Reconciliation (GNR) and international donors are supportive of an augmented
                 role for CSOs in effective service delivery, participation, and decentralization
                 programs. In the Riyadh conference in September 2012, the GNR and donors
                 reaffirmed their commitment to work with CSOs as key development partners.
                 This was specifically mentioned as one of the pillars in Yemen’s Mutual
                 Accountability Framework (MAF), which also emphasized the need to focus on
                 women and youth in both economic and governance realms. These
                 developments signal an increasing recognition among the GNR and the donor
                 community that CSOs’ constructive engagement, particularly in areas that
                 impact women, youth, and other marginalized groups, will contribute to a
                 peaceful and successful transition and to more inclusive and sustainable
                 development in Yemen.

                 Coordination with the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) leading
                 the MAF Task Force on Government-CSOs Partnership: UNDP are leading the
                 work to create a partnership framework between CSOs, government, and
                 donors. This is one of 13 priorities identified in a high-level donor meeting held
                 in Sana’a, Yemen, on June 19, 2013 to discuss progress on the MAF. Specifically,
                 UNDP prepared in September 2013 a document that serves as a compact
                 between CSOs, government, and donors, led by a Task Force comprised of
                 MoPIC, MoSAL, the Prime Minister’s and the President’s Office, CSOs, and
                 international NGOs. The compact would describe the nature of the relationship
                                                                                Appendixes ■   29



between CSOs, the Government of Yemen, and donors and would develop an
action plan to operationalize this partnership. The World Bank team has liaised
with UNDP and is coordinating closely with their team during this process as the
Government-CSO Partnership Project complements the work on the CSOs-
Government-Donors partnership building under the MAF.

Specifically, in terms of civil society support the MAF aims to: (a) bolster the
culture of public participation, and strengthen the principles of democracy; and
(b) build CSOs capacities and improve their professionalism to enable their
effective participation in the partnership through (i) establishing a Supreme
Council to review the laws and the bylaws relating to CSOs and recommend new
provisions; (ii) involve CSOs in policy making; and (iii) build the technical and
professional capacities of CSOs. The coordination with UNDP on the planned
Partnership for Development Knowledge Conference aims to support the
Government of Yemen in the donor community to facilitate engagement with
CSOs through awareness raising and learning from countries that went through
similar transitions. This will help create space for a constructive dialogue
between Government of Yemen and CSOs.
30   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs




                 Appendix B. Conference Agenda




                                   March 4-6, 2014 | Movenpick Hotel, Sana’a, Yemen


                                                    Tuesday, March 4th, 2014
                                                        (8:30—3:30pm)

                   9:00 - 9:05   Welcome: Dr. Mohammed Alhaweri, Deputy Minister of Planning and
                      (5m)       International Cooperation

                   9:05 - 9:15   Dr. Mohammed Saed Al-Sadi, Minister of Planning and International Cooperation
                     (10m)

                   9:15—9:25     Dr. Amat Al-Razzak Ali Hummed, Minister of Social Affairs and Labor
                     (10m)

                   9:25—9:35     World Bank Support in Yemen: Mr. Wael Zakout, Manager Yemen Country Office,
                     (10m)       World Bank

                   9:35—9:45     Opening Address: H.E. Mr. Prime Minister of Yemen
                     (10m)

                   9:45—9:50
                                                  Closing the opening ceremony by Moderator
                      (5m)


                   9:50—10:20
                                                                   Coffee Break
                      (30m)


                                              Session 1: International Experiences

                  10:20—10:30    Introduction to the Partnership Framework between the Government of
                     (10m)       Yemen and Civil Society Organizations, Mr. Ahmed Hussain Aljawi, Ministry
                                 of Planning and International Cooperation

                  10:30—10:55    Keynote address: “Elements of Success for Partnerships for Development,” Mr.
                     (25m)       Jeff Thindwa, Manager, Social Accountability Practice Group, World Bank Institute
                                                                                               Appendixes ■   31




       Global experience on building State and non-State Partnerships from Indonesia,
                                  Ghana, Brazil, and India

               Speaker: INDONESIA—Dr. Suprayoga Hadi, Deputy Minister for Disadvantaged
               Regions, Republic of Indonesia
               • How did Indonesia engage in new and fluid environments to support the
10:55—11:15
                  new objectives for more open, transparent and accountable state institutions?
   (20m)
                  What were the respective roles of Government, Parliament, Media, CSOs,
                  religious organizations, etc.? How did the transitional government interact
                  and approach these various actors?


                         Moderated Q&A—Moderator (15 Minutes)


               Speaker: GHANA—Dr. Tony Aidoo, Head, Policy Evaluation and Oversight Unit,
               Office of the President
               • How did the Ghana engage in a new multi-stakeholder framework with the
11:30—11:50        objectives for more transparency, accountability, and participation in policy
   (20m)           processes? What were respective role of Government, Parliament, Media,
                   CSOs, private sector, etc?
               • What were the enabling factors that supported the Open Government
                   Partnership in the Ghana and what are some of the outstanding challenges?


                         Moderated Q&A—Moderator (10 minutes)


               Speaker: BRAZIL—Mr. Federico Fornazieri, Cabinet Secretary of Rio Grande do
               Sul, Brazil
               • What mechanisms did the Brazilian government use to engage with citizens
12:00—12:20        during “The Governor Asks” initiative to make a participatory decision
   (20m)           making process effective? What effective mechanisms were used in
                   participatory planning? What process elements made the citizen feedback
                   collection process successful? What were the respective roles of Government,
                   Media and CSOs as social intermediaries in the process?


                         Moderated Q&A—Moderator (15 minutes)


               Speaker: INDIA—Mr. George Cheriyan, Director, CUTS International, India
               • What lessons learned to date, challenges and opportunities regarding
                  Government-CSO partnerships around the health sector can be drawn? What
                  were the roles played by government and CSOs during this process and what
12:35—12:55
                  measures were taken to promote citizen’s direct involvement?
   (20m)
               • What are the outstanding challenges in making government-CSO
                  partnerships more effective? What lessons can be shared regarding the
                  passing of the Right to Information Act?
32   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs




                                          Moderated Q&A—Moderator (15 minutes)



                   1:10—2:10
                                                                 Lunch Break
                      (1h)



                         Session 2: Constructive Engagement between Government & CSOs in Practice


                                “Bridging the Gap: Building Blocks for Sustainable Development”—Q&A
                                Panel Session Discussants: Dr. Daniel Batidam, Executive Director, APNAC-
                                Africa, Ghana, George Cheriyan, Director, CUTS International, India, Maryati
                                Abdullah, National Coordinator of Publish What You Pay (PWYP) Indonesia,
                                Steering Committee member of Open Government Partnership (OGP), Mr. Alyan
                   2:10—2:55    Ali Al-Haisami, ANSA-Arab World Yemen Representative, Ghassan Kasabreh,
                     (45m)      Director, Palestinian NGO Development Center

                                Panel Topics:
                                • Enabling and Institutional Environment
                                • Government-CSO Partnerships
                                • Public Consultations

                                          Moderated Q&A—Moderator (30 minutes)

                                 ***KNOWLEDGE FAIR—OPEN THROUGH 9AM-6PM***




                                                Wednesday, March 5th, 2014
                                                   (8:30am—3:00pm)



                                         Session 3: Learning from the MNA Region


                   8:30—8:40    Overview of the Day: Moderator
                     (10m)
                   8:40—9:00    Speaker: PALESTINIAN TERRITORIES—”Improving the Internal Governance
                     (20m)      of the CSO Sector,” Mr. Ghassan Kasabreh, Director, Palestinian NGO
                                Development Center
                   9:00—9:20    Speaker: REPUBLIC OF YEMEN—”Lessons from the Experience with the
                     (20m)      National Dialogue and Access to Information Law,” Mostafa Nasr, Head of the
                                SEMC


                                         Moderated Q&A—Moderator (30 minutes)
                                                                                         Appendixes ■   33




                         Session 4: Thematic Working Groups


9:50—10:15    Framing of Issues: Enabling Environment and CSO Governance, Mr. Jeff
   (25m)      Thindwa, Manager, Social Accountability Practice Group, World Bank Institute
10:15—10:30   Yemen Government CSO Partnership Framework Principles, Rawhi Afaghani,
   (15m)      UNDP Strategic Communications Expert


                                     Coffee Break


10:50—12:30   Thematic Working Groups: Parallel Working Sessions
   (40m)
              “Supply Side” Themes:
              • Enabling environment—Working Group 1
              • Access to information—Working Group 2

              “Demand Side” Themes:
              • Law of associations—Working Group 3
              • CSO Governance (i.e., internal governance, self-regulation, CSO Charter of
                 Ethics )—Working Group 4
              • Citizen engagement in service delivery—Working Group 5
12:30—1:30
    (1h)                                      Lunch Break



1:30—3:00     CONTINUATION: Thematic Working Groups: Parallel Working Sessions
  (1.5h)


                         Closing Remarks for Day 2: Moderator



                  ***KNOWLEDGE FAIR—OPEN THROUGH 6PM***
34   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs




                                                   Thursday, March 5th, 2014
                                                      (8:30am—1:30pm)


                             Session 5: Way Forward: Lessons to support Yemen during the transition


                   8:30—8:40      Overview of the Day: Moderator
                     (10m)
                   8:40—9:40      Thematic Working Groups—Report Back in Plenary
                      (1h)        • Enabling environment—Working Group 1
                                  • Access to information—Working Group 2
                                  • Law of associations—Working Group 3
                                  • CSO Governance (i.e., internal governance, self-regulation, CSO Charter of
                                     Ethics )—Working Group 4
                                  • Citizen engagement in service delivery—Working Group 5
                   9:40—11:40     Thematic Working Groups—Entry Points and Opportunities for Government:
                       (2h)       CSO Partnership in Yemen
                                  • Enabling environment—Working Group 1
                                  • Access to information—Working Group 2
                                  • Law of associations—Working Group 3
                                  • CSO Governance (i.e., internal governance, self-regulation, CSO Charter of
                                     Ethics )—Working Group 4
                                  • Citizen engagement in service delivery—Working Group 5


                                    Session 6: Opportunities for Yemen and Next Steps


                  11:40—12:40     Thematic Working Groups—Report Back in Plenary—Yemen
                      (1h)        Opportunities
                   12:40 -1:10    Mapping Way Forward—Implementation of Partnership Framework,
                     (30m)        Presentation of next steps for strengthening CSO-Government
                                  Partnerships in Yemen, Mansour Albashiry, Ministry of Planning and
                                  International Cooperation
                   1:10 - 1:25    Closing Remarks for Day 3: Dr. Mohammed Alhaweri, Deputy Minister
                     (15m)        of Planning and International Cooperation


                                                            Lunch



                                   ***KNOWLEDGE FAIR—OPEN THROUGH 4PM***
                                                                             Appendixes ■   35




Appendix C. Links to Conference Materials

Conference Materials (presentations, government speeches, and resource
materials)
http://www.worldbank.org/en/events/2014/03/05/yemen-csos-conference


Feature Story
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2014/03/04/a-new-role-for-civil-
society-in-yemen


Video Blogs (displayed during conference)
YEMEN: Civil Society in Yemen: A Thousand Year Tradition with a Vital
Future Role
http://blogs.worldbank.org/arabvoices/civil-society-yemen-thousand-year-
tradition-vital-future-role

TUNISIA: Citizen’s Café
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/video/2013/10/25/the-citizen-cafe-tunisia

THAILAND: Strengthening Local Organizations
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1fMVvjCg3z0&list=PL5E7BABB475E47699&i
ndex=25
36   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs




                 Appendix D. Speaker Biographies

                                               Dr. Suprayoga Hadi
                 Dr. Suprayoga Hadi is Deputy Minister for the Development of Special Regions
                 at the Ministry for the Development of Disadvantaged Regions, Republic of
                 Indonesia. Before joining the Ministry for the Development of Disadvantaged
                 Regions in 2011, he was assigned as Director for Special Areas and
                 Disadvantaged Regions at the Ministry for National Development
                 Planning/National Development Planning Agency (BAPPENAS), Republic of
                 Indonesia. His career at BAPPENAS began in 1990. He has various
                 responsibilities for planning, programming, and monitoring of the policies and
                 strategies for disaster reduction and recovery related issues, such as the
                 rehabilitation and reconstruction of post-disaster areas in Indonesia, particularly
                 in post-tsunami recovery process in Aceh and Yogyakarta, as well as post-
                 conflict regions in Aceh, Papua, and Maluku.

                 Since 2006, Dr. Hadi has been a focal resource person for disaster risk reduction
                 policy initiatives in Indonesia, working with respective international donor
                 agencies, such as the World Bank and UNDP. These agencies have appointed
                 him as the National Project Director for many foreign-assisted disaster reduction
                 and recovery-related projects. Along with his assignment as government official
                 of BAPPENAS, since 1992 he has been teaching as a lecturer in the graduate
                 program of regional development planning at University of Indonesia in Jakarta.

                 Dr. Hadi obtained his MA in regional planning at Bandung Institute of
                 Technology in 1990 and a BA in agricultural economics at University of
                 Lampung in 1987. He then enrolled in the doctoral program at the University of
                 Southern California in 1998, and obtained his PhD in Planning and Development
                 Studies in 2002.


                                                  Dr. Tony Aidoo
                 Dr. Tony Aidoo served as Senior Presidential Aide and Head of the Policy
                 Evaluation and Oversight Unit of the Office of the President from 2009 to 2013.
                 He was also a member of the Cabinet’s Economic Management Team for three
                 years. Currently, Dr. Aidoo holds the post of Ambassador Designate, to which he
                 was appointed by the President of Ghana in November 2013. He is also a
                 member of the National Information Technology Authority, and of the African
                 Union Advisory Board on Corruption.

                 Dr. Aidoo’s educational background is in International Affairs and Sociology. He
                 graduated from the University College of London with a Diploma in
                                                                               Appendixes ■   37



International Affairs in 1973, from the University of Buckinghamshire with a BSc
(Hons.) in Sociology in 1976, and from the University College of London with an
MSc in International Relations in 1977. Dr. Aidoo earned his PhD from the
University of Surrey in 1983 and he also completed a Post-Graduate Diploma in
Law from the College of Law, London, in 2003.

Dr. Aidoo was a member of Ghana’s Civil Service Council between 1992 and
2001. At the same time, he also served as a member of Presidential and State
Delegations to International Conferences and State Visits to the United States,
United Kingdom, Japan, China, Germany, Malaysia, Brunei, Jamaica, Trinidad &
Tobago, Côte d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso, and the Federal Republic of Nigeria.

Dr. Aidoo has an extensive background in politics and was a member of the
Consultative Assembly for the Drafting of the 1992 Constitution of the Republic
of Ghana. Between 1992 and 2000, Dr. Aidoo was the Director of Research and
Monitoring for the National Democratic Congress (NDC). He also acted as Co-
ordinator of the Overseas Branches of the NDC. He was a member of the
National Executive Committee of the NDC from 1992 to 2000 and from 2002 to
2005. In addition, Dr. Aidoo served as Deputy Minister to the Ministry of
Defence from April 1999 to January 2001.


                           Mr. Federico Fornazieri
Mr. Federico Fornazieri is currently the International Relations Coordinator and
Technical Advisor on Strategic Projects at the Rio Grande do Sul State
Government’s General Secretariat of Government. From 2011 to 2013 Mr.
Fornazieri served as a Technical Advisor at the Cooperation and International
Relations Advisory at the Rio Grande do Sul State Government.

Before making the transition to civil service, Mr. Fornazieri held research and
consulting positions within the field of development. Between 2007 and 2008, he
was the Social-Cultural Director of the Academic Directory at the Trevisan
Business School. His experience in Social Development goes back six years: from
2007 to 2010, Mr. Fornazieri worked as an Analyst on Politics, Economy, and
Social Development for Latin America at Clássica Consultant. His experience in
development goes back even further; in 2006, he worked as an Education and
Development Researcher at the Plural Project. Since the beginning of 2014, Mr.
Fornazieri has enjoyed helping others and has served as a Youth Counselor for
the State of Rio Grande do Sul.
38   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                                              Mr. George Cheriyan
                 Mr. George Cheriyan is currently the Director of CUTS International and heads
                 the CUTS Centre for Consumer Action, Research & Training (CUTS CART), one
                 of the program centers of CUTS, based in Jaipur, India. CUTS is an international
                 NGO of Indian origin, pursuing social justice and economic equity within and
                 across borders. George has over 29 years of experience in working in
                 development and the NGO sector.

                 Good Governance & Social Accountability is one of Mr. Cheriyan’s areas of
                 interest, and he is presently managing the implementation of various projects on
                 governance and accountability. He is also overseeing the anchoring of
                 Community of Practice on Social Accountability in the South Asia Region
                 (CoPSA), in partnership with the Affiliated Network for Social Accountability in
                 the South Asia Region (ANSA SAR) and supported by the World Bank Institute
                 (WBI).

                 Mr. Cheriyan has been a member of the United Nations Roster of Consultants on
                 sustainable development since 1995, and a Member of International Resource
                 Team on social accountability of the WBI since January 2007. In this capacity, Mr.
                 Cheriyan was involved in the Training of Trainers programs on social
                 accountability tools organized by WBI in Sri Lanka and Bangladesh in 2007. He
                 also has served as a resource person for social accountability tools in various
                 workshops organized by ANSA SAR. He has experience in facilitating social
                 accountability trainings and field exercises in Cambodia, Vietnam, Nepal,
                 Uganda, and Kenya. He was the facilitator/resource person of an e-learning
                 action course on social accountability organized by WBI for participants from
                 South Asia and the Arab World in 2012 and 2013, respectively.

                 Mr. Cheriyan became a member of the Rosters of Experts of the Global
                 Partnership for Social Accountability (GPSA) of the World Bank in March 2013.
                 He has written and published a number of articles in leading national news
                 dailies, news magazines, journals, and periodicals; has edited books; and has
                 made several presentations at several international conferences.


                                              Ms. Maryati Abdullah
                 Ms. Maryati Abdullah is National Coordinator of Publish What You Pay
                 (PWYP) Indonesia. She has experience in freedom of information, open budgets,
                 extractive industries, and natural resources transparency, as well as in
                 democracy and good governance issues. Her academic background is in
                 chemistry, and in economic development and globalization. Before joining
                 PWYP, she worked for Pattiro and Parliament Watch.
                                                                                   Appendixes ■   39



She was actively engaged with communities, the government, and the private
sector in the multi-stakeholder working group initiatives, including the Open
Government Partnership (OGP) and the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI). Maryati is a civil society representative with EITI Indonesia and
is also to be elected as steering committee member of OGP at the global level.


                             Mr. Ghassan Kasabreh
Mr. Ghassan Kasabreh, holds an MS in Environmental Engineering from the
University of Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, and a BSc in Civil
Engineering from Birzeit University, Palestine. He has been a member of the
Jordanian Engineers Syndicate for over 20 years and served as a board member
of several civil society organizations. Mr. Kasabreh has acquired expertise in the
NGO sector and international cooperation by gaining extensive experience in
project and organizational development, throughout the West Bank and Gaza.

Mr. Kasabreh’s professional involvement in Palestinian civil society stretches
back 15 years. He has been the Director of the NGO Development Center since
November 2006, through which he has supported community development and
a just and democratic Palestinian society by promoting good governance and
sector transparency and accountability. The Center has commissioned studies
that underscore the need to strengthen the contribution and participation of
Palestinian civil society in national and sector planning and policy making
processes, as well as promoting a culture of cooperation and information
sharing. The NGO Development Center coordinates the efforts of Palestinian
NGOs to become sustainable, independent, and efficient as well as more
responsive to the needs of Palestinian society in a transparent and credible
manner.

In his early career, Mr. Kasabreh was a Senior Planner for Infrastructure and
Environment at UNDP’s Local Rural Development Program (LRDP) in
Jerusalem, where he helped identify major interventions and investments while
managing LRDP activities. In addition, he has six years of experience working as
a Project Engineer in Bethlehem and Ramallah.


                               Mr. Daniel Batidam
Mr. Daniel Batidam is a policy analyst and governance/anti-corruption
specialist. He has over 15 years’ experience working with African governments,
development partners, and key state and private sector institutions—including
civil society groups and the media—to promote policy reforms, good
governance, and institutional development.
40   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs



                 Over the past ten years (2003–13), Mr. Batidam’s career has focused mainly on
                 anti-corruption work and the coordination of good governance programs in
                 Ghana, Africa, and globally. Specifically, he has worked for four years (2003–07)
                 as the Executive Director of the Ghana Integrity Initiative, which is the local
                 chapter of the respected international civil society organization Transparency
                 International. He has also worked for over four years (2010 to date) as Executive
                 Director of the African Parliamentarians’ Network Against Corruption. These
                 two positions—one within civil society and the other with politicians and
                 parliamentarians—have given Daniel a unique opportunity to understand and
                 appreciate the need for and benefit of stronger collaboration between all the key
                 stakeholders in governance, namely government/public sector, the private
                 sector/business community, and citizen groups/civil society organizations.

                 Mr. Batidam has, over the years, gained extensive experience in multi-actor
                 coordination and has participated in numerous international conferences on
                 governance in Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Americas. He holds post-graduate
                 degrees in Communications and in Public Policy and Human Development.


                                                  Jeff Thindwa
                 Mr. Thindwa is Manager of Social Accountability Practice at the World Bank
                 Institute. He joined the World Bank in 2000 as Senior Social Development
                 Specialist. He has worked across the Bank’s Regions promoting the use of social
                 accountability mechanisms to improve public governance and performance of
                 Bank-funded operations. The practice of social accountability engages and
                 empowers key stakeholders, including media, parliaments, and civil society. It
                 strengthens their capacity to make public policy, budgets, and programs more
                 effective and accountable in servicing citizens. Social accountability also
                 prioritizes access to information, open and inclusive budgeting, and third party
                 monitoring and citizen feedback. Prior to joining the Bank, Mr. Thindwa worked
                 with civil society organizations for 17 years.
                            Appendixes ■   41




Appendix E. CSO Factsheet
42   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs
                                                                                                          Appendixes ■   43




     Appendix F. Conference Participants

                                  Government Participants
#    Organization                                             Name
1    Ministry of Social Affairs                               Abdo Mohammed Alhakimi
2    The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation   Abdullah Abdulmajeed
3    Care and Rehabilitation of the Disabled Fund             Abdullah Ahmed Al-Hamdani(Basheer Al-Sablani)
4    The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation   Abdullah Al-Shater
5    Yemeni Center for Social Studies                         Abdullah Yehya Al-Olefi
6    The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation   Abulqawi Noman
7    The Higher Council for Motherhood and Childhood          Adel Al-Rooaeni
8    Social Fund for Development                              Ahmed Al-Barakani
9    Ministry of Sports and Youth                             Ahmed Al-Hasani
10   Shura Council                                            Tariq Al-Baraq
11   National Dialogue Conference                             Ahmed Awad Mubarak
12   Social Welfare Fund                                      Ahmed Jameel Al-Areeqi
13   Sana’a University                                        Ali Abdullah Qaed
14   Ministry of Social Affairs                               Ali Ahmed Al-Nusairi
15   Ministry of Social Affairs                               Ali Saleh Hussien
16   Yemeni Industrialists Association                        Ali Mohammed Al-Maktari
17   The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation   Al-Salami Saleh Al-Salami
18   Ministry of Human Rights                                 Amal Sultan Al-Jaradi
19   The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation   Aneesah Mohammed Ali
20   Sana’a University                                        Dawood Othman
21   Central Bureau of Statistics                             Dr. Abdulhakeem Al-Obaid
22   The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation   Dr. Adel Al-Hoshabi
23   Sana’a University                                        Dr. Adel Al-Horibi
24   General Union of Chambers of Commerce                    Dr. Mona Al-Mahagri
25   Sana’a University                                        Dr. Taha Al-Fosail
26   Ministry of Agriculture                                  Eman Bazara’a
27   The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation   Eman Al-Hamami
28   General Union of Chambers of Commerce                    Esam Mohammed Badr Al-Zubiri
29   Prime Ministry                                           Eshraq Al-Jadeeri
30   Shura Council                                            Hasan Abdulkhaliq
31   Business Yemenis Club                                    Fathi Abdulwasea Hael (Mohammed Ismael)
32   Encouraging agricultural production and fish Fund        Hareth Abdulbari
33   Ministry of Culture                                      Hisham Ali Ben Ali
34   Agricultural Cooperative Union                           Jawad Al-Areefi
35   House of Representatives                                 Khadija Al-Ojali
36   Ministry of Information                                  Khaled Hussein Tairaman
37   National Information Center                              Labeeb Shaif Mohammed
38   Social Fund for Development                              Lamees Al-Eryani (Khlood Alhaj)
39   Ministry of Social Affairs                               Lotf Ahmed Al-Alaya
40   The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation   Mohammed Al-Maswari
41   General Union of Chambers of Commerce                    Mohammed Mohammed Qaflah
44   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs




                  42       Ministry of Education                                      Mohsen Saleh Al-Yafae
                  43       Executive Body                                             Mojahed Al-Masabi
                  44       Ministry of Social Affairs                                 Mojeeb Sultan Al-Fatesh
                  45       The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation     Mutahar Al-Abbasi
                  46       Ministry of Social Affairs                                 Nabil Al-Suhaibi
                  47       children and youth Welfare Fund                            Nadhmia Abdulsalam Othman
                  48       Presidency Of The Republic                                 Nasr Taha Mustafa
                  49       Yemeni Center for Strategic Studies                        Nasser Al-Taweel
                  50       The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation     Omar Abdulaziz
                  51       Public Works                                               Saeed Abdo
                  52       Ministry of Finance                                        Saleem Al-Basheeri
                  53       Ministry of Social Affairs                                 Saleh Ahmed Ali
                  54       The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation     Suliman Al-Qatabri
                  55       Ministry of Industry and Commerce                          Wafa Abdullah Awad
                  56       Social Fund for Development                                Saleh Al-Razahi




                                Civil Society Organizations Participants
                       #                                Organization                                Name
                       1    Abu Mosa Al-Ashari Charity Association                    Abdo Ali Almansoob Mizjaji

                       2    Transparency Coalition for Extractive Industries          Abdulbaset Al-Mashwali

                       3    Ejad Foundation for Development                           Abdulfatah Aref Abo Al-gaeth

                       4    Tafolati Foundation for Development and Creativeness      Abdulkaher Hamood Alhomaidy

                       5    Yemen First Organization                                  Abdulkareem Al-Anasi

                       6    Rawaby Al-Kheer Development Foundation                    Abdullah Abeed Bahfi

                       7    Tamkeen Foundation For Rural Youth                        Abdul-Moeen Al-Homadi

                       8    National Organization for Defending Rights and Freedoms   Abdulrahamn Ali Barman

                       9    Manarat Center                                            Abdulrahman Al-Olefi

                   10       Taiba Association for Development                         Abdulrahman Khered

                   11       Together Foundation for Development and Human Rights      Adel Dabwan

                   12       Yemen Observatory for Human Rights                        Ahmed Al-Wadaei

                   13       Yemen Organization for Promoting Transparency             Ahmed Mohammed Al-zekry

                   14       Yemen Family Care Association                             Afrah Al-garshi

                   15       Yemen Child Rights Association                            Aisha Mohammed Hashabirah

                   16       Al-Saleh Social Foundation for Development                Akram Yehya Baker

                   17       Challenge Foundation for Disabled Women                   Ali Ahmed Alkashmari

                   18       General Federation of Workers Unions of Yemen             Ali Ahmed Bamahisoon

                   19       Civic Democratic Initiatives Support Foundation- CDF      Altaf Al-yusofi

                   20       Al-Saleh Social Foundation for Development                Akram Yehya Baker
                                                                                                    Appendixes ■   45




21   All Girls Foundation for Gender Development                    Amani Al-theeb

22   Wedyan Association for Society Development                     Ammar Mohammed Saleh Hussein

23   Tawasl Foundation for Human Development                        Anas Al-Mekhlafi

24   Partners Foundation for Development and Democracy              Anwar Ismaeil Al-Marwani

25   Human Rights Training and Information Center                   Arafat Al-Roufaid

     Affiliated Network for Social Accountability in the Arab
26                                                                  Alyan Ali Al-Haisami
     World/Member ANSA-AW Board of Trustees

27   Yemeni Parliamentarians Against Corruption (YemenPac)          Areej Al-Khawlani

28   Youth Leadership Development Foundation                        Asma Al-Kubati

29   Yemen Revolutions Martyrs Families Forum                       Awad Al-Awsaji

30   Fajar Al-amal Charity Foundation                               Baleegh Al-Tamimi

31   Solutions Development Foundation                               Bassam Al Absi

32   Raqeeb Organization for Human Rights                           Dr. Abdullah Al-sholeef

33   Al-awn for Development Association                             Dr. Adel Mohammed Bahameed

34   Civil Confederacy for Peace, Rights, and Freedoms Protection   Dr. Adel Al-shoga’a

35   Saihad Foundation for Social Development                       Dr. Ali Abdullah Sawab

36   Al-Nebras Medical Association                                  Dr. Ali Zayad

37   Youth Leadership Development Foundation                        Dr. Antelaq Al-Mutawakel

38   National Safe Motherhood Alliance Foundation                   Dr.Asma Ghaleb

39   Haraz Al-Sulihyia Development Organization                     Dr. Taha Ali Mohammed Al-Meri

40   Al-fatah Charity Women Association                             Dr. Jamilh Oqbaa

41   Sana’a Governorate Youth Council                               Dr. Khaled Mohammed Al-dhahar

42   Bent Al-Hussein Charity Organization for Development           Dr. Najwa Al-Khazan
     Yemeni Monitoring, Transparency and Anti-Corruption
                                                                    Dr. Mohammed Al-Jadabi
43   Coalition
44   Athar Development Association                                  Eman Hassan Madghah

45   Al-Wattn Cultural Forum                                        Essam Al-Olofi

46   Yemeni Development Network for NGOs (NAMA)                     Fahmi Al-sarari

47   Sam Association for Women Development                          Fatema Al-Jabali

48   Yemeni Women Union                                             Fathia Mohammed Abdullah

49   Ocsana Foundation for Disabled                                 Foad Shojaa Al-Deen

50   Aden Women Development Association for Promoting Family        Haiam Abdullah Mubarak

51   Humanitarian Forum                                             Hala Al-Bahri

52   Pupil Care Development Foundation                              Hamdi Al-Hamdi

53   Yemen Youth General Union                                      Hameed Yahya Al-Nussiry

54   Add Cultural Organization                                      Hamood Al-Thebri

55   Third Eye Foundation for Media and Development                 Hana Al-Adeemi

56   Democratic School                                              Jamal Al-shami

57   Civil Society Organizations Forum (CSOs)                       Jameel Hussein Alhamdani
     Yemeni Monitoring, Transparency and Anti-Corruption
                                                                    Jameel Ali Mohammed Al-Matari
58   Coalition
59   Al-Ihsan Charity Association                                   Khaled Al-mothalaa
46   ■ Supporting Constructive Engagement between the Government of Yemen and CSOs




                   60   Yemeni Youth Organization for Development                 Khaled Al-tashi

                   61   Generation without Qat Organization                       Laila Ali Alfakeeh

                   62   Shawthab foundation for Childhood and Development         Lamia Yahya Al-eryani

                   63   Transparency Coalition for Extractive Industries          Maher Oqbaa
                                                                                  Mahfood Mohammed Fadel Al-
                        Change your life for Society Development
                   64                                                             Huqeeb
                   65   Law Enlightment Organization (Nahj)                       Mahroos Oqba

                   66   Transparency Center for Studies and Researches            Mohammed Alazizi

                   67   Al-Maona Coalition For Human Rights                       Mohammed Ali Alao

                   68   Orphan Development Foundation                             Mohammed Hassn Ameen

                   69   Insan Foundation for Development                          Mohammed Maoda

                   70   Hemmat Shabab Foundation for Development                  Mofeed Al-Shibani

                   71   Yemeni Center for Human Rights Studies                    Mohammed Qasem Noman

                   72   Alkhair Foundation for Social Development                 Mukhtar Mohammed Al-saqaf

                   73   Resonate Yemen Foundation                                 Mustafa Al-Mansoor

                   74   Studies and Economic Media Center                         Mustafa Nasr

                   75   Yemen Observatory for Human Rights                        Nabil Abdulhafeez Abdo Saif

                   76   Social Democratic Forum                                   Nabil Abdulhafeez Majed

                   77   Life Makers Forum                                         Nabila Al-Kumaim

                   78   Al-Aman Association for Blind Women Care                  Nabila Al-wadeai

                   79   Yemeni Anti-Trafficking Organization                      Nabil Fadel

                   80   Hand by Hand Development Association                      Najla Saad Al-A koori

                   81   Awtad Organization for Defending Corruption               Naji Al-Abdali

                   82   Al-Hekma Al-Yamania Development Association               Nasr Salem Ali Shamsan

                   83   SOUL for Women and Child Development Organization         Nouria Al- Khamery

                   84   Al-twasol Foundation For Human Development                Raeed Ibrahim

                   85   Life Charity Foundation                                   Rafiq Mohammed Al-thubyani

                   86   Arabic Foundation for Human Rights                        Raja Al-Musabi

                   87   Environment and Law Youth Association for Development     Rashed Qasem Mohammed Hazeb

                   88   Al-zahra Charity Foundation                               Refatt Omer Fakirah

                   89   Khadija Development Foundation                            Roma Mohammed Al-damasi

                   90   Al-Aman Association for Blind Women Care                  Sabah Huraish

                   91   Alshorooq Social Charity Association                      Saeed Mubark Sabti

                   92   My Right Organization for Development                     Sameera Ali Balah

                   93   Aden Women Development Association for Promoting Family   Salwa Hassn Shawalh

                   94   Al-fordos Women Development Association                   Sameera Abdullah Nasr

                   95   Social Family Association                                 Shadya Alhobieshi

                   96   Al-Noor Youth Development Association                     Shamim Mahmoud Al-Abdli

                   97   Democratic House (Siyad )                                 Taha Ahmed Ali

                   98   Yemen Polling Center                                      Taha Yaseen Abdo Ahmed

                   99   Transparency Coalition for Extractive Industries          Taher Al-Hatef
                                                                                     Appendixes ■   47




100   General Federation of marginalized              Thuryia Abdullah Moqbel Saed

101   Bader Development Association                   Waleed Elhaj

102   Al-Islah Social Charity Foundation              Yehya Al-daba

103   Social Service Association                      Yones Mohammed Awad Sallem

104   Yemeni Women Empowerment Foundation (Tamkeen)   Zafaran Mohammed Zaed
48
