                                               88651

Trucks Under Siege
CASE STUDY



The Costs of Crime and Insecurity to the
Transport Industry in Papua New Guinea




                By Sadaf Lakhani

                Social Cohesion and Violence Prevention Team
                Social Development Department
© 2014 The World Bank Group
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org/socialdevelopment
E-mail: asksocial@worldbank.org

All rights reserved.

This paper has been prepared as part of a broader study to understand the
socioeconomic costs of crime and violence to businesses, government agencies,
Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) and households in PNG. This work was
requested by the Prime Minister and was undertaken with extensive input from
international partners and local stakeholders.

The papers in this Research and Dialogue series are informal publications of the
World Bank. They are circulated to encourage thought and discussion. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank and its affiliated
organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the
governments they represent.
Social Cohesion and Violence Prevention Team



CASE STUDY
The Costs of Crime and
Insecurity to the Transport
Industry in Papua New
Guinea1
Transport as the lifeblood of the economy
The Highlands Highway is a lifeline for the country’s economy,
for businesses, and for the three million people who live in the
Highlands’ provinces. As in any country, the movement of                                 The Highlands
goods and people around the country—in particular between                                Highway is a
commercial towns—is critical factor for the functioning of the                           lifeline for the
economy. Transporting people and goods, the Highlands                                    country’s
Highway is used by trucks connecting the region’s major port,
                                                                                         economy, for
Lae, to Madang and then it carries on into the resource-rich
                                                                                         businesses, and
Highlands, across limestone cliffs, through valleys and along
                                                                                         for the three
hair-raising mountain passes. Without railways and with air
travel prohibitively expensive for most people and many                                  million people
companies, PMVs 2 ply the route carrying people between their                            who live in the
hometowns and the commercial centers. Trucks carry food                                  Highlands’
products and other essential supplies as well as agricultural                            provinces.
produce, including Highlands’ coffee—a major income earner
for the rural population.
     With both infrastructure and law and order identified as
critical development constraints 3 the transport and haulage
industry is one that is seriously affected. Interestingly, it is also


1
  The author would like to thank Laura Keenan, World Bank, for her inputs to this
publication. Special thanks go to Peter Long from the iPi Group of Companies and Jacob
Luke and Team from Mapai Transport Ltd for taking part in this case study.
2
  Public Motor Vehicles, or mini vans.
3
  Papua New Guinea, Critical Development Constraints, Country Diagnostic Series, 2012,
Asian Development Bank: Manila, available at http://www.nicta.gov.pg/public_inquiries/
Retail%20Service%20Determination%20Papers/Digicel%20Response%20ADB%20PNG%20
-%20critical%20development%20constraints.pdf.



Trucks Under Siege                                                                                  3
                                                                         Social Development Department


                                 an industry that has found innovative ways to manage the risks.
                                 We spoke with two locally owned, medium-sized haulage
The transport                    companies about the challenges they face in their business
and haulage                      operations. Their stories provide a fascinating look into what it
industry is one                  takes to run a haulage firm in PNG, and the day-to-day risks
                                 faced by managers, drivers, and other staff.
that is
seriously                            The first company operates a fleet of roughly 100 trucks.
affected... it has               The trucks are driven by highly trained and constantly
[also] found                     monitored drivers along the 700km highway from Lae to the
innovative                       mountain town of Porgera in Enga Province, home to the
                                 country’s second largest mine site, and on to the populous
ways to
                                 towns of Mount Hagen and Goroka, or to Hela Province, where
manage the
                                 the PNGLNG project—the country’s largest natural resource
risks.
                                 project—is based. The second firm in this case study also hauls
                                 goods along the Highlands Highway through Goroka, Mount
                                 Hagen, and then up into either the Southern Highlands or into
                                 Enga Province. The goods include bulk diesel and
                                 packed/drummed Jet A1, bulk gas, cigarettes, and some general


       Quick Facts: Transport Infrastructure in PNG
       Population of PNG: PNG is one of the most isolated countries in the world. With a population of
       more than 7 million and total land area that is roughly the size of California. 4 out of 5 people live in
       rugged mountainous or coastal terrain, many without even rudimentary access to roads, and as such
       to markets, and public services such as health clinics and schools.
       Main modes of transport: Public transport is limited, the most common form being Public Motor
       Vehicles or PMVs (mini-vans and small buses). There are a large number of PMVs operating that are
       privately run. Air services, while available across many parts of the country, are prohibitively
       expensive for most people. With 6,500 km of coastline, water-transport is an important means of
       moving people and goods. Some towns in maritime provinces are accessible only by sea. Inland
       waterways cover approximately 10,000 km. Some communities along the Sepik, Fly and Ramu river
       systems can only be reached by dugout canoes. There are no functioning public railways.
       Road network: Papua New Guinea's road network covers some 16,540 km; roads are generally
       poorly maintained and provide unreliable, infrequent, high-cost transport. There are a handful of
       major highways, but they become unusable in wet weather. Vehicle breakdowns occur frequently and
       vehicles are commonly subjected to robbery, looting and car-jacking. The Highlands Highway is the
       longest road in the country, linking the port towns of Lae and Madang to the Highlands region.
       Women and transport: Poor transport networks and unsafe, unreliable transport services constrain
       women’s and girls’ opportunities in particular. The issues include limited access to health and
       education services, limited access to economic opportunities and an increased vulnerabili gender-
       based violence, HIV and other STIs.




   4                                                                                              CASE STUDY
Social Cohesion and Violence Prevention Team




dry goods such as foodstuffs. Most trips involve a simple pick-
up from a point of origin with delivery of the goods to a final
destination, unloading or discharge the goods and then returning
the trucks to a home base. What could possibly go wrong?


What could go wrong?                                               “…without
                                                                   strong and
To start with, road conditions are generally poor. Transport       consistent risk
infrastructure in PNG suffers not only from insufficient
                                                                   management
investment, but the quality of construction and maintenance of
                                                                   applied across
roads is affected by low standards and corrupt practices on the
                                                                   all levels of the
part of contractors, elite capture of local government budgets
and a ‘leakage’ of funds throughout the public finance             business, the
management system. Potholes, landslides, broken bridges and        ‘wheels would
other roadblocks, especially during the rainy season, can          fall off’ very
disrupt travel. Stopping en route presents serious risks to the    quickly.”
trucks-equipment-cargo; drivers regularly report being ‘held to
ransom’ for payouts when trucks have had to make



Trucks Under Siege                                                              5
                                                       Social Development Department


                     unscheduled stops because of the road conditions. Where there
                     are potholes—sometimes man-made—it is easy for trucks to tip,
                     at which point looting becomes a major hazard.
                          Another hazard and expense is that the Highlands Highway
 Claims may
                     passes by hundred of villages and landowners groups. Claims
 come out of the
                     for compensation from villagers are extremely common, in
 blue and be
                     response to complaints about drivers who allegedly ran over a
 unsubstantiated,    pig or perhaps hit a person, for example. Claims may come out
 but negotiations    of the blue and be unsubstantiated, but negotiations with the
 with the            aggrieved party/parties can go on for months. As one of the
 aggrieved party/    businesses explained “We get threats of violence, threats to have
 parties can go      trucks taken hostage, threats to have the road blocked, drivers
 on for months.      threatened and assaulted, threats to have trucks burnt.” Claims
                     are even made for actions of third parties; for example if fuel is
                     siphoned-off by looters, there often follows a claim from the
                     village in situ for environmental damage, or a claim for
                     compensation might be presented to the firm if a truck was
                     hijacked or stolen and then crashed and caused damage. For
                     one of the transport companies studied here, these payments
                     amount to roughly K200–K500 per incident—or approximately
                     K1–K2 million a year. Costs are also incurred in the additional
                     time each journey may take due to road blocks for payouts,
                     tribal fighting, and unscheduled stops by drivers to visit family
                     and wantoks. When travelling in a convey to mitigate risks, the
                     convey must travel at the speed of the slowest truck, and a truck
“We are in a high
                     may have to stop and wait en route while other trucks ahead
cost-high risk
                     sort out claims with landowners.
industry with             Along the Highway also exists a buoyant black market
many enemies         economy in stolen fuel. A constant siphoning-off of fuel (either
within...            by drivers themselves or by ‘looters’ along the route) can cost a
[you have to]…       haulage company as much as US$1 million a year—outgoings
manage the           which are simply factored into the costs of doing business. Yet
business both        fuel is only one of the items that is regularly stolen from trucks
well and             themselves: fire extinguishers, spare wheels, driving lights,
diligently or, get   radios/stereos and batteries all go missing on a regular basis.
out all together.”   Theft from the main office or the depots is also common; “we
                     are not talking here about the office stapler or calculator going
                     missing but things such as expensive tooling, spare parts,
                     lubricants, tires. You name it, it has the potential to go missing.”



     6                                                                      CASE STUDY
Social Cohesion and Violence Prevention Team


How can we manage the risks?
Like other successful Papua New Guinean haulage companies,
these firms have h ad to develop tools to mitigate and manage         Firms have
the impact of these risks. For example:                               had to develop
    ■ The entire fleet is electronically monitored 24 hours a         tools to
       day, 7 days a week from a coordination center, by a            mitigate and
       contracted firm. The hardware and software were                manage the
       developed for the businesses and are owned by them.            impact of
       As one business’ noted; “it is expensive, but if it saves      these risks.
       one incident, it is worth every dollar spent.”
    ■ The trucks are specially fitted with high-tech
       equipment. An advanced GPS mapping system tracks
       the movements of every truck, from start to finish of its
       journey, and flags anywhere they may go off-route.
       Drivers must be safely parked in one of the depots in
       Mount Hagen, Goroka, or Lae by midnight, at which              An advanced
       point systems, and engines, are shut down remotely.            GPS
       Remove shutdown can also be employed if a truck goes           mapping
       off route or is reported stolen, and can only be restarted     system
       by workshop personnel. Other modifications made to             tracks the
       the trucks include to the springs, wheels, and                 movements
       suspensions to cope with the adverse road conditions.          of every
       For the two firms involved in this case study, their systems   truck
       are top-range, technologically far exceeding comparators
       in more developed economies. All fuel lines and points of
       discharge as securely locked and tagged.
    ■ Both businesses include on their payroll public
       relations or ‘road liaison’ officers, who facilitate
       negotiations at strategic sites along the route in order to    ‘Road liaison’
       assist the safe passage of trucks. They patrol the             officers are
       Highway, watching for potential trouble, handling
                                                                      generally
       compensation claims. One of the firms employs
                                                                      considered a
       approximately 20 of these valuable facilitators. For one
                                                                      ‘must-have’
       firm, payment for their services add up to between 3,000
       and 4,000 Kina (US$350-$500) a week—up to US$25,200
                                                                      and are drawn
       a year. Whilst one of the firms questioned how effective       from local
       these employees are, they are generally considered a           communities.



Trucks Under Siege                                                               7
                                               Social Development Department




                     ‘must-have’: they are drawn from the local communities
Insurers often       themselves and this is key to maintaining a good
refuse to cover      relationship with landowners.
transport         ■ The company pays a high price for insurance. Given
along road           the large number of risks that affect every journey,
sections             insurance comes at a high price. Insurance companies
considered           often refuse to cover transport along certain sections of
particularly         the road that are considered particularly high-risk, so
                     any costs from losses or damage incurred on these
high-risk.
                     stretches must be absorbed by the firm.
                  ■ Police are used to report crimes, particularly for the
Assets are           deterrent effect this has. However the firms reported
                     having to pay for this public service; “we look after their
protected with
                     vehicles—fuel, tires, servicing, and in some cases
expensive
                     payments to the police to allow them to attend issues on
infrastructure,      our behalf…they are underfunded.”
monitoring
systems, and      ■ Assets are protected with expensive infrastructure;
                     haulage companies typically invest in a rage of
procedures
                     hardware and systems—steel grills, access bolts, tagging


 8                                                                 CASE STUDY
Social Cohesion and Violence Prevention Team


       and laminated windscreens, among other security
       measures. One of the firms has its own fuel farm for
       ensuring quality fuel, and uses innovative ways of
       securing all fuel lines.
    ■ Monitoring systems and procedures are also used and
       rigorously followed to prevent theft from the workplace.    Investing in
       Internal monitoring systems in all depots, external gate    the human
       control by a security firm and even internal laundry        resources of the
       facilities for uniforms illustrates how operational costs   firm is critical
       can add up even for office base.                            to compensate
    ■ Investing in the human resources of the firm is critical     for deficits in
       to compensate for deficits in the education system and to   the education
       help reinforce good practices and counter those social      system and to
       pressures and mores that compromise the effective           help reinforce
       running of a haulage firm. The drivers are given            good practices.
       rigorous training across all levels of the business, from
       Depot management and controls, local or urban haulage
       work through to highway work. Skills training in truck
       management, driving technique, care and maintenance,




Trucks Under Siege                                                            9
                                              Social Development Department


                     security alerts/awareness, personal and work-place
                     safety, and the like are on going. One of the firms
Local staff are
                     reported having their own in-house trainers. They also
transported to
                     sponsor apprentices and trainees for acquiring
and from             vocational       skills—applicable    fees,     travel,
work in order        accommodation, and meals for apprentices and trainees
to reduce their      are fully paid for.
risk of
                  ■ Truck drivers are amongst the most highly paid
becoming
                     workers in the country, partly as a reflection of the
victims of           hazardous nature of their job; they can earn up to
crime and            K100,000 per year. In addition to paying a generous
violence.            salary, one of the businesses uses an incentive system
                     using lucrative performance-linked payments to
                     discourage stealing of fuel and complicity in looting and
                     stealing.
                  ■ Private security escorts are routinely employed for
                     high-value cargo, such as cigarettes. They accompany
                     trucks on their journey—especially from the LNG site.
                     Security firms also help securing the office pr and
                     depots, and as act escorts through areas where there are
                     tribal fights and roadblocks caused by civil unrest. Even
                     security vehicles however are not immune to being
                     targeted. On occasion they have also on occasion been
                     subject to demands and robberies on Highlands’ roads.
                  ■ Local staff working for haulage firms are transported
                     to and from work in order to reduce their risk of
                     becoming victims of crime and violence en route from
Measures are
                     home to the workplace. One of the firms operated their
taken to             own internal bus transport fleet, dedicated to home to
ensure the           work pickups and drop-offs.
safety of
                  ■ Measures are taken to ensure the safety of female staff
female staff as
                     as they face heightened and special risks. Both firms
they face
                     noted that security in getting to and from the work place
heightened           is paramount for female staff. Both firms are also highly
and special          cognizant of issues concerning safety and welfare faced
risks.               by female staff outside of the workplace. Training in
                     relation to health awareness, domestic violence, and



  10                                                             CASE STUDY
Social Cohesion and Violence Prevention Team


       general well being is offered to both female and male
       staff.
    ■ One of the businesses noted a heavy reliance on
       international staff at senior levels, in part to mitigate
       perceived collusion and pressures from wantoks. Costs
       for internationals are high, as on top of salaries that
       incorporate ‘hazard pay’ they often require housing,
       catering, and fly-in/fly out arrangements.
    Costs accumulate quickly, for private security, for lost fuel,
to replace stolen parts and equipment, pay insurance, repair
damaged assets, for running depots, investing technology and
security stations, for compensation payouts, and to remunerate
its drivers and other staff who often face serious risks every
time they set out on the Highway.




Trucks Under Siege                                                   11
                                                   Social Development Department



                  How does this affect business and the
                  economy?

                  Limiting business opportunities, inflating costs for consumers

                  These additional costs paid by businesses are then passed onto
Ultimately, it    consumers in the form of inflated prices. A tin of tuna fish, one
is the ordinary   of the staple foods of many households in PNG can cost as
person in PNG     much as 6 kina in Goroka. This price is inflated by the costs that
citizen who       the firms in the supply and distribution chain pass on. Without
pays.             these additional costs due to crime and security, consumer
                  products would cheaper and the overall cost of living less.
                  Ultimately, it is the ordinary person in PNG citizen who pays.
                      But it doesn’t stop there.

                  Holding our economic growth hostage

                  As these two businesses made clear, the challenges and
                  additional costs they face in dealing with crime and insecurity
                  present serious constraints to business expansion, and without
                  expansion, job creation cannot occur. Prospective new suppliers
                  also face significant barriers to market entry. As the owner of
“It’s the
                  one of the companies explained, he is grateful that he has the
smaller firms
                  capital to cover security costs. While insurance is expensive,
that are the      proportionately it is more affordable for a larger firm that has
most fragile,     already invested heavily in security infrastructure. “I started out
those getting     as a truck driver 25 years ago and built up my business from
started.”         there,” he says. “Now if I was looking to expand and diversify, I
                  couldn’t do it. It’s the smaller firms that are the most fragile,
                  those getting started. They can’t afford to carry these sorts of
                  risks.”




  12                                                                    CASE STUDY
