                                      88780
Debt Management Reform Plan (DeMPA)



            Madagascar




           February 2014
                             Abbreviations


BCP     Business Continuity Plan
BCM     Banque Centrale de Madagascar
CBM     Central Bank of Madagascar
DDP     Public Debt Directorate
DeM     Debt Management
DeMPA   Debt Management Performance Assessment
DMFAS   Debt Management and Financial Analysis System (also SYGADE)
DMS     Debt Management Strategy
DRS     Disaster Recovery Site
DSA     Debt Sustainability Analysis
HIPIC   Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
IMF     International Monetary Fund
MDRI    Multilateral Debt Relief
MGA     Malagasy Ariary
MoFB    Ministry of Finance and Budget
MoU     Memorandum of Understanding
MTDS    Medium Term Debt Management Strategy
ORM     Operational Risk Management
PFM     Public Financial Management
SLA     Service Level Agreement
SOE     State Owned Enterprise
WEO     World Economic Outlook




                                                                      2
Table of Content

Executive Summary ............................................................................................................ 4

Background ......................................................................................................................... 7

The Legal Framework ....................................................................................................... 11

Debt Management Strategy and Risk Management.......................................................... 16

Government borrowing policies ....................................................................................... 20

Operational Risk Management ......................................................................................... 28

Annex 1: Debt Management Reform Plan Logframe ....................................................... 38

Annex 2. Outline of Quarterly Debt Bulletin.................................................................... 46

Annex 3: Template for a Debt Management Strategy for [2015-2017]............................ 48

Annex 4. People met ......................................................................................................... 52




                                                                                                                                    3
                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


A World Bank mission comprising Lilia Razlog (World Bank, lead), Cigdem Aslan
(BDM, World Bank), Mike Williams, Per-Olof Jonsson (External Consultants), and
Stella N Rusine (Debt Practitioner, Rwanda), visited Antananarivo, Madagascar, during
February 11-20, 2014, to assist the authorities in developing a sequenced medium term
reform plan in the area of government debt management. The team wishes to express
appreciation to all the counterparts at the Treasury, Ministry of Finance and the Central
Bank of Madagascar, for their hospitality and engagement during the technical meetings
and workshop sessions.

The reform plan pillars outlined in this report build on the findings of the 2013 World
Bank Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) for Madagascar and the
discussions held during this mission with the central government representatives.

Recent presidential elections and envisaged inauguration of the new government
provides an enabling environment for engaging into broad economic and institutional
reforms. Improvement of the governance practices and continuation of the public
finance management reforms are among priorities stipulated in the President’s reform
agenda.

It is important to mention that during the last two years MoFB’s Treasury undertook a
number of initiatives to improve government debt management. The Public Debt
Directorate (DDP) was reorganised in 2012 and additional staff was hired during the
last calendar year. Improvement of existing legal framework was initiated by the DDP
in close cooperation with legal advisers of the Treasury. Against this background the
design of a debt management reform plan is timely. It is expected to contribute to
further improvement of debt management capacities and support reforms’
implementation.

Based on consultations with the authorities, and taking into account reforms and technical
assistance projects already underway, it was decided to focus the reform plan on four
specific issues, and to work under a medium term timeline. Thus, proposed plan focuses
mainly on specific activities in 2014 and 2015, many of which can be undertaken within
existing capacities of the DDP without substantial external support. In some areas,
however, such as operational risk management, it is recommended that external
consultants are engaged to support the establishment of risk identification and monitoring
process. It is recommended that this reform plan, once it has been finalized by MoFB’s
Treasury, is shared with the donor community.



                                                                                        4
The main areas of reforms identified include: (i) improvement of the legal framework (ii)
formulation of a debt management strategy, (iii) improvement of central government
borrowing policies and (iv) operational risk management. Main weaknesses and proposed
activities of the reform plan are summarized in the table below.


                           Weaknesses                     Proposed actions
1.Legal             - Legal framework for       - Revise draft debt management law
Framework           DeM is scattered among      (recommendations provided by the
                    several laws and is         mission team);
                    incomplete;
                                                -Consider inclusion of development
                    - No authority to issue     domestic market into list of DeM
                    loan guarantees is          objectives;
                    envisaged
                                                -Consider including concrete
                                                guidelines for DeM strategy

                                                -Add purposes, including borrowing
                                                for buybacks of debt and borrowing
                                                for monetary policy purposes, among
                                                others
2.Debt              - Risks of the existing     -Analyze government debt portfolio
management          debt portfolio is not       and associated risks
strategy            assessed
                                                -Prepare and publish a medium term
                    -No debt management         debt management strategy document
                    strategy                    covering 2015-2017

                                                -Revise the medium term debt
                                                management strategy annually
3.Borrowing         -The overall borrowing      -Identify potential external creditors
policies            planning is weak            with their respective focus on
                                                activities and expected financial
                                                terms and conditions

                                                -Produce an aggregate annual cash
                                                plan on monthly basis

                    -Limited information on     -On the basis of the overall cash plan
                    planned T-bills             prepare a quarterly auction calendar,
                    borrowing is provided
                                                starting in 2014, and make it public



                                                                                         5
                     -External loan analysis is - Undertake analysis of terms and
                     limited to concessionality conditions of planned borrowing
                     analysis
                                                beyond concessionality analysis

4.Operational risk   -No integrated              -In the short term:
management           operational risk            a)Bring the DMFAS database into
                     management framework        full operation
                                                 b)Dialogue with CBM with a view to
                     -Apparent risk exposures    preparing MoU
                     arising from:
                     a)Incomplete segregation    -In the medium term:
                     of duties                   a)Prepare procedures manuals within
                     b)DMFAS database can        the DDP
                     still not be used as        b)Appoint a risk champion
                     DDP’s primary database      c)Undertake a full risk identification
                     c)Extensive services        and assessment process
                     supplied by the CBM are     d)Establish regular risk monitoring
                     not documented in a         process and decide mitigation
                     MoU                         priorities
                     d)Lack of procedures
                     manuals in the DDP


The above activities are discussed in more detail in the report, including sound practices
in specific areas, highlights of the current situation, and description of recommended
actions. Also, a log-frame (Annex 1) outlines the specific actions, sequencing, and
expected outcomes.

The reform plan mission team is ready to provide input and feedback throughout the
reform plan implementation phase. Also, within next 12 to 16 month, the MoFB may
wish to request a follow-up reform plan mission to take stock of activities undertaken
during the year, and to provide input for further reforms.




                                                                                             6
                                                              BACKGROUND

1.      Madagascar’s economic growth remains weak and inflation contained. Since
2010, the Malagasy economy has been growing slowly; this followed negative growth in
2009 (-4.1 percent) as a result of the political crisis after which the economy slowed
down in general. In 2013, real GDP growth was estimated at 2.4 percent against 2.8 per
cent projected. This shortfall was in part because of weak performance in the mining and
agro-industry sector, but also low government spending caused by a restrictive fiscal
policy to cope with the reduction of external aid. Inflation was maintained at 6.7 percent,
thanks to prudent monetary policy.1

                                      Figure 1: Growth, Inflation and Current account balance
                   12.0
                                                                                                         Year
                   10.0                                                                  2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
                                                                                    0
                    8.0
                    6.0
                                                                                    -5
                    4.0


                                                                     in % of GDP
        % change




                    2.0                                                            -10
                    0.0
                   -2.0   2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013                       -15
                   -4.0
                                                                                   -20
                   -6.0
                                           Year                                    -25

                                Real GDP          Inflation                                      Current account balance


Source: World Economic Outlook, October 2013
2.      The current account balance has continued to record a deficit in recent
years. Exports of goods and services have remained subdued, as well as capital and
financial inflows, generating an overall deficit of 2.3 percent of GDP in 20132.

3.      The Budget implementation process during 2013 was jeopardized by lower
domestic revenue collection, reflecting the slowdown in almost every sector of the
economy. Moreover, according to authorities, budget and capital grants were lower in
2013 compared to 2012. On the other hand, expenses rose, due to additional subsidies for
petrol and compensation to pension funds arising from past indemnities despite a budget
cut by 20 percent approximately. The overall deficit was estimated at 1.6 per cent of GDP
against 0.6 per cent previously projected. This was mainly financed through issuance of
Treasury bills and advances granted by the central bank.

4.                 Central Government Debt

Having reached the HIPC completion point in October 2004 and subsequently receiving
additional debt relief (USD 1.8 billion) under the MDRI, Madagascar’s external public

1
    Source: MoFB/Budget law 2014, IMF/World Economic Outlook Database October 2013.
2
    Source: MoFB/Budget law 2014

                                                                                                                              7
debt was significantly reduced, and total public debt declined to USD 1.7 billion (23.4
percent) in 2006. By end 2013, total public debt was estimated at 26.3 per cent of GDP.3
The external debt stood at 17.7 per cent of GDP and domestic debt at 6.5 per cent.

Figure 2: Debt Stock as a share of GDP

                                           25.0                                                            27.6
    External & Domestic debt as % of GDP




                                                                                                           27.4




                                                                                                                  Total Debt as % of GDP
                                           20.0                                                            27.2

                                                                                                           27.0

                                           15.0                                                            26.8

                                                                                                           26.6

                                           10.0                                                            26.4

                                                                                                           26.2

                                            5.0                                                            26.0

                                                                                                           25.8

                                             -                                                             25.6
                                                  2009              2010    2011       2012      2013

                                                                           Year
                                                         External           Domestic          Total Debt


Source: MoFB

Foreign loans in outstanding debt account for the largest share, 73.2 per cent against 26.7
per cent for domestic debt. External borrowing slightly increased in nominal terms during
the last year, from USD 1786.2 million in 2012 to USD 1792.8 million in 2013.
Domestic debt stood at MGA 1.5 billion (approximately USD 740 million). A significant
part of the domestic debt has to be refinanced in 2014. This includes T-bills amounting to
MGA 1.13 billion issued for budget funding, and statutory advances amounting to MGA
33.4 billion to be repaid six months after the end of 2013(year in which it was disbursed).

The stock of domestic debt also includes recapitalization and other consolidated loans
held by the CBM as well as some interest arrears. Recapitalization loans held by the
CBM amounted to MGA 110.80 billion as per 2007’s convention between the CBM and
the Treasury,4 and consolidated loans amounted to MGA 227.32 billion as per 1992’s
convention.5 Both these loans were securitised and are held in the form of Titres de
Creances Negociables (TCN), which can be used by the CBM in its monetary policy
operations.

3
  This stock excludes domestic arrears, Wich include the costs of sterilization of the monetary policy, subsidies for the
purchase of petroleum products, and reimbursement of amounts paid by the central bank on VAT charges.
4
  Source:Article 4 of the Statutes of the BCM / Decree number 2007-481 of 30/05/2007/convention between the CBM
and the Treasury of 4/07/2007 concerning the use of TCN to the recapitalization of the CBM / Addendum number 1 of
the Convention 4/07/2007.
5
  Source: Article 21 to 28 of the Articles of agreement between the CBM and the Treasury concerning the modality for
reimbursement of debts from 1992’s Convention and other loans granted to the Treasury of 31/03/2004 addendum
number 1,2,3, 4 of 08/02/2006, 07/03/2007, 30/04/2007, and 22/04/2010.

                                                                                                                                           8
Figure 3: Debt Service

       External / Domestic Debt as % of Revenues   70                                                                                         $1,000
                                                                                  62.75




                                                                                                                                                        External /Domestic debt in million s of USD
                                                             59.79                                 63.64           62.39                      $900
                                                   60
                                                                                                                                              $800
                                                   50                                                                            54.53        $700
                                                                                                                                              $600
                                                   40
                                                                                                                                              $500
                                                   30
                                                                                                                                              $400

                                                   20                                                                                         $300

                                                                                                               4.14                           $200
                                                   10             5.05                             4.75
                                                                                  3.77                                             3.23       $100
                                                    -                                                                                         $-
                                                           2009            2010             2011            2012                 2013
                                                                                          Year

                                                   Domestic                                                External
                                                   External debt service as share of revenues              Domestic debt service as share of revenues

Source: MoFB

In 2013, total government debt service was USD 896.18 million; this represented
approximately 57.8 percent of total revenues, with the largest share attributed to domestic
debt repayment (54.5 percent).

5.                                                  Risk Indicators and Currency Composition, End 2013

The tables below sets out details of the currency composition and risks indicators
associated to Malagasy debt portfolio:

                                                                                                                External           Domestic          Total
    Risk Indicators6                                                                                              debt               debt             debt
    Amount (in millions of USD)                                                                                  2,028.7               740.0         2,768.8
    Nominal debt as % GDP                                                                                           17.0                 6.2            23.2
    PV as % of GDP                                                                                                         9.6              6.2        15.8
    Cost of debt                                                  Weighted Av. IR (%)                                      0.9              7.4                                2.7
                                                                  ATM (years)                                          17.0                 0.5        12.6
    Refinancing risk                                              Debt maturing in 1yr (% of total)                     2.8               100.0        28.8
                                                                  ATR (years)                                          16.9                 0.5        12.5
                                                                  Debt refixing in 1yr (% of total)                     2.9               100.0        28.9
    Interest rate risk                                            Fixed rate debt (% of total)                         99.9                24.7        79.8
    FX risk                                                       FX debt (% of total debt)                                                            73.3




6
 Risk indicators include: Present Value( PV), Interest Rate( IR), Average Time to Maturity( ATM),
Average Time to Re-fixing( ATR). and Foreign Exchange denominated debt (FX)

                                                                                                                                                                                                      9
Figure 4: Currency Composition Debt Outstanding                                                        Figure 5: Decomposition of SDR - End December
and Disbursed DOD - End December 2013                                                                  2013
                             0%           0%               1%
                                                   0%
                                  2%                      3%
                                                                                         1%                                                            0%
                                                                                                                                                            0%
                                                                                                                                   5%
                                                                         15%                                           2%                         6%
                      27%                                                                                                                                                 22%


                                                                                                                     27%


                                                                                                                                                                          37%
                                                                 51%

                                                                                                                            1%



       SAR                    EUR                 USD            KWD              SDR                           SAR                EUR             USD                    KWD     MGA
       MGA                    CNY                 JPY            GBP              AED                           CNY                JPY             GBP                    AED




Figure 6: Redemption profile Existing debt
                        1,800
                        1,600
                        1,400
    Millions of MGA




                        1,200
                        1,000
                            800
                            600
                            400
                            200
                              0
                                   2014
                                           2016
                                                   2018
                                                          2020
                                                                  2022
                                                                          2024
                                                                                 2026
                                                                                         2028
                                                                                                2030
                                                                                                       2032
                                                                                                              2034
                                                                                                                     2036
                                                                                                                            2038
                                                                                                                                    2040
                                                                                                                                           2042
                                                                                                                                                  2044
                                                                                                                                                            2046
                                                                                                                                                                   2048
                                                                                                                                                                           2050



                                                                                        Year
                                                           Total External                                        Total Domestic




External loans in the Malagasy debt portfolio constituted 17 per cent of GDP by Dec 31st,
2013. The estimated average time to maturity is 17 years, and only 2.9 percent of external
loans are being re-fixed in one year. This reflects a large proportion of highly concessional
external loans. The criterion for considering concessional financing has been a minimum
requirement of grant element of 35.0 per cent or more, before contracting new external loans.

At the same time, indicators show a high exposure of the debt portfolio to exchange rate
risks. Should there be a significant depreciation in the Malagasy Ariary, this would have an
adverse impact on servicing the debt denominated in foreign currency.
Total domestic debt is almost entirely in treasury bills with a very short maturity. Average
time to maturity is at 0.5 years, and 24.7 percent is at fixed rate. This poses a high risk in
terms of refinancing (rollover of the Treasury bills each two weeks) and interest rate risk.

In terms of currency composition, the SDR has the largest portfolio share, 51 percent as of
2013. The decomposition of the SDR reveals a high exposure of the external debt service to
fluctuations in the US dollar (37 percent). Madagascar’s major external creditors are
International Development Association (IDA) and the African Development Bank (AfDB).

The last DSA, which was undertaken in June 2008 by the IMF, suggested Madagascar’s risk
of debt distress as low although vulnerable to a shock on export growth given the country
concentration of exports in textiles and mining products. The IMF plans to conduct a joint
DSA with the World Bank in spring 2014.


                                 THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

Sound Practice

6.     The legal framework for government debt management (DeM) comprises both
primary legislation (laws enacted with approval of the Parliament) and secondary or
delegated legislation (executive orders, decrees, ordinances etc.) determined by the Council
of Ministers or individual Ministers.

7.      The primary legislation should include a clear authorization by the Parliament to the
executive branch of government (to the Council of Ministers or directly to the Minister of
Finance) to approve borrowings and loan guarantees on behalf of the central government. In
the secondary legislation the Council of Ministers or the Minister of Finance could delegate
the mandate further. Thus, the legal framework should clearly set out the authority to borrow
(in both domestic and foreign markets) and issue loan guarantees. It is important that the line
of delegation is clear, both for internal control and for due diligence purposes. All creditors
and lenders require a legally binding and enforceable contract with the central government in
its capacity of the borrower. The primary legislation on delegation is normally found either in
the general Public Finance Act or in a dedicated debt law.

8.      The primary legislation should also include specified purposes for which the
executive can borrow. Purposes may include, for example, financing budget and cash
balance deficits; refinance and pre-finance outstanding debt; finance investment projects
approved by the Parliament; finance honoring of outstanding guarantees; fulfill requirements
by the central bank to replenish foreign currency reserves; and fulfill requirements by the
central bank to issue government securities to support monetary policy objectives. The main
reason to include borrowing purposes in the primary legislation is to safeguard against


                                                                                            11
borrowing for speculative investments and borrowing to finance expenditures that have not
been included in the annual budget or approved by the parliament or congress in another
way.

9.      Furthermore, the primary legislation should contain clear DeM objectives and
requirements to develop a DeM strategy and report back to the Parliament on DeM activities,
with an evaluation of outcomes against stated objectives and the determined strategy.
Common DeM objectives found in modern legislation include meeting the funding needs of
the central government, minimizing the cost of debt from a medium-term or long-term
perspective, keeping the risks in the debt portfolio at acceptable levels, and promoting the
development of the domestic debt market. Once the DeM objectives are set, they must be
translated into an operational strategy that sets out the medium-term framework for how the
government will achieve its DeM objectives. Reporting to the parliament or congress
increases transparency and strengthens accountability. It is also common to include a
requirement to conduct a risk assessment before issuing loan guarantees or conduct on-
lending. Based on the risk assessment a risk premium could be levied upon the beneficiary of
the loan guarantee or the on-lending.

Current Situation

10.    The legal framework for central government DeM consists of the Constitution, the
Organic Budget Law, the annual budget laws and the decree on the functions and
organization of the Ministry of Finance and Budget. A debt management law is currently
being prepared within the Treasury of the MoFB.

11.     The Organic Budget Law clarifies that all borrowing must be authorized by the
Parliament in the annual Budget Laws and undertaken on behalf of the State by the
Minister of Finance and Budget. The Constitution further clarifies that the President must
ratify loan agreements that are considered a treaty, i.e. loan agreements with
international organizations and other sovereigns, after approval by the Parliament.

12.     In the annual Budget Laws, the Parliament authorizes the government to borrow
domestically for deficit financing and externally for the government investment program, up
to certain indicative amounts. The external financing consists mainly of disbursements of
already contracted borrowing but also of disbursements of expected new borrowings. The
annual Budget Law also contains a firm limit on the amount of new external debt to be
contracted during the year. This amount is calculated as the average borrowing during the
last couple of years plus 80 percent.

13.    The Minister of Finance and Budget has further delegated to the Director General of
the Treasury authority to borrow domestically for deficit financing. Thus, the authority to
borrow is clearly delegated to the Minister of Finance and Budget in the primary legislation

                                                                                         12
and he has further delegated the authority to borrow domestically to the Treasury. However,
the legal framework provides no authority to issue loan guarantees, which is an instrument
that has been used although not very frequently.

Issues and Recommendations

14.    The Treasury has initiated a process of establishing a comprehensive debt
management legislation. The process has been led by the DDP and the Treasury legal
advisor. The mission was given the opportunity to review the draft legislation.

15.    The draft legislation includes provisions for:

Definitions
        A set of definitions, including also that debt includes both direct debt and guarantees,
is part of the draft legislation

Objectives
      Objectives of debt management including that the financial needs of the government
agencies are guaranteed, that the costs of debt are minimized; and that borrowings have a
reasonable level of risk

DMS and Debt Committee
       Establishment of a Technical Debt Committee whose main role is the development
and periodic review of the National Strategy for Debt
       The Debt Strategy is a general document updated every three years and it is
complemented with an annual framework letter to be included in the Budget containing more
precise guidelines
       The National Strategy is subject to the approval of the President of the Republic in
the Council of Ministers for its adoption and diffusion
       The Ministry of Finance is responsible for the implementation of the National
Strategy for the public debt

Central Bank
       The Central Bank is the main financial agent of the Central Government for its cash
transactions, banking and credit

Authority
      The Ministry of Finance is the sole authority to assess the funding offers for the
Central Government, taking into account the terms and financial conditions offered




                                                                                              13
       The Central Government may enter into domestic debt in order to replenish the state
treasury for the payment of expenditures in the general budget and to finance investment
programs
       The issuance of new stocks and bonds by the Treasury should be by way of decree of
the Council of Ministers
       The implementation of domestic debt operations of the Central Government belongs
exclusively to the Treasury
       Only the state can issue guarantees. The Minister of Finance is the only authorized for
this purpose
       The Minister of Finance may issue guarantees in favor of a public body or a company
where the state holds shares
       Any proposed issuance of a guarantee of the State must be subject to a preliminary
analysis of the Treasury. The Treasury Department will evaluate the risks to the guarantees
of the public debt in order to predict the cost of debt service to be included in project finance
laws
       Following a favorable opinion of the technical team, the loan guarantee shall be
adopted by the Council of Ministers before it is signed by the Minister of Finance.

Reporting
      The Minister of Finance shall prepare an annual report to the Government, the
National Assembly and the Senate on the management and the situation of the domestic and
external public debt
      Copies of these reports shall be forwarded to the Court of Auditors. The report can be
shared with stakeholders and the public debt may be widely disseminated

Audit
      Audits and / or external controls can be made to provide a comprehensive account on
the management of public debt. An audit and / or external audit will be carried out following
an order from the President of the Republic, an order from the Prime Minister, a request from
Parliament or a request from Technical and Financial Partners.

16.     The mission welcomes the initiative to establish a comprehensive debt management
law. The mission has the following comments in order to further improve the legislation and
to align it with international sound practice, meeting the government´s requirements now and
in the coming years.

17.     The delegation to the Minister of Finance and Budget for borrowing (external as well
as domestic) and issuing loan guarantees could be drafted in a more unified way, including
the sole authority to sign these contracts and delegate the authority further. The mission also
notes that approval is required from the Council of Ministers regarding domestic borrowing
and issuing of loan guarantees. The mission assumes that this approval relates to the overall
T-bills borrowing plan and not the individual borrowing transactions, which should be

                                                                                              14
clarified. According to the proposal the Council of Ministers should approve the debt
management strategy, but the authorities were considering whether the Minister could
approve the debt management strategy himself. The mission has not studied the procedures
for government decision-making in detail and therefore urges the Treasury to ensure that the
proposed level of the decision-making is in line with government normal procedures. The
mission also urges the Treasury to ensure that the proposed draft legislation is not
inconsistent with other existing legislation.

18.      The borrowing purposes should refer to both domestic and external borrowing and
include also borrowing for redemptions and buying back outstanding debt in advance,
borrowing for honoring of outstanding guarantees, as well as borrowing for monetary
purposes on instruction by the CBM. The latter might become necessary e.g. in order to
sterilize fund inflows should the government succeed to mobilize more resources from
foreign donors.7 The possibility of providing for borrowing for entering into derivative
contracts should also be considered. Such operations are currently not conducted or planned
to be conducted; but in the future situations could arise where it would be advantageous to
undertake such operations in order to manage the risks of the debt, should sufficient capacity
exist

19.      The objectives of debt management may include developing the domestic market,
which is an objective (in some cases a secondary objective) found in many countries´ debt
management legislation. The risk assessment before issuing loan guarantees may be extended
to cover also on-lending operations since the credit risk that might arise in principle is the
same and there should be provisions making it possible for the Minister of Finance and
Budget to levy a risk premium on the beneficiary of the loan guarantee or the on-lending
based on the risk assessment. The DMS should include concrete guidelines for the operations
under a medium term time horizon but the document should be updated annually and made
public. In the definitions of debt guarantees should not be included. Guarantees are not
liabilities but contingent liabilities. As well as reporting to Parliament, the DDP should
develop a strategy for reporting more generally, to the financial markets and the wider
public. A quarterly statistical bulletin is likely to be an important element of this strategy.
Annex 2 discusses the options and makes a number of suggestions for the development of a
quarterly bulletin (the coverage of which could also be used as guidance for reporting to
Parliament).

20.     Removal of some of the proposed provisions to secondary legislation (whether issued
by the Council of Ministers or the Minister directly) should be considered in order to add
flexibility, since secondary legislation is easier to adapt to changing circumstances than
primary legislation, and to ensure an appropriate level of the decision-making. For instance
the establishment of the Debt Management Committee and the appointment of body to
undertake domestic borrowing and risk analysis could be subject to such secondary
legislation.



7
  Additional issuance of T-bills, with the extra proceeds sterilised in the central bank, avoids the risk of market
fragmentation that arises if the central bank issues its own bills alongside T-bills.

                                                                                                                 15
   21.     Omission of the references to the CBM and external audit should also be considered
   further, since the clauses as far as the mission understands do not add anything to the existing
   legislation. The references to bank accounts in the CBM and the MoFB sole ownership of the
   debt management system could also preferably be omitted from the proposed debt
   management legislation.

   22.   The following actions are proposed as part of the process of establishing a debt
   management law:

   In the short term:

 i.       DDP internal review of comments provided by the mission on the draft Debt Law
ii.       DDP consult with legal advisors in the Office of the Secretary General of the
    Government
iii.      Review of the draft within the MoFB
iv.       Submission to PM’s Cabinet for approval
 v.       Submission to Council of Ministers for approval
vi.       Submission to Parliament for approval




                    DEBT MANAGEMENT STRATEGY AND RISK MANAGEMENT

   Sound Practice

   23.     A well-designed medium term debt management strategy (DMS) is based on the debt
   management objectives and set within the context of the government’s fiscal and monetary
   policies. It is a plan that the government intends to implement over the medium term in order
   to achieve a desired composition of the government debt portfolio. The strategy reflects the
   government’s preferences with respect to the cost and risk trade-offs and provides clear
   direction for borrowing choices. This can be formulated as targets regarding the composition
   and the risk exposure of the government debt portfolio.

   24.     The design of the DMS involves the evaluation of the risks embedded in the debt
   portfolio. Additionally, debt managers conduct scenario analyses with future borrowing paths
   to quantify the potential costs and risks of the debt portfolio, subject to the macroeconomic
   environment and market conditions. This exercise requires the use of an analytical tool.

   25.    Where countries are severely constrained in their borrowing choices, that is with few
   funding sources from abroad and/or a shallow domestic market, a sound DMS can be
   developed without the use of an analytical tool. However, the use of scenario analysis always
   provides useful information, enabling the debt managers to quantify the potential risks to the
   budget of alternative debt management strategies.


                                                                                                16
26.     It is good practice for the debt management strategy to be formally approved at the
political level (Cabinet, Council of Ministers or the Minister of Finance), and to be a publicly
available document. It can often conveniently be annexed to the yearly budget law, although
some countries publish it as a stand-alone document. Publication helps to promote
accountability and transparency, enhances the visibility and hence the credibility of debt
management policy.

27.     Many countries review the DMS on an annual basis. This helps to evaluate the results
of the strategy implementation, to facilitate updating the analysis with the latest revisions of
the macroeconomic framework and market developments, and to fine-tune the financing
targets based on cost/risk preferences and the overall debt management objectives.

Current Situation

28.     As a result of the protracted political crisis, funding sources have been limited since
2008 (with on average only 2 external loans being signed annually according to the
authorities) and the DDP has had little room for maneuver in terms of borrowing. The
implicit debt management strategy has been, for many years, to maximize concessional
financing from external sources to fund investment projects and to issue T-bills of up to one
year for budget financing purposes (although recently the MoFB has also borrowed from the
CBM). This strategy generates a debt portfolio which is exposed to currency fluctuations
reflecting the high share of external debt; domestic debt on the other hand is exposed to both
interest rate and refinancing risk due to short maturity of the securities.

29.     No annual borrowing plan for external or domestic debt has been prepared over the
last few years, which is partly a reflection of the crisis resulting in difficulties to forecast
external flows. This, in turn, has contributed to weaknesses in cash flow forecasting in the
domestic debt side.

30.     Medium term macroeconomic forecasts have yet to be prepared, with officials
waiting for the establishment of the new government. This makes it impossible to estimate
the medium term borrowing requirement which the DDP will have to finance. In addition, it
is not clear which creditors will be willing to lend to Madagascar. However, although
financing choices will continue to be limited, with its economic performance expected to
improve, Madagascar expects to have access to more funding sources including some
bilateral and commercial lenders with various term and conditions.

31.    Consequently, the DDP wishes to undertake a strategy analysis which would take into
account the increasing financing choices and provide a basis for future borrowing decisions.
Director of the DDP has already identified the key staff members from the Middle Office
who will be responsible for coordinating and leading this process. The plan is to use the


                                                                                             17
Medium Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) analytical tool8 and prepare the first ever
debt management strategy, covering the period of 2015-2017. To this end, WB conducted a
workshop on the methodology of the MTDS tool using Malagasy debt data following the
reform plan mission to train the relevant staff in its use.

Issues and Recommendations

32.     The DDP has to coordinate among all related entities (DG Budget, BCM) the DMS
analysis, ensuring that the input is realistic and taking into account macroeconomic policies
and market conditions. This process could be conducted through the technical committee if
the approved debt law institutes such a structure as is currently planned. In any case, a
working team led by the middle office staff (3 staff) within the DDP should be responsible
for this effort in consultation with technical staff from relevant units (such as CBM and DG
Budget). This team can undertake the drafting of the strategy document once the preferred
strategy is selected.

33.     As a pre-requisite to conduct DMS analysis, the debt database has to be accurate and
complete, and updated on a timely basis. It is also important that appropriate and dedicated
staff have been identified to conduct the cost and risk analysis. The preparatory work ahead
of the DMS analysis should then be centered on training and capacity building of not only
these key staff but also the broader contributors to the process, such as staff from the CBM
and DG Budget.

34.      Given the lack of information on the macroeconomic framework and funding sources,
it is unlikely for the DDP to be in a position to undertake a thorough forward looking DMS
analysis until the new government is fully established. Initially, however, it would be
sufficient to prepare a directional debt management strategy document and, after approval by
the Executive body (CoM or Minister of Finance as required), publish it. This document
would express the strategy as guidelines to indicate the direction in which certain key
indicators (see Box 1) are expected to evolve (for example, a statement that “the amount of
local currency debt maturing within 12 months shall be reduced’)9. The document should i)
identify the vulnerabilities of the existing debt portfolio, ii) present the potential funding
sources available to Madagascar, iii) discuss briefly the macroeconomic context (fiscal and
monetary policies) and iv) express the government’s desired portfolio with soft strategic
targets (i.e. indicating the direction of change, rather than quantitative targets, e.g. “extend
the maturity of domestic debt”, see Annex 3).

35.    The DMS document should be updated every year on a rolling basis (even if there are
no big changes) to sustain and improve the level of expertise of key staff, to ensure regular

8
    Developed jointly by the WB and the IMF.
9
    DeMPA Tool, Indicator DPI-3, WB, 2009

                                                                                             18
monitoring of the debt portfolio costs and risks and to review the implementation of the
borrowing transactions against the strategy. The authorities can start undertaking a more
detailed debt management strategy analysis for 2016-2018 and update the document
accordingly.

                                        Box 1: Risk measures

The following are some useful portfolio statistics that capture directly the inherent exposure of the
debt portfolio to such risks as interest and exchange rate changes or the refinancing risk.

Interest rate risk
Interest rate risk refers to the vulnerability of the debt portfolio, and the cost of government debt, to
higher market interest rates at the point at which the interest rate on variable rate debt and fixed rate
debt that is maturing is being re-priced. The following indicators provide measures of the exposure to
this risk:
-        Amount of the debt stock refixing the interest rate in a particular period
-        Share of debt in the debt portfolio refixing the interest rate in a particular period
-        Average time to refixing of the debt portfolio. This indicator is a measure of the weighted
average time until all principal payments in the debt portfolio become subject to a new interest rate.

Refinancing (roll-over) risk
Refinancing risk captures the exposure of the debt portfolio to unusually higher interest rates at the
point at which debt is being refinanced; in the extreme, when this risk is too high debt managers are
unable to roll over maturing obligations. The following indicators provide measures of the exposure
to this risk:
-         Redemption profile of the outstanding debt.
-         Proportion of the debt stock falling due within a particular period.
-         Ratio of debt falling due to tax revenues
-         Average time to maturity. This indicator measures the weighted average time to maturity of
all the principal payments in the debt portfolio. ATM shows how long it takes on average to rollover
the debt portfolio.

Foreign exchange rate risk
FX risk relates to the vulnerability of the debt portfolio, and the government’s debt cost, to a
depreciation/devaluation in the external value of the domestic currency. The following indicators
provide a measure to the exposure to this risk:
-       Ratio of foreign currency debt to total debt
-       Mismatch in the level of foreign currency liabilities in relation to foreign currency reserves
-       Mismatch in the composition of foreign currency liabilities in relation to foreign currency
reserves
Source: “Developing a Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) Guidance Note for Country Authorities”,
WB/IMF, 2009.




                                                                                                      19
   36.    The strategy documents should include a summary of the debt management
   performance along with a short evaluation of the costs and risks relating to the targets or
   other objectives set the previous year.

   37.    In summary, the following actions are recommended:

   In the short term:

 i.           Conduct a simple MTDS analysis for 2015-2017 and identify the strategy to be
     proposed for approval. This should be led by DDP in coordination with relevant technical
     staff from other units
 ii.          Draft the strategy document by DDP
iii.          Circulate draft for formal opinion to MoFB General Directorates and the CBM
iv.           Present/submit strategy to the Secretary General and the Finance Minister
 v.           DMS approved by the Executive body (Minister and Council of Ministers as
     required)
vi.           Publication of the first DMS

   In the medium term:

 i.         In the course of 2015, revise the medium term debt management strategy, so that it
    applies to the period 2016-2018, and contains more detailed analysis. This activity should be
    renewed on a yearly basis.
ii.         Train on an on-going basis the technical staff on the DMS design methodology



                              GOVERNMENT BORROWING POLICIES

   Sound practice

   38.         The government’s borrowing operations, both external and domestic, should be
   planned carefully and be based on the guidelines in the DMS, e.g. composition
   external/domestic, currency composition of external borrowing, fixed/floating composition,
   maturity and interest rate fixing targets. The borrowing operations should be incorporated
   into an overall annual cash plan on monthly basis with forecast total revenues and
   expenditures, borrowing operations and resulting net cash flows and hence cash balances.
   The cash plan should be prepared before the beginning of the year and be updated regularly,
   at least on a monthly basis.

   39.    External borrowing should be included in the cash plan according to the expected
   disbursements of both already contracted loans and planned new loans. All external planned

                                                                                              20
borrowing during the year, whether planned to be disbursed or not, should be quantified and
potential creditors identified with their focus of lending and expected terms and conditions.
The list of potential creditors should not only include current active creditors but also
creditors that potentially could provide credits, whether or not they were previously active
creditors to the government. This requires identification of all creditors active in the region.
The potential external creditors’ expected terms and conditions should be systematically
analyzed in terms of cost and risk and the analysis be regularly updated.

40.     All domestic borrowing should be included in the aggregate cash plan, including
securities, loans, retail borrowing and eventual borrowing from the Central Bank. The
composition of the planned borrowing should reflect cost and risk considerations, but could
also be a based on the objective of developing the domestic securities market, since having
access to a well-functioning domestic securities market provides the government with a
stable and secure financing source, as well as bringing wider benefits to the economy..

41.     The aggregate borrowing and its overall composition should be made public, in the
Budget document or in another document. The most common technique by governments to
sell domestic securities is by way of auction. In such cases the planned borrowing in the
securities market should be made public through an auction calendar where the instruments,
dates for issuance and volumes are presented on an indicative basis. Firm amounts of the
instruments to issue should be presented to the public in advance of the auction and generally
follow the previously announced indicative amounts. The issued amounts should normally
closely follow the auctioned amounts, but the government should keep the right not to accept
all bids even though the planned volumes would then not be issued. This right should be used
very cautiously and sparingly.

42.    All procedures should be documented. This includes overall borrowing procedures in
the domestic market that should be made publicly available as well as internal procedures on
how to process the domestic and external borrowings. Legal advisers should be available for
advising on both domestic and external contracts.

Current situation

43.     As mentioned above, the Budget contains indicative amounts of aggregate domestic
(net) and external borrowing (gross and net) to be disbursed during the year. The Budget also
contains a limit on the amount of contracted new external debt. The domestic borrowing is
supposed to be guided by a quarterly auction plan but no such plan has existed in practice.
The DDP internally produces a plan for T-bill issuance for the coming month. However, at
weekly Liquidity Committee meetings between the MoFB and the CBM the only background
information on T-bills provided is the maturing amount. The Treasury normally proposes an



                                                                                             21
extra issuance volume on top of the maturing amount for deficit financing purposes. The
final decision on the amounts to issue is taken by the Director General of Treasury.

44.     Cash flow forecasting within the Treasury is conducted in several steps by different
units. The Research directorate breaks down the Budget numbers for revenues and
expenditures on a quarterly basis for the year. The breakdown is based on contacts with the
tax authorities and the Budget directorate. The DDP further breaks down the quarterly
estimates on a monthly basis adding domestic financing items consisting of letters of credits
(CBM credits to the government whereby it discounts some importers’ future payments of
customs revenue to government), T-bills on a net basis and statutory advances. Repayments
of statutory advances are not included. The table ends with the estimated cash balances.
External debt disbursements are not included and nor are the capital expenditures these
disbursements finance. Based on the monthly cash flow estimates by the DDP the
Accounting directorate, also in the Treasury, produces a breakdown of the numbers on a
daily basis for the coming month.

45.     External debt is contracted by the Government for investment purposes. Thus, such
borrowing may arise based on the following processes: (i) the line ministry has identified a
creditor which intends to fund a specific project, (ii) no creditor is identified for financing an
investment project, in which case the DDP is responsible for contacting potential creditors, or
(iii) the donors propose to the authorities projects that they are willing to fund.

46.    For each negotiation of an external loan, a formal decision, including the
composition of the negotiation team, is approved by the MoFB. The delegation often
includes representatives of the relevant line ministry and DDP. No legal advisors, however,
take part in the negotiations or are consulted on the draft agreement.

47.     The DDP assesses the loan proposals based on concessionality analysis. Most of the
loans have a fixed interest rate. The government requires a concessionality element of 35
percent. The degree of concessionality is calculated using the tool available on the IMF
website. The DDP also considers the most appropriate repayment dates. When the loan
agreement has been signed it is entered into a DDP Excel application, and also into the
DMFAS (for bilateral loans). The DDP also submits a summary loan declaration form and a
copy of the loan contract to the CBM for entering into an Access application developed in-
house by CBM. Disbursement requests are submitted to the creditors by the DDP and the
debt recording systems are updated based on creditor disbursement advices. The procedures
are not documented.

48.   In the domestic market, auctions of T-bills with four maturities (4, 12, 24 and 52
weeks) are conducted every second week on Wednesdays. A formal announcement in the
newspapers is made on the Monday (the banks are contacted 2 working days before the
announcement) and settlement is on the Friday. Everybody can participate in the auctions but

                                                                                               22
the banks provide almost all bids, both for their own purposes and on behalf of their clients.
Sealed envelopes with the bids, in form of interest rates, are presented to the CBM. Bids can
also be submitted by fax. The bids are entered into an auction application and ranked using
the multiple price auction technique. The list, without the bidders´ identities, is submitted to
the Treasury (one of its staff is participating at the auctions) and the Director General decides
on the winning bids. The winners are informed and the aggregate result is presented on the
CBM website the same day. Settlement is carried out on Friday, when the CBM debits the
bank accounts of the successful bidders and credits the bank account of the Treasury. At the
settlement date the successful bidders also have to pay a tax of 20 percent of the interest that
will accrue over the life of the T-bill. It is possible to deduct this tax payment later from the
corporate tax. Confirmation is sent to the registry system that payment has been made and the
securities accounts of the successful bidders are credited. Trading in the secondary market is
very infrequent, but settlement is carried out in a similar way with the exception that
information on the trades is transmitted via the RTGS.

49.     There is a procedures manual available on the CBM website concerning the issuance
of T-bills. The manual is from 2006 (there is a similar manual on the MoFB website dated
2008) and does not always reflect the current procedures. For instance, the manual states that
a quarterly auction plan should be issued and that a primary dealer system should be in place.
This is not the case in practice.

50.     The government can also borrow through advances provided by the CBM up to 15
percent of previous year´s ordinary revenues to be paid back within six months after the end
of the fiscal year. . Until recently this facility had not been actively used since 2009.
However, at the end of 2013, as a result of substantial cash shortages the MoFB had to draw
on the advances for execution of payments during the last couple of months of the year. In
addition to the advances strictly limited by the legislation the government has also
accumulated debts with the CBM for several reasons, including recapitalization of the bank.
This debt is not always serviced fully or on time. Currently the CBM is also providing credits
to the government whereby it discounts some importers’ future payments of customs revenue
to government (letters of credit).

Issues and recommendations

51.      All potential external creditors should be identified, with their respective focus on
activities and expected financial terms and conditions. The DDP should actively approach the
creditors offering the best terms and conditions within the government core development
areas. A mobilization plan for external borrowing for the year should be developed after
initial contacts with the creditors.




                                                                                              23
52.     The terms and conditions of the loans should be subject to a financial analysis that
goes beyond only concessionality analysis. The focus should be to get the lowest possible
borrowing costs within the guidelines of the DMS in terms of currency and fixed/floating
composition. For commercially viable projects, the total return of the projects, including
financing costs, should be calculated. For these projects the debt manager should analyze the
yield or net present value (NPV) for the total project including the financing. The rationale is
that the government should seek to do as profitable investments as possible. A project with
high direct return can service also a relatively costly financing source. Thus, the standard
techniques for investment evaluation, including the expected revenues and costs for the
investment as well as the financing costs, should be applied by debt managers and project
managers together in a coordinated analysis.

53.      Several of the commercially viable projects are sometimes implemented through loan
guarantee or on-lending arrangements. Loan guarantees and on-lending could imply credit
risk if the beneficiary is outside the central government. The credit risk should therefore be
assessed10 and possibly form the basis for a credit risk fee levied upon the beneficiary.

54.     The overall borrowing planning needs to be strengthened. An aggregate annual cash
plan on a monthly basis with expected revenues, expenditures, domestic and external
borrowing as well as cash flows and balances should be produced by the Treasury as a tool
for planning the borrowing and the budget execution. Compared with the existing cash plan,
the T-bills should be on gross basis and per maturity, thereby providing a better basis for the
auction calendar, see below. The external debt disbursements and the associated capital
expenditures should also be included. Redemptions of statutory advances should be included.
Ideally, the outstanding debt stocks and the CBM credit limit should also be incorporated
into the cash plan.

55.    In the domestic market an auction plan for T-bills for at least a quarter ahead and
based on the aggregate cash plan should be made public. The announcements and the issued
volumes should stay close to the indicative amounts (which may be in the form of ranges)
and only be changed if there are substantial unanticipated changes in cash flows. The auction
plan should be complemented with other forms of more active communication with the
market participants in order to provide feedback and avoid market uncertainty, which
ultimately will harm the government.

56.     The mission has analyzed the 26 auctions of 52 weeks T-bills during 2013. This
instrument constituted around 55 percent of the total auctioned amount. In the beginning of
2013 the interest rates were falling gradually, see figure 1. The interest rate spreads
(difference between highest and lowest interest rate) for the successful bids were also low
and stable.
10
     This is a requirement in the proposed Debt Law

                                                                                             24
  Figure 6: Average interest rate and interest rate spread of successful bids in auctions of 52
                              weeks T-bills during 2013. Percent




Source: DDP

57.     However, at the end of May the trend of falling interest rates reversed and the spreads
in the auctions increased to more than 2 percentage points. This led to a change in the
borrowing policy also, see figure 2. Before the sudden interest rate increase the issued
amount closely followed the announced amount, but after the rate increased. The authorities
responded by taking a more flexible attitude to the announced amounts. Initially the issued
amount was substantially lower than the announced amount. For the rest of the year the
issued amounts were often substantially larger than the announced amount. The differences
between announced and issued amount for 52 weeks T-bills were to a certain extent
moderated by corresponding changes in issued amounts for the other maturities, making the
overall volatility in the issuance less than for the 52 weeks T-bills. However, the policy did
not succeed in calming investors. The interest rates continued to increase and the spreads
remained high during the remainder of the year indicating a less efficient primary market,
where investors were buying the same securities at the same time to very different prices.

58.    More information to the market, including an auction calendar, would probably to
some extent reduce the uncertainties faced by market participants and make them more
capable of assessing the market clearing prices in the auctions. This would reduce their risk
and probably reduce the interest rate required in the auctions.

59.     Governments all over the world have found that domestic borrowing primarily should
be conducted in the form of marketable securities. A security as opposed to a loan can easily
be traded. The trading feature reduces the liquidity risk of the investor and will therefore
reduce the interest rate required. In order to provide this desired reduction in liquidity risk the
securities should not only be possible to trade; they should also be actively traded in practice.
This is not the case in Madagascar. Secondary trading is negligible.


                                                                                                  25
     Figure 2: Announced issuance volume and issued amount during 2013, MGA billion




Source: DDP

60.    Developing the secondary market is an important and difficult task. Reforms need to
be undertaken in several areas but are likely to include the following steps and measures:

       The information before the auctions could be improved as discussed above
       The different maturities falling due the same day can be designed to be fungible, i.e.
they are legally the same loan being issued at different times. By making the T-bills fungible
it would be possible to re-open the outstanding volumes in each T-bill, thus creating larger
issues which would be more easily traded.
       Non-resident investors could be actively promoted (as far as the mission understands
foreigners are not restricted from buying government securities, but they are not active in the
market)
       A primary dealer system could be implemented, where the PDs have the exclusive
right to participate in the auctions but with the obligation to be active in both the primary and
the secondary market
       A market place could be implemented by the PDs showing indicative prices on
dedicated Reuters pages.

61.    However, these measures alone will not have much of an impact on the secondary
market trading unless the tax regulations are changed. Experience from all over the world
shows that it is very difficult to levy taxes on securities transactions without significant
negative effects on trading. In this case, moreover, the tax is constructed in a way that makes
these effects larger than necessary. For companies making profits the tax, since it is
deductible from corporate tax, is more of a tax payment in advance than a real burden. But

                                                                                              26
   since profitability always is uncertain it will not be clear for anyone whether a tax liability
   will occur from which that paid on the securities is deductible. For other companies and for
   individuals it will be obvious that the tax is a real tax since it will not be possible to deduct it
   from any profits. These uncertainties will effectively make it very difficult to arrive at prices
   on the secondary market and hinder the development of a well-functioning domestic
   securities market.

   62.     It is recommended that the issues raised above concerning the functioning of the
   secondary market should be further analyzed within a comprehensive reform program for the
   securities market development.

   63.     The borrowing procedures presented on the CBM and MoFB website should be
   uniform and updated to reflect existing current procedures. Internal procedures manuals
   should be developed within the DDP for both domestic and external borrowing. Legal
   advisors should be invited to review the proposed loan proposals and other contracts entered
   into by the DDP and the Treasury.

   64.     The following actions are proposed:

           In the short term:

 i.       External creditors to be identified with their respective focus on activities and
   expected financial terms and conditions

ii.       Prepare annual resource mobilization plan for external borrowing for 2015 (as part of
   the budget process)

iii.       Training the staff on how to conduct basic financial analysis of cost effectiveness of
    loan

           In the medium term:

 i.         Develop the in-house methodology to undertake financial analysis
ii.         Expand the current borrowing plan for 2014 with T-bills on a gross basis and
    maturing domestic instruments
iii.        Based on the borrowing plan, develop an auction calendar for T-bills on a quarterly
    basis and make it public and present it actively to the market participants
iv.         Develop an aggregate and comprehensive annual borrowing plan for external and
    domestic borrowing for 2015 (as part of the Budget preparation process)
 v.         Update the borrowing procedures for T-Bills presented on the CBM and MoFB
    websites



                                                                                                    27
vi.          Legal advisors review the loan proposals and other contracts entered into by DDP and
      the Treasury


                                         OPERATIONAL RISK MANAGEMENT

      Sound practice

      65.      Government debt management operations involve the processing and recording of
      all borrowing and debt-related transactions and maintenance of systems and procedures
      required for effective and secure debt administration. These processes and operations expose
      the government to risk, with consequences that may be financial, reputational or political.
      This operational risk11 can arise from a range of sources, internal and external to the debt
      management function; they include human error, failure of IT systems, a lack of suitably
      trained staff, poorly designed procedures, staff inertia, greed or fraud, badly performing
      suppliers and a failure to plan adequately to respond to business continuity events.

      66.       The consequences of poor risk management can be various. They include failure to
      pay creditors on time; paying an incorrect amount; not observing laws or regulations; or
      failing to borrow enough or borrowing at an unnecessarily high cost. Even if the financial
      consequences are modest, the reputational impact can impose lasting damage on the
      economy, not least through the impact on credit ratings.

      67.        Sound practice in the management of operational risk requires:

      a.     An appropriate risk management environment, which is a responsibility of senior
      management

      b.      A framework for management of risks: their identification, assessment, and
      monitoring; and a process for prioritising action for their mitigation and/or control

      c.      Recognition by all staff, and their line managers, of their responsibilities for the
      management of the risks in their area; and the continuous nature of risk monitoring and
      assurance processes.

      68.      An effective operational risk management (ORM) framework requires a function
      within the debt management unit that is independent of day-to-day decision making, that has
      direct access to senior managers, and that is able to develop a consistent approach to risk in
      the different policy areas, as described more fully below. This function might combine an
      advisory role with its analytical and monitoring role. The advisory role includes helping

      11
          Operational risk is usually defined as “the risk of loss (financial or nonfinancial) resulting from inadequate or
      failed internal processes, people and systems, or from external events that impact a company’s ability to operate
      its on-going business processes.” (Basel II)

                                                                                                                        28
managers at different levels to identify the risk in their areas, to analyze processes and
institute necessary controls. These controls should be based on best financial sector practice,
including:

a. Policy and operational control of transactions and projects.

b. A separation between operational and processing areas (i.e. between front and back
   office).

c. Documentation of processes; which should include relevant controls

d. Clarity in the relationship with external suppliers of services (including the central bank)

e. An ability to respond to events that threaten the continuity of the business

f. Embedded monitoring.

69.       Some offices have identified a “risk champion” within the middle office (MO), with
lead responsibility for operational risk management. This role includes helping staff to
identify the risk in their areas, to analyze processes and institute necessary controls. This is a
significant task, particularly setting up the processes, and needs the full support of senior
management.

Current situation

70.     There is currently no ORM framework in place in the DDP. In a number of areas,
however, some thought has been given to operational risk, albeit not in a systematic way
across the range of activities. The databases are reconciled with creditors and there are
checking and authorization procedures for data entry and debt servicing payments. Debt
servicing procedures are triggered two weeks in advance to reduce the risk of delay. The
CBM has adequate arrangements for data back-up as well as full procedures manual for
external debt operations, a business continuity plan (BCP) and a disaster recovery site
(DRS).12

71.      There are nevertheless a number of apparent risk exposures. Within the DDP there is
a less than full segregation of duties. The DMFAS database can still not be used by the DDP
as its primary database because of the inadequate treatment of some restructured loans in
transferring the data from version 5.2 to 6.0.13 It has to rely on the Access database at the
CBM despite its relative lack of robustness and security, and lack of electronic interfaces
(including within the CBM). The extensive services supplied by the CBM are not
12
   The details in this and the next paragraph are summarized from the DeMPA report, as elaborated during
meetings of the current mission. Neither mission reviewed the CBM’s BCP or DRS, or their effectiveness.
13
   The DDP has been waiting for a response from UNCTAD to its request for a fix.

                                                                                                           29
documented in a memorandum of understanding (MoU) or similar, with the risk of
misunderstanding (and recrimination if anything goes wrong). There are no procedures
manuals, nor a BCP/DRS for those data and operations that are located within the DDP or
wider MoFB.14 More generally heavy trust is placed on the professionalism and honesty of
the staff in both the DDP and the CBM, which is admirable in management terms but not
acceptable in an environment of high risk exposure. All these risks are heightened by the
apparent lack of an effective (or adequately resourced) internal audit function; there has been
no recent internal audit of debt management functions in either the MoF or the CBM.

Issues and recommendations

72.     Some of the risks noted above need immediate action, in particular bringing the
DMFAS database into full operation. Procedures manuals are also required within the MoF.
A more systematic process is needed and it is recommended that the DDP puts in place a
comprehensive ORM framework in line with sound practice. In a small debt unit, it may not
be possible in the near future to dedicate one staff member to ORM; but it is possible for
make substantial process with one official working for half of his or her time on this task,
with some management time. This official, referred to below as the “risk champion” could
be part of the MO.

73.      The question arises as to whether the DDP, rather than the wider MoFB, is the
appropriate unit for this exercise. However, it does not seem likely that the MoFB will be
putting an ORM framework in place in the near future; and given the risk profile of DDP ’s
work, it should not be delayed. The DDP is large enough for a successful exercise, and it has
a well-defined management structure. If successful the process could in due course be
widened to include the rest of the ministry as has happened elsewhere.

74.       The importance of the wider risk culture should also be stressed. Senior
management should signal the importance they attach to sound operational risk management;
but also ensure that everyone is aware how they collectively and individually contribute.
Risk awareness should be embedded in all day to day activities, and responsibility does not
lie just with the risk champion or risk managers. Office meetings and more informal




14
  Data used by MoFB applications are backed up daily, and taken off-site weekly. An initial study on options
for a DRS and associated BCP is under way although in practice both will need to be linked with the
forthcoming project for an integrated financial management system; that will also aim to integrate from an IT
perspective the directorates within the MoFB to which some IT responsibilities are currently dispersed. The
timeline of these major initiatives is unclear.

                                                                                                            30
75.      A simplified process is set out below.15 Although a fully-fledged risk control
framework would be a significant undertaking, there are potential benefits from even a
coarse-grained exercise, which can be developed as resources grow.

76.      In due course the Head of the MO would develop risk polices which, after approval
by senior management16 would be promulgated across the office. This would include advice
on the way in which processes should be documented and on control mechanisms. But
before this ─ and more straightforwardly ─ the risk champion would facilitate a process,
involving all DDP staff, to identify relevant risks (the risk register), score or estimate them,
and after management approval, establish the key mitigation controls or policies. Box 2
summarizes how this might be done in practice.


                              Box 2: Risk Identification and Assessment

The suggested first step is to run a series of workshops, organized on a team basis across the
DDP.17 The workshops should be guided by someone, probably the risk champion, who has an
understanding of risk across the range of functions; and can also ensure a consistency of approach
and terminology.18 In practice there will be far bigger risks in some areas of the business than in
others – and without some process to ensure consistency, there is a significant risk that the result
will be lists of risks that have been ‘scored’ by very different criteria.

The approach is to break down the main business areas into business activities or processes, each
with a stated objective; and then to identify and describe in the workshops the key risks that
might impact on each area of the business. There is a balance to be drawn between the amount of
detail and usefulness to management.

One way of scoring risks is to rate each risk for both likelihood (low, medium, high) and impact
(low, medium, high) and plot the combinations on a 3x3 matrix (some use a 4x4 or 5x5 matrix).
The most serious risk exposures are those of high likelihood and large impact. They will be
identified for urgent management action. Ideally this scoring process would be done separately
before and after the mitigating controls, and some view formed as to whether the residual risk can
be further reduced or is unavoidable (it will never be possible to control against all external
events). But initially scoring the present positions would be the highest priority.

The risk champion should report to management on the overall risk profile. This will require the


15
   Fuller descriptions are in: World Bank (2010), “Guidance for Operational Risk Management in Government
Debt Management” (World Bank, 2010), http://go.worldbank.org/48MIDC8BH0; and Hakan Tokaç and Mike
Williams "Government Debt Management and Operational Risk: A Risk Management Framework and its
Application in Turkey" (OECD, 2013, SIGMA Papers, No. 50), http://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/governance/government-debt-management-and-operational-risk_5k483jnqxtms-en
16
   It would be good practice also to discuss these plans with the internal and external auditors for their input; but
that will depend on the local context. As noted in the DeMPA the internal audit function in the MoFB is not
fully developed, which is arguably a significant weakness of the wider control environment.
17
   It is important that everyone is involved, including the more junior staff. It helps to develop risk
understanding and a risk culture – and they often bring a different perspective anyway.
18
   In the first round of assessment workshops, the risk champion could be supported by an international
consultant, both to ensure a full coverage and to transfer knowledge and confidence to the risk champion.

                                                                                                                  31
champion to identify from the workshops the risks where there is greatest exposure, together with
the actions that have been taken or might be taken in future. Some of this might require
improvement in control procedures; but action might lie elsewhere, for example in the
relationship with the CBM, in improving IT or in building capacity in the DDP.


77.       The identified controls should link to the documented operating procedures for each
activity. These procedures should be prepared by the relevant official and manager.19
Controls should be embedded within them. The procedures need not be documented in great
detail; but sufficiently to allow a new or substitute staff member to follow them. It is more
practical for there to be several slim manuals, each linked to a key area of activity, rather
than one large one. It is for the DDP to decide what breakdown makes most sense in
organizational terms, but a possible split is shown in Box 3, together with a suggested
priority for their preparation (with the emphasis being on operational risk exposure, not the
intrinsic importance of the activity). They should ideally be agreed with the risk champion.

                   Box 3: Procedure and Control Manuals: a Possible Listing
High Priority
1.      Analysis, negotiation and agreement of external loans and associated documentation
2.      Projecting and initiating debt servicing payments
3.      Maintenance of databases, external & domestic
4.      Aggregate cash flow forecasting
5.      Domestic auction processes
Other
6.      Preparation of Bulletin and other reports
7.      Forecasting and monitoring of disbursements
8.      Domestic market monitoring and advice on domestic borrowing (links to cash flow
forecasting above)
9.      Preparation of DMS and annual financing plan
10.     Credit risk and ORM processes
11.     Project analysis processes


78.       The purpose of documenting the procedures is twofold:

a. To provide a check-list for the relevant member of staff or his/her manager to ensure that
   all the necessary actions underpinning an activity have been executed. Key controls
   should be evidenced, for example with tick-off sheets if not electronically, and any errors,
   incidences or exceptions recorded.


19
  The manuals should not be prepared by an external consultant, which would discourage ownership, although
an external consultant could assist in setting up the process and formats and subsequent review. It would be
good practice also to review the whole ORM framework after it had been in operation for, say. two years, to see
whether it could be better tuned or made more pertinent; an external consultant could contribute also to that
review.

                                                                                                            32
b. To provide a basis for the risk manager, auditor or compliance officer to confirm that
   actions are being taken in accordance with agreed procedures and to investigate whether
   the embedded controls are effective, efficient and proportionate.

79.        The procedures should be written in summary form, and should not be any more
detailed than is needed; they should comprise bullets and flow charts, rather than prose; they
can also usefully be presented on screens.. However, there should be sufficient detail so that
if a staff member was taken ill or unexpectedly leaves, his or her replacement could step into
the relevant functions.

80.      The risk champion should also report regularly (say, quarterly) on changes in the
risk profile. These changes could arise from many sources, both internal such as key
members of staff leaving or the introduction of new IT systems, and external, not least as the
DDP’s own interaction with the financial markets becomes more sophisticated. This
updating process is best linked with individual managers themselves reporting on the risk
profile in their area. Once the relevant spreadsheets, summarizing the output from the
workshops, have been prepared, this should be relatively straightforward. Managers should
report their experience over the previous period, and indicate how their risks have changed,
any changes in controls, and any recommendations for further mitigation action. Their
reports would be coordinated and summarized by the risk champion

81.     Part of the regular report to senior management should be a summary of incidents
and exceptions, all of which should be reported. They are relevant both as a way of
monitoring the control framework and in identifying new or poorly managed risks. It must
be emphasized to staff that this is not a matter of their having to “own-up”, nor does it in any
way expose them to disciplinary action. But it is important to learn lessons so that the same
problem does not recur. Many incidents and even staff errors are often not the fault of the
individual concerned, but of management who has failed to develop an adequate control
environment.

82.        Many of the DDP’s risk exposures are “external” to it, in particular its dependence
on the CBM’s management of its databases (for both external and internal debt); and of the
auction process.20 There are also risks arising from a failure of debtors to pay on time, in
particular those public sector enterprises to which loans from donors have been on-lent by the
government. Receivables of this kind have many of the characteristics of contingent
liabilities (they are arguably “contingent negative assets”) and need to be monitored (by back
office) as carefully as the government’s exposure to the risk that guarantees are called.




20
  As well as the MoFB’s banker, the CBM is its fiscal agent, IT services supplier, settlement agent and registrar
and paying agent for domestic securities.

                                                                                                              33
83.      Some of the apparent risks will be reduced as soon as the DMFAS database is fully
operational, and that should clearly remain a high priority. But the process outlined should
cover the risks arising from the role of the CBM. The DDP cannot directly control the risk
management environment within the CBM, but in can seek to clarify respective
responsibilities to ensure that risks are addressed. It may not be appropriate to have a fully-
fledged contract between two organizations that are in effect guaranteed by central
government. But some form of memorandum of understanding (MoU) or “service level
agreement” (SLA) would be normal to set out the roles and responsibilities of both parties.
This also helps to give effect to the expectations on both sides.21

84.      There is currently a one-page agreement between the Treasury and the CBM
covering the issuance and management of securities, but it has only the briefest of details
concerning respective responsibilities. It does, however, provide for the Treasury to pay for
this service; it is generally good practice for the government to pay a cost-related fee for the
services supplied by the central bank and the commercial banks; although in the interest of
aligning incentives and avoiding cross-subsidy it is also good practice for the central bank to
pay a market-related interest rate on government cash balances. No such interest is paid by
the CBM, despite interest being charged on advances to the MoFB. However, as noted in the
previous chapter, there is a range of other financial interactions between the CBM and the
MoFB which complicate an overall assessment.

85.       Issues covered by the SLA might include:22

     a. The arrangements for the DDP’s access to the databases.

     b. The procedures for Tbill issuance, including timings, handling of bids, decision
        making and settlement processes.

     c. The notice that both sides would give of any impending change in the auction pattern
        or timetable.

     d. The turnaround times by the CBM in handling any relevant transactions or processes.


21
   The terminology is not important but an SLA would normally have some quantitative deadlines, targets or
indicators, and be more akin to a contract than a MoU which often focusses more on policy issues.
22
   Not many ministries publish their SLAs. But the French Agence France Trésor has published some of the
details of its agreement with the central bank. As well as details of information flows and execution deadlines,
it specifies service availability covering technical incidents and the implementation of backup procedures; and it
requires compensation for investment opportunities that are missed as a result of the central bank’s inability to
honor its contractual commitments. In many countries the MoU/SLA would cover the basis of calculation of
fees paid for the services and the rate of interest to be paid on government accounts; and the circumstances in
which either might be changed. There is a wider discussion of the operational and contractual interaction
between the Treasury and Central Bank in Mario Pessoa and Mike Williams “Government Cash Management:
Relationship between the Treasury and the Central Bank (IMF, FAD, 2012), available at:
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/cat/longres.aspx?sk=40111.0.

                                                                                                               34
  e. Details of information flows in either direction (including on cash management related
     activities).

  f. The handling of any business continuity problem (the CBM should be obliged to have
     a business continuity and disaster recovery plan which is regularly tested).

86.      It should be stressed that the focus of the SLA is on the operational services
supplied by the CBM. Those interactions where the MoFB is acting as “owner”, which
includes the injection of capital through the issue of securities, or compensation for the quasi-
fiscal activities of the CBM, would normally be handled separately (and often
organizationally separately within the ministry of finance).

87.      The risk management arrangements in place within the CBM should cohere with
similar processes as they are developed across the MoFB. The DDP is potentially exposed to
a business continuity event in both institutions, and as thinking on the MoFB’s business
continuity plan develops there could be some advantage in exchanging experience with the
CBM, identifying common responses, jointly testing business continuity and related plans,
and potentially sharing facilities. In the meantime, the DDP should explore within the
MoFB, with the IT function and others, whether there is any scope for reducing the DDP’s
exposure to business continuity risks relating to the MoFB as a whole, ahead of the MoFB’s
full development of a BCP and DRS.

88.       Some of the recommendations discussed above could have implications for staff
numbers, capacity and training. There are different aspects: the risk assessment process of
itself will have a limited impact on resources; but it is possible that recommended enhanced
controls will be more demanding. Additional training is likely to be required, to improve
understanding of the policy and risk issues that need to be addressed in decision-making.
There must also be adequate back-up for key staff when they are on leave or sick; that will in
turn require identifying the back-up staff and ensuring that they have the necessary skills for
this dual task. Such issues need to be addressed in developing the training program for the
DDP. There is a brief overview of a suggested approach to training generally in Box 4.




                                                                                              35
                      Box 4: Training for Government Debt Management
Training Policy
Government debt management requires staff with a combination of financial market skills and
public policy skills. These are unusual even within a ministry of finance that will normally have
access to a greater range of financial and economics skills than any other unit of government.
Since it will often be impractical to buy those skills in from the private sector debt management
units must rely on training to improve their skill base. It also has an important role in helping the
debt management function to attract and to retain staff.
It is good management practice to have a formal statement of training policy. That stresses to
staff the importance that management attaches to training; draws attention to the role that every
individual must play in relation to their training; and is a reminder to senior management of the
role that training must play in establishing an effective debt management function; and that it
should be resourced accordingly.
The key elements of a training policy are likely to include that:
 all staff should have the necessary training to ensure their professional effectiveness; this
includes their ability to contribute across teams and to cover for others
 training and development should be part of an internal culture that is open to new ideas and
is able to assimilate them
    staff should have access to training and development opportunities to further their careers.
Training Assessment and Delivery
There is no single template for the skills requirement of a debt management function. The
identified skills gaps flowing from a training needs assessment will often be general rather than
specific, and in most cases individuals will have the relevant skills to some extent. But there is
typically a collective need for specific skills that are over and above those gained from
experience. There will be a mix of
    Debt Management Concepts, Principles and Activities (for all staff)
    Specific debt management techniques (for more senior staff)
 Administrative and task-related skills (for specific identified staff). This can often usefully
extend to managerial training to reflect the specific nature of debt management policies and
processes.
Delivery options will include: on the job training: job shadowing: study tours and similar; local
training courses for skills that are not debt-management specific; scheduled professional courses
and seminars; and tailored courses.
Every member of the debt management unit should prepare individual objectives and a personal
development plan that flow from the unit’s targets and objectives. The individual performance
review process, both during the year and in the annual review, coupled with feedback on training
opportunities, provides the means of monitoring and evaluation




                                                                                                        36
       89.     In summary, the following actions are recommended:

               In the short term:

   i.          Bring the DMFAS database into full operation

  ii.           Maintain dialogue with the CBM with a view to the preparation of MoU/SLA
       (focusing on services)

               In the medium term:

 iii.       Appoint a “risk champion”, with suitable announcement to DDP staff (which
     emphasizes that this appointment does not take away from staff’s own responsibilities).

 iv.            A full risk identification and assessment process (starting in 2015 but continuing
       thereafter)

  v.           Senior management meeting [quarterly] to consider risk mitigation priorities,
       advised by risk champion

 vi.             The DDP to identify scope for reducing its exposure to business continuity risk
       relating to the MoFB as a whole, ahead of the MoFB’s full development of a BCP and DRS

vii.           Prepare procedures manual within the DDP

viii.          Identify back-up for key people, and integrate with training program




                                                                                               37
                                              ANNEX 1: DEBT MANAGEMENT REFORM PLAN LOGFRAME23

                                     Madagascar Debt Management Reform plan – February, 2014

      Issues/Project                   Actions                 Timing         Expected Outputs of the                Budget (for            Expected Outcome
       Components                                                                    Actions                          external                of the Project
                                                                                                                     assistance)              Components
                                                                         Legal Framework

Fragmented and                DDP internal review of        April-May,        Revised draft law                 Internal                   Enhanced legal
incomplete legislation        comments provided by          2014                                                                           control of, and
relating to                   the mission for the draft                                                                                    accountability for
government debt               Debt Law                                                                                                     government debt
management                    DDP consultation with         June, 2014        Second revision of draft law      Internal                   management
                              legal advisors in the                           for compatibility with the
                              Office of the Secretary                         existing legal framework
                              General of the
                              Government
                              Review of the draft           July, 2014        Third revision of draft law       Internal
                              within MoFB

                              Submission to PM’s            September,        Draft law submitted               Internal
                              Cabinet for approval          2014
                              Submission to Council         October,          Draft law submitted               Internal
                              of Ministers for              2014
                              approval
                              Submission to                 November,         Draft law submitted               Internal
                              Parliament for approval       2014



23
     For external assistance the cost estimates are based on weekly total cost of external consultants of USD 7,000, and USD 6,000 for a roundtrip.


                                                                                                                                                                38
                            Madagascar Debt Management Reform plan – February, 2014

  Issues/Project             Actions               Timing      Expected Outputs of the             Budget (for   Expected Outcome
   Components                                                         Actions                       external       of the Project
                                                                                                   assistance)     Components
                                                     Debt Management Strategy

No medium term debt   Conduct a simple           July-         The analysis is undertaken      Internal          The Government is
management strategy   MTDS analysis for          October2014   by the DDP team and the                           able to achieve the
in place              2015-2017 and identify                   identified strategy discussed                     desired level of risk at
                      the strategy to be                       with the technical staff from                     an acceptable cost
                      proposed for approval                    relevant units (DDP, CBM,                         through the
                                                               DG Budget and other                               development,
                                                               relevant units if any)                            implementation and
                      Draft the strategy         October-      DMS document is drafted.        Internal          publication of the
                      document by the            November                                                        medium term DMS
                      technical staff            2014                                                            on an annual basis.
                      Circulate draft for        November      Formal opinion of the           Internal
                      formal opinion to MoFB     2014          MoFB general directorates
                      general directorates and                 and CBM are collected.
                      the CBM
                      Present/submit strategy    December      Secretary General / Minister    Internal
                      to the Secretary General   2014          of Finance are informed
                      / Minister of Finance                    about the proposed strategy.
                      DMS approved by the        December      Executive body approves         Internal
                      Executive body             2014          the strategy.
                      (Minister/Council of
                      Ministers as required)
                      Publication of the DMS     December      DMS published.                  Internal
                      (including the MoFB        2014
                      website)
                      Publish a revised DMS      November-     2016-2018 DMS published.        Internal



                                                                                                                                      39
                              Madagascar Debt Management Reform plan – February, 2014

   Issues/Project               Actions               Timing      Expected Outputs of the             Budget (for       Expected Outcome
    Components                                                           Actions                       external           of the Project
                                                                                                      assistance)         Components
                        for 2016-2018,              December
                        containing more detailed    2015
                        analysis. Renew this
                        activity on an annual
                        basis.
                        Train the technical staff                 Staff has sufficient capacity   External,
                        on the DMS design           on-going      to produce the DMS.             Participate in the
                        methodology.                                                              MTDS workshops




                                                          Government Borrowing

Improved borrowing      External creditors to be    To start      Documented list of all          Internal              Government
procedures for          identified with their       April, 2014   potential creditors and their                         borrowing conducted
external and domestic   respective focus on                       expected terms and                                    based on thorough
debt                    activities and expected                   conditions                                            analysis of all
                        financial terms and                                                                             available options.
                        conditions                                                                                      Borrowing operations
                        Prepare annual resource     July-August   Documented external             Internal              on the domestic
                        mobilization plan for       2014          mobilization plan for 2015.                           market conducted
                        external borrowing for                                                                          transparently and
                        2015 (as part of the                      Ongoing procedure as part                             predictably.
                        budget process)                           of the annual budget
                                                                  formulation process
                        Training the staff on       September-    Increased capacity to           External consultant
                        how to conduct basic        October,      undertake financial analysis    USD 20.000



                                                                                                                                          40
                       Madagascar Debt Management Reform plan – February, 2014

Issues/Project           Actions                Timing      Expected Outputs of the           Budget (for       Expected Outcome
 Components                                                        Actions                     external           of the Project
                                                                                              assistance)         Components
                 financial analysis of cost   2014          of the loans.
                 effectiveness of loan

                 Develop the in-house         To start      Excel applications for        External consultant
                 methodology to               November-     assessing loan proposals      USD 20.000
                 undertake financial          December,     developed
                 analysis                     2014
                 Expand the current           April 2014    Expanded borrowing plan       Internal
                 borrowing plan for 2014
                 with T-bills on a gross
                 basis and maturing
                 domestic instruments
                 Based on the borrowing       May 2014      Quarterly auction calendar    Internal
                 plan, develop an auction                   made public; ongoing
                 calendar for T-bills on a                  procedure
                 quarterly basis and make
                 it public and present it
                 actively to the market
                 participants
                 Develop an aggregate         July-August   Documented borrowing          Internal
                 and comprehensive            2014          plan for 2015; ongoing
                 annual borrowing plan                      procedure in Budget process
                 for external and
                 domestic borrowing for
                 2015 (as part of the
                 Budget preparation
                 process)
                 Update the borrowing         September,    Revised borrowing             CBM internal


                                                                                                                              41
                             Madagascar Debt Management Reform plan – February, 2014

  Issues/Project               Actions                Timing       Expected Outputs of the            Budget (for          Expected Outcome
   Components                                                             Actions                      external              of the Project
                                                                                                      assistance)            Components
                       procedures for T-Bills       2014           procedures for T-bills made
                       presented on the                            public on MoFB and CBM
                       websites                                    websites
                       Legal advisors review        On-going       Loan agreements cleared by    Internal
                       the loan proposals and                      legal adviser/s
                       other contracts entered
                       into by DDP and the
                       Treasury


                                                    Operational Risk Management (ORM)

Action on immediate    Coordinate with               By end April All debt data in DMFAS 6       Internal /in              Reduced operational
priorities to reduce   UNCTAD and bring              2014         and accessible                 cooperation with          risk exposures in key
operational risk       DMFAS into full                                                           UNCTAD                    areas
exposure               operation
                       Agree way forward on          End January   Agreed process, priorities    Internal
                       procedures manuals,           2015          and format of procedures
                       (taking into account                        manuals
                       review of past work)
                       Drafting of procedures        2015          Full set of procedures        External consultant
                       manuals.                      (extending    manuals                       (USD 32,000) to
                                                     into 2016)                                  facilitate early stages
                       Identify back up staff for     2015         Staff able to cover           Internal;
                       all key functions;                          adequately for key staff in   External training as
                       integrate with training                     the event of absences or      required
                       program                                     departure



                                                                                                                                              42
                            Madagascar Debt Management Reform plan – February, 2014

  Issues/Project             Actions               Timing     Expected Outputs of the          Budget (for   Expected Outcome
   Components                                                        Actions                    external       of the Project
                                                                                               assistance)     Components
                      Dialogue with CBM with      April to    Management of                Internal
                      a view to the preparation   October     expectations and
                      of MoU/SLA (focusing        2014        clarification of
                      on services supplied)                   responsibilities between
                                                              DDP and CBM;
                                                              understanding of risks
                                                              arising
                      MOU/SLA agreed and          November-   MoU signed
                      submitted to signature      December,
                                                  2014
                      DDP to identify scope       2015,       Risks to DDP minimized       Internal
                      for reducing its            extending   in the event of a business
                      exposure to business        into 2016   continuity shock
                      continuity risk relating                applying to MoFB
                      to MoFB as a whole
                      ahead of MoFB’s full
                      development of BCP
                      and DRS
ORM framework         Appoint a “risk             End         ORM champion                 Internal          Sound operational
required to improve   champion”, with             January     nominated                                      risk management
management of         suitable announcement       2015                                                       practices adopted
operational risk,     to DDP                                                                                 with a regular
ensuring a            Risk champion to            End March   Process agreed               Internal          cyclical process to
consistent approach   specify risk assessment     2015                                                       assess risks and
                      process, agreed by                                                                     prioritize actions
                      Head/DDP                                                                               backed by a strong


                                                                                                                              43
                      Madagascar Debt Management Reform plan – February, 2014

Issues/Project          Actions             Timing      Expected Outputs of the        Budget (for       Expected Outcome
 Components                                                    Actions                   external           of the Project
                                                                                       assistance)          Components
                 Risk champion to          April to     OR areas defined,          External consultant   risk culture in DDP
                 organize series of        June 2015    assessed and prioritized   (USD 20,000)
                 workshops across
                 DDP, supported by
                 external consultant
                 Risk exposures            Sept 2015    Sound basis for further    Internal
                 prioritized with                       risk mitigation actions
                 proposed mitigation
                 strategies submitted to
                 senior management of
                 DDP (consulting others
                 in MoFB as necessary)
                 Meeting of senior DDP     Nov 2015     New controls or other      [Will depend on
                 management to                          mitigation actions         recommendations]
                 consider
                 recommendations and
                 agree actions; onward
                 submission to DG
                 Treasury and others as
                 necessary depending
                 on recommendations
                 Risk champion to          End March    Updating of risk           Internal
                 collect exception data;   2016 and     assessment to ensure
                 managers to refresh       quarterly    high risk exposures are
                 risk profiles, with       thereafter   fully addressed



                                                                                                                         44
                      Madagascar Debt Management Reform plan – February, 2014

Issues/Project         Actions             Timing    Expected Outputs of the       Budget (for       Expected Outcome
 Components                                                 Actions                 external           of the Project
                                                                                   assistance)         Components
                 assessment submitted
                 to senior management
                 by risk champion
                 Review of process, and   End 2017   More pertinent ORM        External consultant
                 lessons learnt with a               framework in place        (USD 20,000)
                 view to further
                 improvement




                                                                                                                   45
ANNEX 2. OUTLINE OF QUARTERLY DEBT BULLETIN

      [Initially central government debts only; where relevant include details on
guarantees. Note that this initial bulletin is intended to be no more than 4 pages] 24

1.          Headlines:

Summary of Key/New Points in bullet form; example:

a.          Debt/GDP rose to [          ] at end of [3rd quarter 2014], a rise of [            ]

b.          Domestic currency composition of debt portfolio rose slightly from [                   %] to [
%]

c.     Net domestic securities issuance was slightly higher over the quarter, compared
with the average of the previous [6 quarters]

d.     [The government agreed 2 new external project loans and issued its first 2-year
bond.]

2.          Costs and Risks of the Debt Portfolio

[The figure for the latest quarter compared with the previous quarter. There is no need
for a long run of figures provided that the graphs show the time trend over more than, for
example, 4 years. A current estimate will be needed of GDP: indicate its source e.g. in a
footnote. The chosen indicators should be those included also in the DMS. Unless it
looks too cluttered all these indicators could be in the same table]

a.          Debt sustainability (e.g. Debt/GDP and Interest to GDP or to Revenue)

b.     Interest rate risk (e.g. Average time to refixing; or proportion of variable rate
debt; or share of debt to be refixed within the next [1 year], domestic and external
separate as well as total)

c.    Exchange rate risk (eg share of external debt in total debt and currency
composition)

d.      Refinancing risk (e.g. share of debt falling due within the next [1 year] or average
time to maturity (domestic and external separately as well as total)

3.          Main Charts

[These charts support the indicators above although may include data that is taken from
the more detailed tables below.]

a.          Debt/GDP over time (line chart showing external and domestic separately)

24
     Material in italics is explanatory only; it is not intended to be part of the bulletin.

                                                                                                       46
b.     External debt and domestic debt over time (in MGA and percent)

c.     Refinancing profile over time, showing both domestic and external (in MGA)

4.     More Detailed Tables

 [Unless indicated otherwise, all tables should include data for the last [4 full years]; and
with the last 6-8 quarters shown separately. The graphs might show a longer run of
years where relevant.]

a.      Stock summary (in MGA): Total central government debt split by: external (split
by bilateral and multilateral, with subtotal in both USD and MGA) and domestic (split by
bonds [when relevant] bills and “other”). Add GDP as a memo item.

b.    Flows (in MGA): Gross new borrowing, amortisation/redemption, and net new
borrowing for external and domestic debt separately in the most recent quarter.

c.     Summary details of all domestic auctions

d.     Debt servicing (in MGA except for effective interest): servicing payments, split
by interest and principal for domestic and external separately; and projections of such
payments over the next [3 years], on the basis of the current debt stock (ie no assumption
about new borrowing). Include calculation of effective interest rate (percent for past
data).

5.     Supporting Charts

a.     External debt by creditor (pie chart)

b.     External debt by currency (pie chart)

c.     [External debt by beneficiary sector, indicating on-lending]

d.      Debt servicing over time, split by interest principal and currency (line chart or
histogram)

e.     Domestic debt by category (bonds, bills, other)

6.     Other

a.     Contact details

b.     Glossary, sources, etc as necessary.




                                                                                          47
     ANNEX 3: TEMPLATE FOR A DEBT MANAGEMENT STRATEGY FOR [2015-2017]25

Objectives and Scope

Debt management objectives of the Malagasy government should be specified here, as
described in the debt legislation which is expected to be finalized and enacted in coming
months.

DMS document can state that the contingent liabilities from guarantees may be included
in the future, once the credit risk assessment framework is developed.

[The main objective of debt management in Madagascar is to ensure that the
government’s financing needs and payment obligations are met at the lowest possible
cost consistent with a prudent degree of risk. A second objective is to support domestic
debt market development.

Scope of the DMS is limited to central government debt portfolio, which is the one with
direct impact on the budget].

Headlines

Historical context for the debt portfolio will be described: changes in its size (including
relative to GDP) and composition through time along with commentary of significant
events in the evolution of the debt. This is similar to the Headlines in the quarterly debt
bulletin that is a summary of Key/New Points in bullet form covering the yearly
developments. For example:

a.      Debt/GDP rose to [ ] at end of [2013], a rise of [ ]
b.      Foreign currency share of debt portfolio rose slightly from [ %] to [ %]
c.      Debt service payments amounted to [ ] at end [2013], compared to [2012]
d.      [The government signed [ ] external project loans in [2013] and continued to
issue 4 week to 52 week T-bills.]
e.      [T-bill interest rates saw an upward trend starting from [June 2013] as a result of
political uncertainty and reduced liquidity. During this period, statutory advances from
CBM were utilized to finance the budget, complementing the T-bill issuances.]

Costs and Risks Characteristics of Debt Portfolio

This section also is similar to the respective section of the quarterly bulletin. Only
current debt portfolio’s costs and exposure to risks can be described in the first DMS
document (2015-2017). The following years’ strategy documents can start highlighting


25
  This appendix uses information from the template which can be found in Appendix VII of “Developing a
Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) Guidance Note for Country Authorities”, WB/IMF,
2009.

                                                                                                   48
the impact of the previous year’s borrowing operations on the cost and risk exposure of
the debt portfolio, based on quarterly information. For example:

[- As a result of high share of external debt (73.2 percent), government debt portfolio is
exposed to foreign exchange risk, that is to increases in debt service payments resulting
from depreciation in the external value of the domestic currency. This risk is subdued
thanks to the low cost concessional terms of the external debt which has a long average
period to maturity and generates lower foreign currency interest payments over the year.
- The impact of a 30 percent depreciation of the Ariary against USD in 2014 would
increase the expected interest payments by [ ] Ariary, that is [ ] of central government
revenues.
- Domestic debt is exposed to interest rate and refinancing risk as a result of short
maturities, with 100 percent of debt renewed and refixed within next year. However, the
low share of domestic debt (25 percent) reduces the impact of this risk on the budget.]

Sample Charts and tables:
-       Nominal debt stock table( and or as percentage of GDP) with external and
domestic debt breakdown, providing also lender type for external debt and instrument
type for domestic debt; (see chart 2)
-       Debt service payments with external and domestic debt breakdown; (see chart 3)
-       Currency composition of external debt; (see pie chart , chart 4)
-       Primary yield curve for the T-bills; (see chart 6)
-       Redemption profile; (see chart 5,)
-       Risk indicators: (see table 1 from MTDS tool of the report)

Outlook for Macroeconomic Environment and Future Funding Needs

The environment for debt management in terms of future funding needs and assumptions
about exchange and interest rates should be described. Information on the three-year
macroeconomic fiscal framework, when and if available, can be provided in this section.

-      Table containing: budget deficit, Principal Payments, Interest Payments, Funding
needs (nominal, local currency), Funding needs / GDP (see table in Macro&Market Data
, MTDS tool)

Potential Sources of Financing

Potential sources of financing from abroad identified by the Treasury should be
portrayed here, with a description of the possible impact on the costs and risks of the
debt portfolio. Constraints of the domestic market should be discussed, and plans for the
development of the domestic market, if any, should be presented.

-      Multilateral lenders X, Y, Z at concessional terms, (low cost and low risk)
-      Bilateral lenders A, B, C at semi-concessional rates, (costlier and riskier than the
previous group of lenders)

                                                                                        49
-       Commercial lenders D, E, F at market rates, fixed floating interest rates and
shorter maturity (costlier and riskier type of external debt)
-       T-bills from 4 weeks to 52 weeks are the domestic market instruments currently
available to the government, (costlier and riskier than [most] external debt).

Plans for Domestic Market Development [2016-2018, on following periods]

If the development of the domestic market is one of the objectives of debt management
and stated in the debt legislation, this section could be added to the DMS in order to
share the steps (see section X of the report) the government considers taking to reach this
objective. This could be introduced in the DMS documents once (and if) such an action
plan has been developed.

[Government of Madagascar is committed to developing domestic government securities
market with a view to becoming less vulnerable to the shocks in market rates, having
greater market access and lowering borrowing costs over the long term. To this end, the
following actions will be taken:

-      Enhancing the communication with the market participants
-      Exploring the possibility to introduce new longer dated instruments, with the
impact of reducing the interest rate / refinancing risk (but increasing the cost)
-      Publish the auction calendar to improve the price discovery.]

Debt Management Strategy and Medium Term Strategic Targets

The recommended strategy and its rationale should be set out. In the first few DMS
documents, it is enough to provide some direction for managing the different risks. As
detailed analysis is conducted, the document could briefly describe the analysis that has
been undertaken to support the recommended debt management strategy. The
assumptions used and limitations of the analysis should be made clear.

-      During [2015-2017], most of the borrowing (project financing and budget
financing) will be conducted from external concessional sources with low cost and risk
impact on the debt portfolio.

-      T-bills will continue to be used for budget financing and cash management. 2-
year T-bonds can be introduced in [2016 or 2017] depending on investor appetite and
market conditions, with a positive impact on the refinancing and interest rate risks.

-       Management of the FX risk
-       Reduce FX risk in the medium term, if the concessional sources of financing start
declining.
-       Management of refinancing and interest rate risk
-       The amount of local currency debt maturing within 12 months shall be reduced
-       External borrowing will be conducted in fixed interest rates to the extent possible



                                                                                        50
Conclusion

The Malagasy government thrives to achieve the desired level of risk at an acceptable
cost by executing the DMS annually, based on a sound analysis of cost and risk.

The documented DMS will be revised and published every year on a rolling basis. The
underlying analysis will be updated to check whether key assumptions continue to hold
and that the DMS remains appropriate.

Additionally, the implementation of the DMS will be regularly monitored through
quarterly bulletins.




                                                                                        51
                              ANNEX 4. PEOPLE MET


Name                   Entity/ Function                       CONTACT/MAIL
RAJEMISA Haingo        Directeur de la dette Publique         ddp.tresor.mg@gmail.com
                       chef du service de la gestion de la
RAHANIRAKA Haingo      dette extérieure SGDE                  haingo_rahan@yahoo,fr
                       Chef de division des opérations
RASOLOMANANA Mina      SGDE/DDP                               tresorsgde@gmail.com
                                                              ambinintsoa.rajaona@gmail.c
RAJAONA Ambinintsoa    chargé des études SGDE/DDP             om
RAKOTONDRASOA Toky
Miarinjaka             chargé des opérations SGDE/DDP         tokymiarinjaka@gmail.com
ANDRIAMIFIDY
Soafaniry              chargée des opérations SGDE/DDP        tresorsgde@gmail.com

RAKOTOVAO Felaniaina   chargée des opérations SGDE/DDP        maharomanjaka@gmail.com
                       chef du service de la gestion de la
RAHARIJAONA Rado       dette intérieure SGDI                  ddpsgdi@gmail.com
RAJAONARISON           Chef de division Etude de              d.rajaonarison@tresorpublic.
Dinaniaina             financement de la trésorerie SGDI      mg
RANAIVOJAONA Miora     Chef de division Emprunt Intérieur
Tantely                SGDI                                   ran.tantely@yahoo.fr
                       Chef de division Intervention
ANDRIANASOLO Avotra    Finançiere de l'Etat SGDI              aavotra@yahoo,fr

ZAFITIANA Françoise    chargée des études SGDI/DDP
ANDRIANANTOANDRO
Christian              chargé des études SGDI/DDP
RAKOTOHASINA                                                  n.rakotohasina@tresorpublic.
Norosoa Harimino       chargée des études SGDI/DDP            mg
RANDRIA Harimbola      chargé des études SGDI/DDP             randriarimbola@yahoo.fr
RAKOTOARIZAKA
Volahanitriniaina      chargée des études SGDI/DDP            v.rakotoarizaka@yahoo.fr
RATSIMBA Rindra        chargée des études SGDI/DDP            r.ratsimba@tresorpublic.mg
RAONIZAFINARIVO
Maeva                  chargée des études SGDI/DDP            dimaevane@yahoo.fr
                       chef du service du suivi des projets
RAHARISOA Clémence     SSP/DDP                                raharyclemence@yahoo,fr
RANDRIAMELSON          Chargée du suivi des projets
Wellina                SSP/DDP                                randriwell@yahoo.fr
RAKOTONANDRASANA       Agent Comptable Central du Tresor
Liva                   ACCT/ DGT                              dgt_acct@moov.mg
RAKOTOMANANA           Chef du Service macroéconomique
Andrianaivo            DGB/ DPCB                              naivo@live.fr


                                                                                         52
RANDRIANASOLO Ange     Chargé de mission Juridique DGT        randianasolo.sandro@live.fr
RANDRIANARIVELO                                               bakoly.randrianarivelo@yaho
Bakoly                 MFB/DGB/DPCB                           o.fr
ANDRIAMABELO
Norotiana              MFB/DGB/DPCB                           nanoutiana@gmail.com
RAVELONJANAHARY
Sylvain                Chargé de la statisitique BCM/DDE
                                                              nandriamihaja@worldbank,or
ANDRIAMIHAJA Noro      Economiste Banque mondiale             g
                       Chef du service back office dette
RAKOTONIRINA Jaona     extérieure BCM
                       chef du service des statisitiques de
EMA-NASOLO Allain      la dette BCM                           a.helison@bfm.mg

RASOANAIVO Bruno       IT Banque Central                      b.rasoanaivo@bfm.mg
RANDRIANARISOA         service règlement de la
Corinne                dette/DDE/BCM                          dde@bfm.mg
NOROMAHEFA Harifetra   BCM/DET/SEF                            h.noromahefa@bfm.mg
RAJAONSON              Directeur de la dette extérieur
Zafindramiantra        BCM                                    dde@bfm.mg
RABENANDRASANA                                                rabenandrasanahery@yahoo,
Hery                   chef de service DGB/DPCB/SCME          fr




                                                                                       53
