                           88847 v2

              RES-Research
              (Resilience in Education
              Settings Research)




TRAINING FACILITATOR
  GUIDANCE NOTES (2)




              Education Resilience Approaches
              PART OF THE: SYSTEMS APPROACH
              FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
2
Contents
  About RES-Research

  Authors and Acknowledgements

  Guidance Note                      Getting started

  Guidance Note: Module 5B           Field work and Feasibility planning

  Guidance Note: Module 6            Analysis and interpretation for policy and
                                     practice

  Guidance Note: Module 7            Knowledge mobilization I: Policy and
                                     reporting

  Guidance Note: Module 8            Knowledge mobilization II: external
                                     engagement, giving back and critique

  Guidance Note: Module 9            Open reflection




                                 3
About RES-Research
Development practitioners in fragile and conflict affected contexts are demanding better
support of research, evaluation and assessments: whether it's conducting an exploratory needs
assessment for an emergency intervention, monitoring and evaluating ongoing project impact
or building the evidence base to design a post-conflict or violence mitigation program. In
contexts of overwhelming adversity it is crucial not only to get reliable and valid data but to also
ensure that we are going about this in the right way. Doing research “right” in these contexts
require asking the right questions, talking to the relevant participants and stakeholders, using
the most pertinent methods, and paying particular attention to ethics and power differentials.

To address these concerns, the ERA program has developed the
Resilience in Education Settings (RES)-RESEARCH training. It brings           As with all SABER tools,
together resilience theory and a transformative research paradigm.            the RES-RESEARCH
                                                                              training module is
Resilience theory seeks to understand the process by which individuals,
                                                                              openly available for
communities and organizations recover from crisis, continue to perform
                                                                              education practitioners
in the midst of adversities and even radically change to prevent future
                                                                              within the World Bank,
risk exposure and continue their development process (Reyes, 2013).           as well as other
The transformative research paradigm provides methodological                  agencies. The module
guidance to conduct studies with vulnerable populations, while                consists of a research
recognizing both their exposure to overwhelming threats but also their        manual and handouts,
assets such as strengths, opportunities and available services (Mertens,      power point
2009).                                                                        presentations and
                                                                              additional guidance
Through a nine-month training program, RES-RESEARCH builds on the             materials. For
capacities of academics and education practitioners in fragile, conflict      information on the ERA
and violence affected contexts to undertake locally relevant and              program please consult
rigorous education resilience research. First piloted in Central America,     www.worldbank/educat
the training program was improved and recently implemented in the             ion/resilience or write to
South Asia region as part of a the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for the             educationresilience@w
                                                                              orldbank.org
System Assessment for Better Education Results (SABER) support by
DfID-UKAID, AUSAID and the World Bank.

The “Facilitator Guidance Notes” were prepared to guide universities, local researchers, and
development and humanitarian agencies that would like to use and teach this approach, in its
entirety or partially. This is only a guide, and the themes, sequence and materials can be
adjusted and complemented as needed.




                                                 4
Authors and acknowledgements
This training package was developed by Joel Reyes, Linda Liebenberg and Jo Kelcey, with the
technical support and input of Donna M. Mertens and Michael Ungar. It has also greatly
benefited from the reflections and input of Education Resilience researchers in Central America
and Colombia, South Asia and the Middle East. We are especially thankful for the peer review
comments from Abdul Hai Sofizada (Education Specialist, Afghanistan), Francisco Marmolejo
(Higher Education Specialist, HDNED ), and Donna M. Mertens (Mixed Methods Research
Specialist, Consultant). 1




1
 The presentation format for this training Guidance Note is derived from the design of the “Education and Fragility” Inter-Agency Training
(Nairobi, 2011) developed by Nina Papadopoulos (USAID) and Rachel McKinney (Save the Children).

                                                                       5
GUIDANCE NOTE

Getting Started




       6
At-a-glance

This section provides a summary of the overall RES-Research structure, discusses its objectives,
intended audience and associated participant expectations. Whereas the other sections of the
RES-Research users guide provide content and pedagogical guidance, this section is intended to
support planning and project management. It is based upon two regional applications of the
RES-Research module in Central America and the South Asia, during the period 2011-2014.

                                            Content
                 1. Target audience
                 2. Rationale
                 3. Objectives
                 4. Expectations
                 5. Administrative and logistical considerations
                 6. Materials
                 7. Training Structure
                 8. Module structure
                 9. How to use the Guidance Notes
                 10. A final request



Target audience

RES-Research is intended for the professional research and evaluation communities in countries
affected by violence and conflict. Specifically, it targets university students at the research
Master's and Doctoral levels, University faculty, and the professional evaluation community
working with local and international civil society organizations interested in education policy
and practice. Bringing these groups together needs to be seen as an important strength of the
overall approach as it provides a crucial link between policy and research. Outreach to these
communities is an important first step in planning your RES-Research. Several institutions,
networks and professional bodies may support the applications process. These include:

       Universities and colleges providing tertiary education social sciences and humanities
       Counterparts in UN agencies, (I)NGOs
       The Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies (INEE)
       Scholars at Risk Network


                                               7
       Scholar Rescue Fund and its parent organization the Institute of International Education
       Professional evaluation communities




Rationale

RES-Research is an experiential learning program. It provides technical guidance for conducting
education resilience research in difficult contexts through a 9-12 month approach that
combines theoretical and practical learning. As an experiential approach RES-Research
embraces the challenges that Education Resilience research presents, recognizing that the
lessons learned through this are an important part of the process.

A key rationale for RES-Research is to bring together the worlds of research and policy making
and practice. Notably, while university actors are used to conducting research on varied topics,
not all researchers from the Global South are provided with the tools to access and influence
domestic and international education development policy making and practice; nor is the
evaluation community always provided with professional development opportunities to
contribute applied knowledge in new and influential ways. RES-Research intends to bridge
these gaps, in the process strengthening indigenous research capacities and promoting more
sustainable evidence generation and use. RES-Research brings researchers and evaluators
together in a South-to-South learning process. However, it takes knowledge exchange a step
further than traditional “sharing of good practices.” Instead it promotes knowledge generation
precisely from researchers and evaluators themselves living in contexts of adversity, supporting
them to influence and inform current debates not only in the Global South but also within the
international education development community.

The table in the next page presents the core objectives of RES-Research.




                                               8
           Resilience in Education Settings Research (RES-Research) Training Program
Objective       Contribution to south to south         Transformative objective
                learning
Build on        RES-Research is premised upon          Through careful participant selection,
capacities in recognition of existing capacities       mutual learning objectives and the
countries       within countries affected by violence sustainability of capacity building
affected by and conflict. It strategically targets     approaches are better ensured. The
violence        local researchers and evaluators who approach aims to create local networks
and conflict are well positioned to connect            for change.
                evidence with policy.
Learning by RES-Research combines theory and           Two challenges face research in
doing           practice for a more holistic teaching  countries affected by violence and
                and learning approach. It is grounded conflict. First, the culture of outsourcing
                in an empowering pedagogical           capacity to external organizations can
                approach that supports local           result in studies that are less familiar
                researchers and evaluators to          with the context and complexities than
                influence internal and external        local actors would be. Second, research
                debates on education resilience. By    in countries affected by violence and
                actively engaging local actors to      conflict presents significant operational
                undertake pilot studies the ERA        and ethical challenges. By working with
                program seeks to improve the           local actors and ensuring that capacity
                sustainability of knowledge through    building approaches are grounded in
                locally relevant studies and           appropriate methodologies RES-
                recommendations.                       Research aims to improve the quality of
                                                       research by ensuring better
                                                       representation of vulnerable
                                                       communities in education policy and
                                                       practice and ultimately providing more
                                                       targeted and relevant recommendations.
Research        By focusing on the skills and          RES-Research actively engages with
for public      strategies needed to influence and     policy and practice. By including sessions
policy and      bring about change, and by working     on translating research and the
influencing through the networks implicit in the discussion and application of strategies
practice        target participants, RES-Research      to influence policy and practice it
                promotes the generation of demand supports knowledge generation not only
                driven knowledge and knowledge         for professional development but also
                sharing.                               more systematic education led change
                                                       processes: education system pro-social
                                                       transformation.

                                               9
Expectations

RES-Research is a practical training program. A practical component (the design, pilot and
implementation of an Education Resilience study) runs throughout the training program. Pilot
studies provide an opportunity for data collection, analysis, interpretation and report writing.
Workshop participants are expected to form country or sub-national teams and work together
towards the implementation of a transformative education resilience study. The focus, topics
and research questions of each study are selected solely by the research participants and their
in-country stakeholders. In between workshops, in-country research teams work together on
the development and implementation of their study. During the face-to-face workshops, they
reunite to discuss their progress and challenges they have had and to learn more about data
analysis, interpretation, and report writing. Ultimately, the teams are provided with guidance
regarding the use of data to influence policies and program for positive change in contexts of
adversity. The ERA program supports the dissemination of the education resilience findings
within each country case study, in addition to other publication sources that the authors may
identify, such as agency reports or academic journals.

This strong practical element has several implications:

       First, teams of researchers are encouraged to apply for RES-Research. Although the
       teams do not need to comprise individuals who have worked together closely
       beforehand, they should be made up of individuals who are willing and able to do this.

       Second, institutional commitment is important for research teams. This means that
       teams should have the support of an education oriented NGO or Agency or their
       university. This support does not necessarily need to be financial. It should however
       allow the participants better access to their target population and provide them with
       the in kind support needed to implement a study.

       Finally, RES-Research is above all a program that looks to identify and build on local
       capacities to conduct education resilience research. Participants and their supporting
       institutions therefore need to share these goals and believe in the crucial contributions
       they have to make towards positive educational change for vulnerable communities.




                                               10
Administrative and logistical considerations for international-
based training

Any domestic or international institution (universities, research tanks, evaluation communities)
can use the RES-Research materials for their own education resilience-based research and
evaluation training. However, for international agencies that wish to provide training in one
location with participants from different countries, the mechanism utilized by the World Bank’s
RES-Research team is detailed next. This provides some initial guidance including financial
support for participants—such as travel, accommodation and ‘seed funding” for resilience case
studies.

Application process: Potential participants can be identified through local universities,
evaluation communities and think tanks. This broad identification of sources of interested
participants should be followed by an application process. This should be started minimally 6-8
weeks before the date of the first workshop, in order to leave enough time for visa processing,
travel bookings etc. As well as comprising an expression of interest in the training, the
application form should also ask potential participants whether or not they have funding to
cover the costs of participation through their university or agency. There are however no
workshop fees. The costs of participation require travel to the workshop locations,
accommodation during the workshop dates and meals and other incidentals.

Travel support: To promote maximum access to researchers and evaluators from the Global
South, RES-Research prioritizes having funding available for selected participants who would be
otherwise unable to attend. Economy class airfare to the workshop destination,
accommodation, visa costs, hotel transfer and three meals a day are included as part of the
RES-Research funding package. In cases where road travel is feasible then a coach and driver
may be rented to transport participants (as was the case in Central America for some
participants). It is important to be clear to participants that they will not be paid per diem for
the days of the workshop as all of their related expenses are covered directly.

Visas: Participants are responsible for applying for their own visas although the training team
agency may cover visa costs and also should issue participants requiring visas with a ‘comfort
letter’ to facilitate visa issuance.

Seed funding: Funding is also provided to facilitate the required practical component of RES-
Research. It is called “seed” funding as it is not intended to finance the full cost of a research
endeavor. In recent applications of the RES-Research training, this ‘seed’ funding has been for
up to 10,000USD per team. It is intended to complement basic researcher costs over the 9-12

                                                11
month period of a pilot Education Resilience case study, which complements the RES-Research
training workshops.

RES-Research participant teams are required to apply for ‘seed funding’ only if without this
support the practice resilience study would not be possible (given the associated costs of
carrying out research such as transportation to and from research sites, refreshments for focus
groups or the costs of statistical software as well as some research team labor costs).
Participants apply for funding at the end of the first workshop. They are required to submit
their draft research plans as well as a budget and timeframe. They must also nominate one
member of their team as the administrative ‘coordinator’ for the budget (see below for more
information on this). Teams do not need to apply for the full 10,000USD. They may instead
apply for a smaller amount to conduct an initial phase within what will (eventually) be a larger
study. It’s more important for each team to submit a feasible proposal that will allow them to
undertake a study that amounts to a quality practical learning experience within the timeframe
of the program.

Study coordinator: Seed funding for the practical studies can be disbursed through only one or
two of the research team members, selected as ‘coordinator.” Funding can be in the form of
short term consultancy, based on a “research coordinator” terms of reference, including two or
three deliverables over the 6 -9 month period covered by their research proposal. In other
words the coordinator is responsible for managing and submitting the team’s deliverables and
for then disbursing the payments as agreed in the team budget. Templates for the coordinator
terms of reference are available.

The 6-9 months period for the practical education resilience case study does not - and should
not - preclude the sustainability of the research into additional research cycles. Rather it is just
an incentive and practice-based learning for local research teams to conduct their own studies.
However, at the end of the RES-Research training, a preliminary study progress report is
required. Templates for these preliminary reports are available as part of this open source RES-
Research package.




                                                 12
Materials

As mentioned at the outset, RES-Research is an open source package of education resilience-
based research training content and resources. These materials can be adjusted as needed and
complemented based on the needs and objectives of each training program and stakeholders.
Based on the experience of the World Bank’s ERA team, the following are guidelines to share
documentation with participants.

Documentation: Prior to the first
workshop, participants should be provided
with background resources. In previous
applications, drop box files have been
created to share this documentation.
These folders served as an online
repository of useful information that could
support not only their understanding of
the program but also more specific
aspects related to data collection, analysis
and reporting writing. Participants should also be provided with printed copies of all
presentations and activities.

To facilitate the learning process the use of laptops is encouraged during the workshop. This
not only allows participants to take notes throughout but also electronic templates for various
group exercises form an important part of the workshops.



Training structure

The following table provides the overall structure for the RES-Research program, which is
organized around 9 core modules that cover the lifespan of an education resilience research
study. It is recommended to implement the program through three face-to-face workshops
during which technical assistance is provided over a twelve-month period. This is the most
enriching approach as it ensures participants have enough time to collect data and it provides
them with guidance in 'real time' for each stage of their research. It is however possible to
implement RES-Research in a more condensed format over 9 months with two workshops. In


                                               13
both cases it is essential that the implementing team is available for technical assistance to the
teams. This may be done virtually or, if resources allow, in person.

The ERA team has developed several reporting templates (consisting of guiding questions) that
can be used to facilitate this.



Module structure

Almost all modules consist of 20 - 30 power point slides. The first and last modules as well as
Module 5B are slightly shorter as they devote a significant amount of time to participant led
discussion and presentations. Module 5 bridges planning and practice and is therefore divided
into two sections - one that takes place during the first workshop to support the research
preparation, and a second part which elicits feedback once the studies are underway. Other
modules are directed by facilitators, although all modules should plan for adequate time for
participant check-ins and feedback.

All modules are designed to promote team discussion among the larger group and within
country teams. Most modules include at least one team or group exercise though facilitators
may choose to add additional exercises and should also insert energizer activities as needed. It
is crucial to leave enough time for these exercises as they are pivotal for the experiential
learning process: most of the exercises directly contribute to the design of the studies and
subsequently to their data analysis and interpretation. Table two below provides the exercise
breakdown over the course of the 9 modules for which it is recommended that implementation
occurs over 8 - 9 days.



                             Table 2: learning activities and exercises
Module                     Activities and exercises
1. Introduction and        Group exercise: individual participant led feedback on expectations
  expectations             and contexts of interest
2. Resilience Theory       Activity: resilience navigation and negotiation (in pairs)
                           Group exercise: individual participant reflections on experiences with
                           resilience and examples from their contexts.
                           Group feedback optional
3. Positioning the study   Team exercise: defining the purpose of their team's transformative
                           mixed methods resilience study.
                           Feedback to the group


                                                14
4. Designing the Study     Team exercise: developing a sampling strategy
                           Feedback to the group
5a. Field work and         Team exercise: developing a data collection and data analysis plan
  Feasibility planning     Team led exercise of presenting initial findings and field experience
                           back to the wider group (see presentation template in RES-Research
5b. Field work and         package)
 Feasibility planning

6. Analysis and            Team exercise: practicing data coding
  interpretation for       Feedback to the group
  policy and practice      Team exercise: determining a statistical analysis plan
                           Feedback to the group
7. Knowledge
  mobilization I: Policy
  and reporting
8. Knowledge               Team exercise: developing a reporting and engagement plan
  mobilization II:         Feedback to the group
  external engagement,     Group exercise: participant feedback and thoughts on critiques of
  giving back and          resilience in theory and practice
  critique
9. Open reflection         Group exercise: open technical support and participant led feedback
                           on RES-Research process and options for sustainability.



If RES-Research is implemented over a 12 month period it is recommended that the following
modular structure is adopted:

       workshop 1: modules 1 - 5a
       workshop 2: modules 5b - 6 (this could also be implemented through in country support
       to teams, by facilitators, and by extending module 6 so that teams and facilitators work
       more closely with data that has been collected)
       workshop 3: modules 7-9

If the 9 month structure is used then the breakdown is as follows:

       workshop 1: modules 1 - 5a
       workshop 2: modules 5b - 9 (with the understanding that reporting and knowledge
       mobilization will need to be discussed in less tangible terms as the teams are less likely
       to have completed data collection)

                                                15
How to use the Guidance Notes

These Guidance Notes provide operational support to deliver training aligned to the RES-
Research Manual (Reyes and Liebenberg 2013). They should be used in conjunction with the
Manual and the power point presentations.

Each Guidance Note corresponds to a different RES-Research learning module. All are
structured in the same way, setting out key messages, learning objectives and core content.
Suggested timing for each component of the module is also provided. It is recommended that
facilitators do not dedicate less time than is indicated but may choose to expand some sessions
with additional explanations or team activities and discussion. Resources (academic papers and
relevant websites) have also been included to provide facilitators with more robust references,
as well as activities which determine the teaching and learning approaches in each module.
These reference lists should also be provided to participants to allow them to delve more
deeply into the subject matter. Where handouts have been developed for different modules,
these are also indicated.

The Guidance Notes are intended as just that - a guide. Facilitators may and should adapt and
add to the content and the direction provided in these notes, as best suits the learning needs of
RES-Research participants. Finally, the Guidance Notes should be used in conjunction with the
RES-Research Manual. The two resources are complementary: the Guidance Notes are intended
to support RES-Research facilitators, while the Manual is intended as a reference and resource
for participants as they plan, implement and use their Education Resilience Research.


A final request

RES-Research is a open source resource for both World Bank staff, as well as those from other
agencies that are engaged with policy and practice. In order that the ERA program may reflect
the rich and diverse learning that an open source policy supports, we would appreciate your
feedback and knowing about any lessons learned from implementing RES-Research. This
includes reflections and reports regarding the RES-Research process as well as the outputs from
the experiential model. Notably, the ERA team is committed to building an evidence base
around education resilience: one that is driven by local researchers who are striving to improve
education policy and practice in contexts of violence and conflict. We request therefore that
you share your thoughts and feedback with us.


                                               16
                                                      Table 3: RES-Research Content Schema
                        Module                                                                Core content
1   Introduction and expectations                 -      Background to the ERA program and RES-Research
                                                  -      Education in contexts of violence and conflict and the role of the World Bank
                                                  -      Workshop expectations and learning approach
2   Resilience Theory                             -      Waves of resilience research
                                                  -      The social ecological perspective and resilience as a process
                                                  -      Capturing complexity in resilience research
                                                  -      Resilience and education settings and systems
3   Positioning the study                         -      Research paradigms and the transformative research ontology and epistemology
                                                  -      Mixed methods in human and social research
                                                  -      Axiology in the transformative paradigm
                                                  -      Transformative resilience research purpose
4   Designing your Study                          -      Research question and sub questions
                                                  -      Samples and sampling strategies
                                                  -      Data collection tools and data analysis plans
5   Planning And Practice: Feasibility, Field     -      Participant access and local advisory committees
    Work And Analysis                             -      Timeframe, budget, research teams and resources
                                                  -      Field practice
                                                  -      Lessons learned, practical challenges and sharing findings
6   Analysis and interpretation for policy and    -      Qualitative data analysis and interpretation
    practice                                      -      Quantitative data analysis and interpretation
                                                  -      Mixed methods analysis and transitions (qualitative to quantitative and quantitative to
                                                         qualitative)
                                                  -      Validating data findings with the community
7   Knowledge mobilization I: Reporting           -      Translating research to policy and practice
                                                  -      Current debates: resilience in international education development
                                                  -      Writing an education resilience report
8   Knowledge mobilization II: policy, external   -      Influencing policy
    engagement and giving back                    -      Engaging with external organizations
                                                  -      Social justice and giving back
9   Open reflection                               -      Local researcher empowerment
                                                  -      Constructive critique
                                                  -      Sustainability of local evidence for policy and practice




                                                                        17
18
     GUIDANCE NOTE FIVE B



Planning and Practice: Feasibility,
    Field Work and Analysis




                 1
Module-at-a-glance
                  Content                          Time                Instructional Activity
Field practice                                30 minutes          Brief welcome and
                                                                  introduction by facilitators
Lessons Learned, practical challenges and       2 hours and 30
                                                                  Team led presentations:
sharing findings                                   minutes
                                                                  Sharing your findings slide 3

Total Time                                          Half a day



Learning Objectives
       Each team is provided with an opportunity to report on the status of their study and to
       reflect upon opportunities, challenges and the process thus far
       Teams benefit from the advice and technical support of expert facilitators as well as
       their peers who are in similar stages of their research

Key Messages
       Field work presents unforeseen challenges and opportunities
       Conducting a transformative education resilience study is an iterative process: initial
       plans may need to change and adjust to realities on the ground.



Core content
                                            Module 5B is participant led. Participants are sent an
                                            electronic power point template several weeks before
                                            the second workshop, that they should use and adapt
                                            to present their findings back to the group. Each team
                                            has 10-15 minutes to present and then a 20 minute
                                            open discussion promoted by facilitator questions
                                            ensues. The module is expected to set the scene for
                                            the rest of the second workshop which is structured
                                            around the analysis and use of actual data collected by
                                            the teams. This part of module 5 therefore serves as a
briefing for the facilitators (and wider group) to set the scene for the second workshop.




                                                2
Bibliography and Support Material

Greene, J. 2007, Mixed Methods in Social Inquiry, (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass).

Liebenberg, L. 2006. The “us” and “them” in research: Can we get around it? Qualitative
research in organizations and management, 1(2), 138-140.

Liebenberg, L., and M. Ungar. 2009, Introduction: The challenges of researching resilience, In L.
Liebenberg and M. Ungar. (eds.) Researching Resilience, (Toronto: University of Toronto Press)

       2011. Ethical concerns regarding participation of marginalised youth in research. Bulletin
       of the International Society for the Study of Behavioural Development, 1(59), 24-27.

Mertens, D. 2009. Transformative Research and Evaluation. New York and London: The
Guildford Press.

       2014. Research and Evaluation in Education and Psychology: Integrating Diversity With
       Quantitative, Qualitative, and Mixed Methods. SAGE Publications, Inc. Fourth Edition.

Mertens, D., F. Cram and B. Chilisa. (Eds). 2013. Indigenous Pathways into Social Research.
Voices of a New Generation. Left Coast Press: California.



Handouts
Power point template to facilitate virtual feedback during implementation phase. Circulated
electronically prior to the second workshop.



Session Activities
   1. This module is participant led. Facilitators do not present during this session but rather
      serve as timekeepers for the presentations and question and answer periods. During the
      Q&A, facilitators should prompt discussion on the team's data collection. This may
      include questions on how the team addressed any challenges; how initial plans may
      have altered, as well as new opportunities that have arisen since the field work began.




                                                3
      GUIDANCE NOTE 6


Analysis and Interpretation for
     Policy and Practice




               1
Module-at-a-glance
                  Content                          Time              Instructional Activity
1. Qualitative Data Analysis and
                                             2 hours
   Interpretation                                              Facilitator presentation
2. Quantitative Data Analysis and                              Qualitative data coding slide 12
                                             2 hours
   Interpretation                                              Statistical analysis plan slide 22
3. Mixed methods analysis (transitions       1 hour 30
   and integration)                          minutes
4. Validating data findings with the
                                             1 hour
   community
Total Time                                         1 day

                                           30 SLIDES



Learning Objectives
       Be aware of the range of ways in which qualitative and quantitative data sets can be
       analyzed and interpreted
       Understand that analyzing qualitative data draws upon context, researcher perspectives
       and theoretical frameworks
       Be aware of the different types of statistics that can be used to analyze qualitative data
       and understand what these statistics allow researchers to deduce about a given sample
       and where their limitations lie.
       Understand that different mixed methods designs have implications for how qualitative
       and quantitative data analysis are brought together
       Learn how to transition between qualitative and quantitative data sets (and vice versa)
       Understand the transformative rationale for community involvement in data analysis
       and interpretation and identify appropriate ways of doing this related to the team's
       study



Key Messages
       Following data collection it is important to prepare data and define a systematic process
       for its analysis
       Data analysis should be structured around the core components of a resilience
       framework - risks, assets (protective and promotive) and relationships
       Coding of qualitative data is an inductive process that helps to summaries and ultimate
       theorize around key education resilience themes and concepts.


                                               2
       Education Resilience analysis and interpretation may also be complemented and
       enriched by other theoretical frameworks to be selected depending on the particular
       focus of each study.
       Three main types of statistical analysis offer different insights to explore, describe and
       explain data sets. Statistical analysis must be used cautiously however so as not to
       present findings based on incorrect assumptions about the vulnerable population, or
       that are devoid of important information related to group differences.
       Mixed methods involves combining qualitative and quantitative data during analysis as
       well as interpretation stages to provide different insights and enhance the
       transformative potential.
       Participant engagement should also be sought during data analysis and interpretation
       with partnership strategies continuing into the reporting and use of data.


Core content
The module begins with a presentation on how to analyze qualitative data. It is important to
stress to participants the need to have a systematic process for managing qualitative data (from
its preparation (such as transcriptions) through to the analytical framework that is selected.


During the analytical process it is important to revert back to our foundational resilience
                                           concepts (discussed in Module 2). Facilitators may
                                           want to provide a summary recap on the core
                                           components of resilience studies as this should form
                                           the basis for any analytical framework. Although
                                           qualitative data may be analysed through a range of
                                           approaches this module focuses on coding and
                                           provides participants with an opportunity to practice
                                           coding. Participants are therefore provided with the
                                           opportunity to apply resilience theory to the thematic
                                           analysis of a practice data set in order to experience
                                           the qualitative data analysis process.


                                           Participants should be aware of what different
                                           analytical approaches allows them to say and their
                                           limitations. As such facilitators should also revisit the
                                           early discussion of data analysis and the differences
                                           between exploring, describing and explaining
                                           phenomena. At the same time that resilience theory
                                           provides the core thread for analysing the data,
                                           participants should also be made aware of other
                                           analytical and theoretical frameworks that may

                                                3
supplement resilience theory and provide additional more in-depth insights into the particular
issues that are emerging from their data (slide 9). The section on qualitative data then
concludes with brief discussion of manual versus computer based analysis. Of note, given the
experiential learning focus of RES-Research, it is recommended that the teams begin with
manual analysis in order to familiarise themselves with the various steps in the process of
preparing data.


                                            The module then shifts to quantitative data analysis
                                            and interpretation. During the data analysis planning
                                            (previous workshop) facilitators should have
                                            ascertained the level of comfort and experience
                                            within the group with regards to qualitative and
                                            quantitative analysis (thus far the majority of
                                            participants have been less comfortable with
                                            quantitative analysis). Participants should
                                            understand that statistical analysis is about reducing
                                            their data to obtain summarized information, to see a
relationship between variables or to compare differences within their data sets. Participants
are first introduced to the three types of statistics that can support the analysis of quantitative.
Given the number of technical terms which will be presented (to audiences for whom English is
likely a second language) it is important to begin with definitions and ensure clarity over what
different types of statistics mean and offer to the mixed methods analysis. Participants should
also be aware that statistical software is required for higher end quantitative analysis. For
teams looking to initiate themselves with STATA and SPSS a brief introduction is included in the
RES-360 manual.


                                           Participants should refer back to their statistical
                                           analysis plans, developed in module 5A, considering in
                                           more detail the specific purpose of their analysis. In all
                                           cases, descriptive statistics will be the appropriate
                                           starting point for most quantitative analysis. Teams
                                           must also consider the value added of other data
                                           manipulations as it relates to the purpose of their
                                           study. In addition to understanding the role and
                                           purpose of different statistical tests, the transformative
                                           paradigm also however requires critical consideration
                                           of results that will be obtained from statistical analysis
(Mertens, 2009; 299). Facilitators should therefore also discuss with participants the concepts
of statistical 'significance' and the potential harm that can come from generalized, aggregated
results when dealing with complex contexts within which the diversity of risks and assets are
crucial dimensions. Notably, statistical significance as an estimated measure of the degree to
which a result is 'true' and reliable needs to be carefully weighed against the erosion of group

                                                 4
differences and possibility of false assumptions that arise regarding the size of the sample,
characteristics of the population and the degree to which the sample can represent the
population. Chapter 9 of Mertens (2009) discusses these issues and provides guidance on
several statistical approaches that can be used to help offset over generalizations and maintain
a transformative perspective throughout quantitative analysis and interpretation.


The module then brings qualitative and quantitative analysis and interpretation together. This
section begins with a discussion of the types of transitions that can be made between
                                          qualitative and quantitative data sets. There is then a
                                          slide on integrating results within the given mixed
                                          methods design of the study. This begins with an
                                          overview of the qualitative and quantitative analytical
                                          methods that relate to research sub-questions
                                          (providing an overview of the analytical methods that
                                          the studies will be using). The next slide reviews the
                                          rationale for mixing methods (see also Mertens, 2009;
                                          309). Facilitators should recall the different types of
                                          mixed methods design and the levels at which
                                          integration can occur. Participants should be aware of
the purpose of integrating analysis and interpretation; including to complement findings,
expand upon findings from one cycle of the research to the next, add clarity and even raise
additional questions. This discussion should be encouraged by having participants revisit their
research purpose and research questions to consider how they will integrate findings during
analysis and not only interpretive phases to enhance the transformative potential (Mertens,
2009; 310).


The module ends with a discussion on validating findings with the community. The two slides in
                                       this section are intended to spur discussion on the
                                       importance of community validation at all stages of
                                       the research - including during analysis and
                                       interpretation - as well as the types of strategies that
                                       may be appropriate in different contexts. This section
                                       also serves as a transition into the next modules (7 and
                                       8) that deal with knowledge mobilization for which
                                       community involvement remains paramount and
                                       should play a significant role in guiding reporting and
                                       use of data if we are to maximize the positive
                                       contributions the studies can make to supporting
                                       social justice.




                                                5
Bibliography and Support Material

American Psychological Association. 2014. Publication Manual of the American Psychological
Association, Sixth Edition. Washington DC: American Psychological Association.

Mertens, D. 2009. Transformative Research and Evaluation. New York and London: The
Guildford Press.

       2014. Research and Evaluation in Education and Psychology: Integrating Diversity With
       Quantitative, Qualitative, and Mixed Methods. SAGE Publications, Inc. Fourth Edition.

Reyes, J., L. Liebenberg and D. Meza. 2013. RES-360°: Resilience Rapid Assessment Manual.
Washington DC: The World Bank.

       2013. RES-360°: Resilience Rapid Assessment Tool Kit. Washington DC: The World Bank.

Reyes, J., D. Mertens, and L. Liebenberg. 2013. "RES-Research Research Methods Manual."
Washington DC: The World Bank.

Ungar, M. and Liebenberg, L. 2013. “Ethnocultural factors, resilience, and school engagement.”
In School Psychology International 2013 34: 514. Sage Publications.

       2011. Assessing Resilience Across Cultures Using Mixed Methods: Construction of the
       Child and Youth Resilience Measure. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 5(2), pp.126-
       149.



Handouts
       Education resilience interview transcript (Female Palestinian refugee student in Gaza)
       Coding template for the interview transcript (Female Palestinian refugee student in
       Gaza)
       Summary of codes for the interview transcript (Female Palestinian refugee student in
       Gaza)
       Handout on creating questionnaires




                                               6
Session Activities
                                            Qualitative data coding (slide 12): This exercise is
                                            based on an early education resilience study
                                            conducted by the ERA team. This example is from an
                                            interview conducted with a female Palestinian
                                            refugee student living in Gaza. Participants are
                                            provided with three handouts which also offer
                                            templates for preparing qualitative data. The
                                            templates are intended to guide the participants
                                            through first identifying references to the core
                                            resilience components (risks, assets and outcomes)
and then moving from these initial codes to categorising the data into overarching themes, to
finally transposing the data to themes that reflect resilience theory and core concepts during
the axial coding stage. Participants should work in their country teams and facilitators should
underscore that coding is not an exact science but rather an interpretative process that draw
upon the understanding of context and the particular focus of the study. This can also be
highlighted through the commonalities and differences that arise during the team feedback on
the coding process and their determination of categories and themes.


                                             Statistical analysis plan (slide 22): The second activity
                                             of the module does not require participants to
                                             quantitative manipulate the data, but instead to plan
                                             for it. Based on their research purpose and
                                             questions, teams should spend time deciding which
                                             types of statistics will reveal the exploratory,
                                             descriptive or explanatory information required from
                                             their studies. In line with the importance of adopting
                                             a critical lens they should also identify the limitations
                                             of this analysis and the assumptions upon which this
                                             is based. Facilitators should make clear in this
   exercise that especially for large scale data sets, quantitative data is often outsources to
   statisticians, however teams considering this will still need to know how to effectively guide
   the process as well as what different types of analysis mean.




                                                 7
      GUIDANCE NOTE 7


Knowledge mobilization 1: Policy
        and reporting




               1
Module-at-a-glance
                  Content                          Time            Instructional Activities
1. Translating Research to Policy and                          Facilitator presentation
   Practice
                                              3 hours
2. Influencing policy

3. Writing an Education Resilience Report     2 hours 30
                                              minutes
Total Time                                         1 day

                                            27 SLIDES



Learning Objectives
       Understand the policy-making environment and consider the political economy and its
       implications in each team’s context
       Learn about the engagement process and the main ways that researchers can influence
       policy and programming
       Understand the needs of education policy makers and the implications of this for
       resilience research process, findings and recommendations
       Know the core components and basic structure for a written education resilience report



Key Messages
       Education Policy makers have particular needs and concerns and to effectively promote
       change, resilience researchers must be aware of this and actively look to address them
       Influencing policy is a process that requires capturing policy makers attention,
       presenting compelling evidence and good practice examples and using the data
       collected from the study to propose policy alternatives
       Reporting does not begin after data collection is over. Both the redaction and
       dissemination must be planned for
       Reporting is not only a question of documenting findings, but of engaging with
       questions of power and privilege. It implicitly requires a stakeholder analysis and
       identification of those who will gain and those who may lose out from the findings.
       Just as at other stages of the study design and implementation, reporting raises
       important ethical considerations including questions of data ownership, authorship and
       representation.



                                               2
Core content
A transformative resilience approach recognizes that for research to be effective it must
address both technical as well as political considerations. Although policy and practice
considerations have been present throughout the resilience study positioning and design, this
module goes into much greater detail around the needs and concerns of policy makers, in order
to promote effective strategies to bring about change.

                                          The module begins by setting out the core needs of
                                          education policy makers. It is important however to
                                          recognize that these are premised on political regimes
                                          that are assumed to be somewhat responsive to
                                          public pressure and democratic in functioning.
                                          Participant teams should therefore be encouraged to
                                          discuss the particular political economy that drives
                                          their political context so that they can better identify
                                          relevant pressure points for change. Understanding
                                          the change climate is an essential first step when
                                          planning how to use data.

When communicating to / with policy makers and those with influence, it is also important to
recap on the value added of a resilience approach. This slide sets out what a resilience
approach offers, which makes it unique and differentiates itself from other research
frameworks. It is especially important to stress to policy makers the ways in which the study
recognizes and values what is already in place at which ever level this exists. At the same time,
the resilience studies do not shy away from complexity nor do they focus on quick fix linear
solutions.

                                           Policy maker needs and the particular aspects of a
                                           resilience approach need to come together if change
                                           is to be achieved. This diagrams demonstrates the
                                           points at which resilience findings can intersect and
                                           respond to policy makers needs. The process that
                                           facilitates this - the research - policy translation - is an
                                           important dimension of knowledge mobilization and
                                           will be discussed over the remainder of module 7 and
                                           in module 8.




                                                 3
                                              Policies should be understood as institutionally
                                              agreed aims and programs and projects as the
                                              formal means to achieve this. This slide presents a
                                              process for influence: identifying the core
                                              components that each team needs to present
                                              through an analysis and interpretation of their
                                              findings. This will also require drawing up
                                              secondary data sources (for example evidence of
                                              good practices elsewhere that can be adapted to
                                              the context in question). The next slides deal with
                                              each component of the process in turn. They
discuss the topic in terms of the lessons that the Resilience Research Centre (in Canada) has
learned over the course of their work. As such these lessons will need to be considered and
ultimately adapted to the particular policy environment and context discussed in the previous
module. Facilitators should ensure enough time for the teams to discuss this.

                                               Especially important to note within this process is
                                               the assumed tradeoff between scientific rigor and
                                               community ownership. As we move up the
                                               research pyramid towards more generalizable
                                               evidence, research methods tend to see a
                                               concomitant decrease in community ownership.
                                               This is a challenge that the transformative
                                               resilience research studies takes on - identifying
                                               ways in which community ownership can be
                                               maximized while also scaling up our evidence base
                                               through mixed methods and retaining rigor and
validity of results (including through its adoption of a more holistic understanding of these
concepts).

                                              Policy messages will also benefit from certain core
                                              content. In particular, developing a theory of
                                              change and indicators will allow policy makers and
                                              policy implementers to track progress and meet
                                              their short term change and impact objectives.
                                              This should not however detract from the longer
                                              term nature of transformative impact which
                                              remains the main objective and should be
                                              complemented through building on capacities and
                                              longer term planning.




                                                4
                                           The module closes with a discussion of report writing
                                           and effective display of data. Participants have been
                                           planning for data utilization throughout their study
                                           positioning and design and this section should
                                           reinforce what has gone before. The first thing to
                                           determine who needs the information to bring about
                                           change and social action. Different audiences may be
                                           selected in order to provide multiple pathways to
                                           change. It should be recognized however that
                                           different audiences will require different reporting
                                           strategies.


                                            Although reports present to the reader the activities
                                            undertaken as part of the study they must do much
                                            more than this. As Mertens (2009; 314) discusses,
                                            they must manage issues of power and inclusion in
                                            their timing and format as well as critically consider
                                            dissemination and utilization strategies. Thus even
                                            when the audience is one policy makers, teams
                                            should be considering who will be affected by their
                                            report and how the information presented will
                                            support positive change for them. The following
                                            slides present ways in which qualitative and
quantitative data may be displayed. Equally important is the dissemination strategy for the
report which raises questions of who is representing the perspectives of the vulnerable
community at the centre of the study. Issues of shared authorship, data ownership and
resistance to findings all need to be considered and planned for during report planning (see also
Mertens 2009, chapter 10 for a more in-depth discussion). Strategies that promote discussion
and transparency should be encouraged.


                                           The module concludes with set of guiding ethical
                                           questions that need to be integrated throughout the
                                           reporting phase. The questions are designed to allow
                                           the teams to think ahead to the various challenges -
                                           and power struggles - they may encounter (and
                                           therefore plan for them). This serves to reinforce the
                                           fact that reporting is not only undertaken at the end
                                           of the study data collection, but in fact needs to be
                                           planned for, if it is to be most effective.




                                                5
Bibliography and Support Material

Maton, K. I. 2000. Making a Difference: The Social Ecology of Social Transformation, American
Journal of Community Psychology, Volume 28, Issue 1, pp. 25-57

       2005. The Social Transformation of Environments and the Promotion of Resilience in
       Children. In R. Peters, B. Leadbeater, and R. Mc.Mahon (eds.), Resilience in Children,
       Families and Communities, (New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers)

       2008. Empowering Community Settings: Agents of Individual Development, Community
       Betterment, and Positive Social Change, American Journal of Community Psychology,
       Volume 41, Issue 1, pp. 4-21

       2008. Community Resilience as a Metaphor: Theory, Set of Capacities and Strategy for
       Disaster Readiness, American Journal of Community Psychology, Volume 41, Issue 1, pp.
       127-150

Maton, K.I, Schellenbach, J., Leadbeater, B. and Solarz, A. 2004. Investing in Children, Youth,
Families and Communities: Strengths-Based Research and Policy, (Washington, D.C.: American
Psychological Association) 86.

Mertens, D. 2009. Transformative Research and Evaluation. New York and London: The
Guildford Press.

Peters, R. D., Leadbeater, B. and McMahon, R. 2005, Resilience in Children, Families and
Communities: Linking Context to Practice and Policy, (New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publisher)

Steiner-Khamsi, G. Ed. 2004. The Global politics of educational borrowing and lending. Teachers
College, Columbia University: New York.




                                               6
       GUIDANCE NOTE 8


   Knowledge mobilization 2:
External Engagement, Giving Back
           and Critique




               1
Module-at-a-glance
                  Content                          Time              Instructional Activity
Engaging with External Organizations:                           Reporting and engagement
                                             1 hour
large and small                                                 plan slide 16
Social Justice and Giving Back
                                             2 hours
                                                                Critiques of resilience slide 22
Current debates: Resilience in               2 hours 30
International Education Development          minutes
Total Time                                        1 day

                                           22 SLIDES



Learning Objectives
       Know that there are important differences when influencing for change between large
       and small organizations and be able to interpret lessons learned relative to each team’s
       context
       Be aware of current debates regarding the use of resilience in international
       development
       Identify critiques that may be relevant in each team's context and discuss how to
       engage and address these
       Identify ways in which the study will actively seek to give back to the vulnerable
       community it intends to support



Key Messages
       Messages and approaches to engage with policy makers and practitioners must be
       tailored to the particular context (political economy and policy making environment) as
       well as the type of organization that is being engaged through the study.
       Transformative research defines itself through its accountability not only to policy
       makers but to the vulnerable communities it is concerned with: this requires explicit
       thought and action in order to 'give-back'.
       Critically engaging with the concept of resilience is essential to maximize the
       transformative potential of a study. Critique can guide researchers towards better
       considered arguments and more explicit recommendations.




                                               2
Core content
                                             In addition to adjusting the lessons learned to the
                                             specific context of each team's study, the strategies
                                             for influence should be adapted to the type of
                                             organization that can support policy, program and
                                             practice change. In particular, smaller organizations
                                             that work more at the community level appreciate
                                             proximal evidence and to hear about promising
                                             practices from individuals who are operating
                                             programs. Building partnerships and coalitions
                                             between stakeholders as well as advocating for
                                             change are possible approaches. On the other
hand, larger organizations and institutions tend to prefer larger data sets that support
generalizable findings and change processes.

                                         The module the shifts to a section on social justice
                                         and giving back as it relates to ethical responsibility,
                                         quality purposes and for pragmatic reasons. This
                                         includes ways in which to ground the lessons of your
                                         research among the various stakeholders and to
                                         make connections and alliances between
                                         stakeholders that can promote transparency and
                                         accountability as part of the momentum for change.
                                         Here, facilitators may recall that the difference
                                         between a transformative paradigm and the
                                         pragmatic one is the responsibility not only to policy
makers but the wider constituency of stakeholders.

                                     Especially relevant is to consider for transformative
                                     purposes, is how each study will give back to the
                                     vulnerable community that participated in the study.
                                     During this slide teams should be given plenty of
                                     time to discuss and report back on their planned
                                     approaches for giving back. This may include
                                     activities such as ethno-drama that allow young
                                     people to express their perspectives, community
                                     town halls to spur discussion and action, or if visual
                                     methods are used exhibits of pictures and photos.
                                     Facilitators may wish to explicitly draw upon the
empowerment education models developed by Freire that promote community based critical
thinking and engagement for reform.

                                                3
                                           The need for critical analysis runs throughout the
                                           transformative resilience approach and knowledge
                                           mobilization is no exception. Complementing their
                                           political economy analysis which is essential to the
                                           contextual relevance of their findings, teams should
                                           also critically engage with the concept of resilience.
                                           While resilience has gained much traction in terms of
                                           rhetoric within international education development
                                           is also has a growing number of detractors. To
                                           positively contribute to both in country and wider
                                           debates it is important for the teams to be aware of
and engage with these critiques.


                                          Many of these critiques require revisiting content of
                                          Module 2 (during workshop one). In particular the
                                          importance of social ecology perspectives in situating
                                          resilience as a dynamic process that draws not only on
                                          assets among vulnerable individuals and communities
                                          but which by definition requires the support and
                                          resourcing of service providers (thereby stressing their
                                          role and responsibility in promoting and, importantly,
                                          sustaining resilience). The table of resilience debates
                                          should be discussed in plenary guided by the activity
                                          questions - see below).



Bibliography and Support Material
Bene, C., Wood, R., Newsham, A., Davies, M. (2012), Resilience: New Utopia or New Tyranny?
Reflection about the Potential and Limits of the Concept of Resilience in Relation to Vulnerability
Reduction Programs, IDS Working Paper 405, (Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies).
78

Davoudi, S. (2012). Resilience: A bridging concept of a dead end? Planning Theory & Practice,
June 2012; 13 (2): 299-307.

Freire, P. 1994. Pedagogy of Hope. New York: Continuum.

       1996. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. London: Penguin Books.


                                                 4
       2001. Pedagogy of Freedom. Lanham/Boulder/New York/Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield
       Publisher, Inc.

IDS. February 2013. "Making the Most of Resilience". IDS in Focus Policy Briefing, Issue 32.

Luthar, S.S., D. Cicchetti and B. Becker. 2000. “The construct of resilience: A critical evaluation
and guidelines for future work.” Child Development 71(3): 543-562.

Maton, K. I. 2000. Making a Difference: The Social Ecology of Social Transformation, American
Journal of Community Psychology, Volume 28, Issue 1, pp. 25-57

       2005. The Social Transformation of Environments and the Promotion of Resilience in
       Children. In R. Peters, B. Leadbeater, and R. Mc.Mahon (eds.), Resilience in Children,
       Families and Communities, (New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers)

       2008. Empowering Community Settings: Agents of Individual Development, Community
       Betterment, and Positive Social Change, American Journal of Community Psychology,
       Volume 41, Issue 1, pp. 4-21

       2008. Community Resilience as a Metaphor: Theory, Set of Capacities and Strategy for
       Disaster Readiness, American Journal of Community Psychology, Volume 41, Issue 1, pp.
       127-150

Maton, K.I, Schellenbach, J., Leadbeater, B. and Solarz, A. 2004. Investing in Children, Youth,
Families and Communities: Strengths-Based Research and Policy. Washington, D.C.: American
Psychological Association. 86

Pathways to Resilience project. Website.
http://www.resilienceproject.org/research/projects/pathways-to-resilience
“The Pathways to Resilience Research Project (PTR) is a mixed methods research study that
examines service use patterns, personal and ecological risk factors, and aspects of resilience of
youth across different cultures, contexts, and with complex service histories. It began in Canada
and now includes partners in at least five countries: Canada, New Zealand, South Africa,
Colombia, and China.”

Peters, R. D., Leadbeater, B. and McMahon, R. (2005), Resilience in Children, Families and
Communities: Linking Context to Practice and Policy, (New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publisher)



                                                 5
Session Activities



                               Reporting and engagement plan (slide 16): Country
                               teams should work through a series of questions
                               that serve to structure the reporting, engagement
                               and dissemination stages of their research.




                               Critiques of resilience (slide 22): As a prelude to
                               the discussion that will occur during module 9, this
                               activity is designed to support a plenary discussion
                               in which participants and participant teams offer
                               critiques that they have heard from others as well
                               as critiques that they may be personally
                               considering based on their experience. Facilitators
                               should take this activity as another opportunity to
                               contextualize findings by encouraging discussion
                               on the particular policy environment (challenges
                               and opportunities) that each research team will
                               face, and working together to identify possible
strategies to overcome them.




                                 6
GUIDANCE NOTE 9


Open reflections




       1
Module-at-a-glance

                  Content                     Suggested time          Instructional Activity
The value of local perspectives
                                                30 minutes       Brief facilitator presentation
Freedom to critique and grow
                                                                 Open discussion
Open reflections                                   2 hours 30
                                                    minutes
Total Time                                         Half a day

                                           9 SLIDES




Learning Objectives
       To identify ways to better support sustainable local evidence for a wide range of
       different policy and practice contexts (in adversity)
       To promote an open debate that allows researchers to critical reflect on the RES-
       Research learning process among their peers
       To promote constructive critique that can be documented and used to improve the
       program



Key Messages
       Research implicitly and explicitly evokes power relations between those 'being
       researched' and those with the power to document, measure and convey their life
       experiences.
       Local researchers have much to contribute to the International Education Development
       agenda, not least of which are cultural validity and local perspectives which respect and
       validate
       As part of this process it is important to critically engage with the theories and
       methodologies used and to critically reflect on the RES-Research process.




                                               2
Core content

                                          The module begins with a brief presentation by the
                                          facilitators (to frame the subsequent discussion).
                                          Building on the 'current debates' that ended the
                                          previous module, facilitators should turn the critical
                                          reflection towards research more generally,
                                          highlighting the possible power dynamics that must
                                          be considered in any study. Facilitators can remind
                                          the group that the transformative agenda seeks to
                                          positively engage with this and reverse them towards
                                          empowering vulnerable communities. It does this
                                          through the ethical dimensions that guide the
research as well as by empowering local researchers to conduct transformative research.



                                             We must therefore also apply the value of critique to
                                             the RES-Research process. Not only the theory and
                                             concept of resilience as was discussed the previous
                                             day, but also the methodology and philosophy of the
                                             training program. Part of this empowerment is being
                                             able to identify the opportunities that a
                                             transformative resilience approach has opened up
                                             and where the challenges remains. Especially
                                             important if we are to break down the dominant
                                             power dynamics is the need to adopt a longer term
                                             perspective and sustain the positive impacts.
Facilitators can also use part of this time for more specific team based technical support and
trouble-shooting.



Bibliography and Support Material

Kirkhart, K. 2010. Eyes on the Prize: Multicultural Validity and Evaluation Theory. American
Journal of Evaluation 2010 31: 400. Sage Publications.

       - 2005. Through a cultural lens: Reflections on validity and theory in evaluation. In S.
       Hood, R. K. Hopson, and H. T. Frierson (eds.). The role of culture and cultural context: A
       mandate for inclusion, the discovery of truth and understanding in evaluative theory and
       practice. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.

                                                3
Liebenberg, L. 2006. The “us” and “them” in research: Can we get around it? Qualitative
research in organizations and management, 1(2), 138-140.

McCumber. 2000. Philosophy and freedom: Derrida, Rorty, Habermas, Foucault. Indiana:
Indiana University Press.

Mertens, D., F. Cram and B. Chilisa. Eds. 2013. Indigenous Pathways into Social Research. Voices
of a New Generation. Left Coast Press: California.

Mertens, D. M. 2009. Transformative Research and Evaluation. New York, NY: Guilford Press

Mita, M. 1989. "Merata Mita On...". In The New Zealand Listener, 14 October, 1989.




Session Activities

                                         The bulk of module 9 is dedicated to open discussion
                                         and is structured around four guiding questions:

                                                 What are the contributions that only
                                         academics, researchers and evaluators who
                                         themselves live in contexts of chronic violence and
                                         conflict can provide?
                                                 From your perspective, what elements would
                                         challenge from the resilience definitions that have
                                         evolved to-date?
       What are the challenges to sustain the relation between local evidence and national
       policy and practice in your country and do you have recommendations to overcome
       this?
       What do you take away from this workshop and the importance of resilience-based
       research?

Facilitators should guide a discussion through these questions ensuring that all teams and team
members have a chance to contribute and participate in the discussion. The reflections and
ideas that are presented during the discussion should be noted down as they may be fed back
into the RES-Research design and content over later iterations. The module concludes with the
final evaluation forms which provide written feedback on the content and process.




                                               4
