                              88847 v1
              RES-Research
              (Resilience in Education
              Settings Research)




TRAINING FACILITATOR
  GUIDANCE NOTES (I)




              Education Resilience Approaches
              PART OF THE: SYSTEMS APPROACH
              FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
Contents

  About RES-Research

  Authors and Acknowledgements

  Guidance Note                      Getting started

  Guidance Note: Module 1            Introduction and expectations

  Guidance Note: Module 2            Resilience Theory

  Guidance Note: Module 3            Positioning the study

  Guidance Note: Module 4            Designing the Study

  Guidance Note: Module 5A           Field work and Feasibility planning




                                 2
About RES-Research
Development practitioners in fragile and conflict affected contexts are demanding better
support of research, evaluation and assessments: whether it's conducting an exploratory needs
assessment for an emergency intervention, monitoring and evaluating ongoing project impact
or building the evidence base to design a post-conflict or violence mitigation program. In
contexts of overwhelming adversity it is crucial not only to get reliable and valid data but to also
ensure that we are going about this in the right way. Doing research “right” in these contexts
require asking the right questions, talking to the relevant participants and stakeholders, using
the most pertinent methods, and paying particular attention to ethics and power differentials.

To address these concerns, the ERA program has developed the
Resilience in Education Settings (RES)-RESEARCH training. It brings           As with all SABER tools,
together resilience theory and a transformative research paradigm.            the RES-RESEARCH
                                                                              training module is
Resilience theory seeks to understand the process by which individuals,
                                                                              openly available for
communities and organizations recover from crisis, continue to perform
                                                                              education practitioners
in the midst of adversities and even radically change to prevent future
                                                                              within the World Bank,
risk exposure and continue their development process (Reyes, 2013).           as well as other
The transformative research paradigm provides methodological                  agencies. The module
guidance to conduct studies with vulnerable populations, while                consists of a research
recognizing both their exposure to overwhelming threats but also their        manual and handouts,
assets such as strengths, opportunities and available services (Mertens,      power point
2009).                                                                        presentations and
                                                                              additional guidance
Through a nine-month training program, RES-RESEARCH builds on the             materials. For
capacities of academics and education practitioners in fragile, conflict      information on the ERA
and violence affected contexts to undertake locally relevant and              program please consult
rigorous education resilience research. First piloted in Central America,     www.worldbank/educat
the training program was improved and recently implemented in the             ion/resilience or write to
South Asia region as part of a the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for the             educationresilience@w
                                                                              orldbank.org
System Assessment for Better Education Results (SABER) support by
DfID-UKAID, AUSAID and the World Bank.

The “Facilitator Guidance Notes” were prepared to guide universities, local researchers, and
development and humanitarian agencies that would like to use and teach this approach, in its
entirety or partially. This is only a guide, and the themes, sequence and materials can be
adjusted and complemented as needed.

                                                 3
Authors and acknowledgements
This training package was developed by Joel Reyes, Linda Liebenberg and Jo Kelcey, with the
technical support and input of Donna M. Mertens and Michael Ungar. It has also greatly
benefited from the reflections and input of Education Resilience researchers in Central America
and Colombia, South Asia and the Middle East. We are especially thankful for the peer review
comments from Abdul Hai Sofizada (Education Specialist, Afghanistan), Francisco Marmolejo
(Higher Education Specialist, HDNED ), and Donna M. Mertens (Mixed Methods Research
Specialist, Consultant). 1




1
 The presentation format for this training Guidance Note is derived from the design of the “Education and Fragility” Inter-Agency Training
(Nairobi, 2011) developed by Nina Papadopoulos (USAID) and Rachel McKinney (Save the Children).

                                                                       4
GUIDANCE NOTE

Getting Started




       5
At-a-glance

This section provides a summary of the overall RES-Research structure, discusses its objectives,
intended audience and associated participant expectations. Whereas the other sections of the
RES-Research users guide provide content and pedagogical guidance, this section is intended to
support planning and project management. It is based upon two regional applications of the
RES-Research module in Central America and the South Asia, during the period 2011-2014.

                                            Content
                 1. Target audience
                 2. Rationale
                 3. Objectives
                 4. Expectations
                 5. Administrative and logistical considerations
                 6. Materials
                 7. Training Structure
                 8. Module structure
                 9. How to use the Guidance Notes
                 10. A final request



Target audience

RES-Research is intended for the professional research and evaluation communities in countries
affected by violence and conflict. Specifically, it targets university students at the research
Master's and Doctoral levels, University faculty, and the professional evaluation community
working with local and international civil society organizations interested in education policy
and practice. Bringing these groups together needs to be seen as an important strength of the
overall approach as it provides a crucial link between policy and research. Outreach to these
communities is an important first step in planning your RES-Research. Several institutions,
networks and professional bodies may support the applications process. These include:

       Universities and colleges providing tertiary education social sciences and humanities
       Counterparts in UN agencies, (I)NGOs
       The Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies (INEE)
       Scholars at Risk Network


                                               6
       Scholar Rescue Fund and its parent organization the Institute of International Education
       Professional evaluation communities




Rationale

RES-Research is an experiential learning program. It provides technical guidance for conducting
education resilience research in difficult contexts through a 9-12 month approach that
combines theoretical and practical learning. As an experiential approach RES-Research
embraces the challenges that Education Resilience research presents, recognizing that the
lessons learned through this are an important part of the process.

A key rationale for RES-Research is to bring together the worlds of research and policy making
and practice. Notably, while university actors are used to conducting research on varied topics,
not all researchers from the Global South are provided with the tools to access and influence
domestic and international education development policy making and practice; nor is the
evaluation community always provided with professional development opportunities to
contribute applied knowledge in new and influential ways. RES-Research intends to bridge
these gaps, in the process strengthening indigenous research capacities and promoting more
sustainable evidence generation and use. RES-Research brings researchers and evaluators
together in a South-to-South learning process. However, it takes knowledge exchange a step
further than traditional “sharing of good practices.” Instead it promotes knowledge generation
precisely from researchers and evaluators themselves living in contexts of adversity, supporting
them to influence and inform current debates not only in the Global South but also within the
international education development community.

The table in the next page presents the core objectives of RES-Research.




                                               7
           Resilience in Education Settings Research (RES-Research) Training Program
Objective       Contribution to south to south         Transformative objective
                learning
Build on        RES-Research is premised upon          Through careful participant selection,
capacities in recognition of existing capacities       mutual learning objectives and the
countries       within countries affected by violence sustainability of capacity building
affected by and conflict. It strategically targets     approaches are better ensured. The
violence        local researchers and evaluators who approach aims to create local networks
and conflict are well positioned to connect            for change.
                evidence with policy.
Learning by RES-Research combines theory and           Two challenges face research in
doing           practice for a more holistic teaching  countries affected by violence and
                and learning approach. It is grounded conflict. First, the culture of outsourcing
                in an empowering pedagogical           capacity to external organizations can
                approach that supports local           result in studies that are less familiar
                researchers and evaluators to          with the context and complexities than
                influence internal and external        local actors would be. Second, research
                debates on education resilience. By    in countries affected by violence and
                actively engaging local actors to      conflict presents significant operational
                undertake pilot studies the ERA        and ethical challenges. By working with
                program seeks to improve the           local actors and ensuring that capacity
                sustainability of knowledge through    building approaches are grounded in
                locally relevant studies and           appropriate methodologies RES-
                recommendations.                       Research aims to improve the quality of
                                                       research by ensuring better
                                                       representation of vulnerable
                                                       communities in education policy and
                                                       practice and ultimately providing more
                                                       targeted and relevant recommendations.
Research        By focusing on the skills and          RES-Research actively engages with
for public      strategies needed to influence and     policy and practice. By including sessions
policy and      bring about change, and by working     on translating research and the
influencing through the networks implicit in the discussion and application of strategies
practice        target participants, RES-Research      to influence policy and practice it
                promotes the generation of demand supports knowledge generation not only
                driven knowledge and knowledge         for professional development but also
                sharing.                               more systematic education led change
                                                       processes: education system pro-social
                                                       transformation.

                                               8
Expectations

RES-Research is a practical training program. A practical component (the design, pilot and
implementation of an Education Resilience study) runs throughout the training program. Pilot
studies provide an opportunity for data collection, analysis, interpretation and report writing.
Workshop participants are expected to form country or sub-national teams and work together
towards the implementation of a transformative education resilience study. The focus, topics
and research questions of each study are selected solely by the research participants and their
in-country stakeholders. In between workshops, in-country research teams work together on
the development and implementation of their study. During the face-to-face workshops, they
reunite to discuss their progress and challenges they have had and to learn more about data
analysis, interpretation, and report writing. Ultimately, the teams are provided with guidance
regarding the use of data to influence policies and program for positive change in contexts of
adversity. The ERA program supports the dissemination of the education resilience findings
within each country case study, in addition to other publication sources that the authors may
identify, such as agency reports or academic journals.

This strong practical element has several implications:

       First, teams of researchers are encouraged to apply for RES-Research. Although the
       teams do not need to comprise individuals who have worked together closely
       beforehand, they should be made up of individuals who are willing and able to do this.

       Second, institutional commitment is important for research teams. This means that
       teams should have the support of an education oriented NGO or Agency or their
       university. This support does not necessarily need to be financial. It should however
       allow the participants better access to their target population and provide them with
       the in kind support needed to implement a study.

       Finally, RES-Research is above all a program that looks to identify and build on local
       capacities to conduct education resilience research. Participants and their supporting
       institutions therefore need to share these goals and believe in the crucial contributions
       they have to make towards positive educational change for vulnerable communities.




                                                9
Administrative and logistical considerations for international-
based training

Any domestic or international institution (universities, research tanks, evaluation communities)
can use the RES-Research materials for their own education resilience-based research and
evaluation training. However, for international agencies that wish to provide training in one
location with participants from different countries, the mechanism utilized by the World Bank’s
RES-Research team is detailed next. This provides some initial guidance including financial
support for participants—such as travel, accommodation and ‘seed funding” for resilience case
studies.

Application process: Potential participants can be identified through local universities,
evaluation communities and think tanks. This broad identification of sources of interested
participants should be followed by an application process. This should be started minimally 6-8
weeks before the date of the first workshop, in order to leave enough time for visa processing,
travel bookings etc. As well as comprising an expression of interest in the training, the
application form should also ask potential participants whether or not they have funding to
cover the costs of participation through their university or agency. There are however no
workshop fees. The costs of participation require travel to the workshop locations,
accommodation during the workshop dates and meals and other incidentals.

Travel support: To promote maximum access to researchers and evaluators from the Global
South, RES-Research prioritizes having funding available for selected participants who would be
otherwise unable to attend. Economy class airfare to the workshop destination,
accommodation, visa costs, hotel transfer and three meals a day are included as part of the
RES-Research funding package. In cases where road travel is feasible then a coach and driver
may be rented to transport participants (as was the case in Central America for some
participants). It is important to be clear to participants that they will not be paid per diem for
the days of the workshop as all of their related expenses are covered directly.

Visas: Participants are responsible for applying for their own visas although the training team
agency may cover visa costs and also should issue participants requiring visas with a ‘comfort
letter’ to facilitate visa issuance.

Seed funding: Funding is also provided to facilitate the required practical component of RES-
Research. It is called “seed” funding as it is not intended to finance the full cost of a research
endeavor. In recent applications of the RES-Research training, this ‘seed’ funding has been for
up to 10,000USD per team. It is intended to complement basic researcher costs over the 9-12

                                                10
month period of a pilot Education Resilience case study, which complements the RES-Research
training workshops.

RES-Research participant teams are required to apply for ‘seed funding’ only if without this
support the practice resilience study would not be possible (given the associated costs of
carrying out research such as transportation to and from research sites, refreshments for focus
groups or the costs of statistical software as well as some research team labor costs).
Participants apply for funding at the end of the first workshop. They are required to submit
their draft research plans as well as a budget and timeframe. They must also nominate one
member of their team as the administrative ‘coordinator’ for the budget (see below for more
information on this). Teams do not need to apply for the full 10,000USD. They may instead
apply for a smaller amount to conduct an initial phase within what will (eventually) be a larger
study. It’s more important for each team to submit a feasible proposal that will allow them to
undertake a study that amounts to a quality practical learning experience within the timeframe
of the program.

Study coordinator: Seed funding for the practical studies can be disbursed through only one or
two of the research team members, selected as ‘coordinator.” Funding can be in the form of
short term consultancy, based on a “research coordinator” terms of reference, including two or
three deliverables over the 6 -9 month period covered by their research proposal. In other
words the coordinator is responsible for managing and submitting the team’s deliverables and
for then disbursing the payments as agreed in the team budget. Templates for the coordinator
terms of reference are available.

The 6-9 months period for the practical education resilience case study does not - and should
not - preclude the sustainability of the research into additional research cycles. Rather it is just
an incentive and practice-based learning for local research teams to conduct their own studies.
However, at the end of the RES-Research training, a preliminary study progress report is
required. Templates for these preliminary reports are available as part of this open source RES-
Research package.




                                                 11
Materials

As mentioned at the outset, RES-Research is an open source package of education resilience-
based research training content and resources. These materials can be adjusted as needed and
complemented based on the needs and objectives of each training program and stakeholders.
Based on the experience of the World Bank’s ERA team, the following are guidelines to share
documentation with participants.

Documentation: Prior to the first
workshop, participants should be provided
with background resources. In previous
applications, drop box files have been
created to share this documentation.
These folders served as an online
repository of useful information that could
support not only their understanding of
the program but also more specific
aspects related to data collection, analysis
and reporting writing. Participants should also be provided with printed copies of all
presentations and activities.

To facilitate the learning process the use of laptops is encouraged during the workshop. This
not only allows participants to take notes throughout but also electronic templates for various
group exercises form an important part of the workshops.



Training structure

The following table provides the overall structure for the RES-Research program, which is
organized around 9 core modules that cover the lifespan of an education resilience research
study. It is recommended to implement the program through three face-to-face workshops
during which technical assistance is provided over a twelve-month period. This is the most
enriching approach as it ensures participants have enough time to collect data and it provides
them with guidance in 'real time' for each stage of their research. It is however possible to
implement RES-Research in a more condensed format over 9 months with two workshops. In


                                               12
both cases it is essential that the implementing team is available for technical assistance to the
teams. This may be done virtually or, if resources allow, in person.

The ERA team has developed several reporting templates (consisting of guiding questions) that
can be used to facilitate this.



Module structure

Almost all modules consist of 20 - 30 power point slides. The first and last modules as well as
Module 5B are slightly shorter as they devote a significant amount of time to participant led
discussion and presentations. Module 5 bridges planning and practice and is therefore divided
into two sections - one that takes place during the first workshop to support the research
preparation, and a second part which elicits feedback once the studies are underway. Other
modules are directed by facilitators, although all modules should plan for adequate time for
participant check-ins and feedback.

All modules are designed to promote team discussion among the larger group and within
country teams. Most modules include at least one team or group exercise though facilitators
may choose to add additional exercises and should also insert energizer activities as needed. It
is crucial to leave enough time for these exercises as they are pivotal for the experiential
learning process: most of the exercises directly contribute to the design of the studies and
subsequently to their data analysis and interpretation. Table two below provides the exercise
breakdown over the course of the 9 modules for which it is recommended that implementation
occurs over 8 - 9 days.



                             Table 2: learning activities and exercises
Module                     Activities and exercises
1. Introduction and        Group exercise: individual participant led feedback on expectations
  expectations             and contexts of interest
2. Resilience Theory       Activity: resilience navigation and negotiation (in pairs)
                           Group exercise: individual participant reflections on experiences with
                           resilience and examples from their contexts.
                           Group feedback optional
3. Positioning the study   Team exercise: defining the purpose of their team's transformative
                           mixed methods resilience study.
                           Feedback to the group


                                                13
4. Designing the Study     Team exercise: developing a sampling strategy
                           Feedback to the group
5a. Field work and         Team exercise: developing a data collection and data analysis plan
  Feasibility planning     Team led exercise of presenting initial findings and field experience
                           back to the wider group (see presentation template in RES-Research
5b. Field work and         package)
 Feasibility planning

6. Analysis and            Team exercise: practicing data coding
  interpretation for       Feedback to the group
  policy and practice      Team exercise: determining a statistical analysis plan
                           Feedback to the group
7. Knowledge
  mobilization I: Policy
  and reporting
8. Knowledge               Team exercise: developing a reporting and engagement plan
  mobilization II:         Feedback to the group
  external engagement,     Group exercise: participant feedback and thoughts on critiques of
  giving back and          resilience in theory and practice
  critique
9. Open reflection         Group exercise: open technical support and participant led feedback
                           on RES-Research process and options for sustainability.



If RES-Research is implemented over a 12 month period it is recommended that the following
modular structure is adopted:

       workshop 1: modules 1 - 5a
       workshop 2: modules 5b - 6 (this could also be implemented through in country support
       to teams, by facilitators, and by extending module 6 so that teams and facilitators work
       more closely with data that has been collected)
       workshop 3: modules 7-9

If the 9 month structure is used then the breakdown is as follows:

       workshop 1: modules 1 - 5a
       workshop 2: modules 5b - 9 (with the understanding that reporting and knowledge
       mobilization will need to be discussed in less tangible terms as the teams are less likely
       to have completed data collection)

                                                14
How to use the Guidance Notes

These Guidance Notes provide operational support to deliver training aligned to the RES-
Research Manual (Reyes and Liebenberg 2013). They should be used in conjunction with the
Manual and the power point presentations.

Each Guidance Note corresponds to a different RES-Research learning module. All are
structured in the same way, setting out key messages, learning objectives and core content.
Suggested timing for each component of the module is also provided. It is recommended that
facilitators do not dedicate less time than is indicated but may choose to expand some sessions
with additional explanations or team activities and discussion. Resources (academic papers and
relevant websites) have also been included to provide facilitators with more robust references,
as well as activities which determine the teaching and learning approaches in each module.
These reference lists should also be provided to participants to allow them to delve more
deeply into the subject matter. Where handouts have been developed for different modules,
these are also indicated.

The Guidance Notes are intended as just that - a guide. Facilitators may and should adapt and
add to the content and the direction provided in these notes, as best suits the learning needs of
RES-Research participants. Finally, the Guidance Notes should be used in conjunction with the
RES-Research Manual. The two resources are complementary: the Guidance Notes are intended
to support RES-Research facilitators, while the Manual is intended as a reference and resource
for participants as they plan, implement and use their Education Resilience Research.


A final request

RES-Research is a open source resource for both World Bank staff, as well as those from other
agencies that are engaged with policy and practice. In order that the ERA program may reflect
the rich and diverse learning that an open source policy supports, we would appreciate your
feedback and knowing about any lessons learned from implementing RES-Research. This
includes reflections and reports regarding the RES-Research process as well as the outputs from
the experiential model. Notably, the ERA team is committed to building an evidence base
around education resilience: one that is driven by local researchers who are striving to improve
education policy and practice in contexts of violence and conflict. We request therefore that
you share your thoughts and feedback with us.


                                               15
                                                      Table 3: RES-Research Content Schema
                        Module                                                                Core content
1   Introduction and expectations                 -      Background to the ERA program and RES-Research
                                                  -      Education in contexts of violence and conflict and the role of the World Bank
                                                  -      Workshop expectations and learning approach
2   Resilience Theory                             -      Waves of resilience research
                                                  -      The social ecological perspective and resilience as a process
                                                  -      Capturing complexity in resilience research
                                                  -      Resilience and education settings and systems
3   Positioning the study                         -      Research paradigms and the transformative research ontology and epistemology
                                                  -      Mixed methods in human and social research
                                                  -      Axiology in the transformative paradigm
                                                  -      Transformative resilience research purpose
4   Designing your Study                          -      Research question and sub questions
                                                  -      Samples and sampling strategies
                                                  -      Data collection tools and data analysis plans
5   Planning And Practice: Feasibility, Field     -      Participant access and local advisory committees
    Work And Analysis                             -      Timeframe, budget, research teams and resources
                                                  -      Field practice
                                                  -      Lessons learned, practical challenges and sharing findings
6   Analysis and interpretation for policy and    -      Qualitative data analysis and interpretation
    practice                                      -      Quantitative data analysis and interpretation
                                                  -      Mixed methods analysis and transitions (qualitative to quantitative and quantitative to
                                                         qualitative)
                                                  -      Validating data findings with the community
7   Knowledge mobilization I: Reporting           -      Translating research to policy and practice
                                                  -      Current debates: resilience in international education development
                                                  -      Writing an education resilience report
8   Knowledge mobilization II: policy, external   -      Influencing policy
    engagement and giving back                    -      Engaging with external organizations
                                                  -      Social justice and giving back
9   Open reflection                               -      Local researcher empowerment
                                                  -      Constructive critique
                                                  -      Sustainability of local evidence for policy and practice




                                                                        16
17
    GUIDANCE NOTE ONE

Introductions and Expectations




              1
Module-at-a-glance

                 Content                       Suggested             Instructional Activity
                                                 timing
Introductions (facilitators and                               Slide 3 prompts open
participants)                                  45 minutes     presentations by facilitators and
                                                              participants
Background to the ERA program and RES-                        Facilitator presentation
Research                                            1 hour
Education in contexts of violence and                         Facilitator presentation
conflict and the role of the World Bank
Workshop expectations and learning                            Slide 18 opens up the discussion
approach                                            1 hour    to the whole group asking for
                                                              feedback from participants
Total Time                                     2 hours 45
                                                minutes




Learning Objectives

       Know that education access and learning in contexts of violence and conflict is a priority
       globally
       Identify the fundamental differences between a fragility approach and a resilience
       approach
       Understand the rationale for working with higher education actors and professional
       researchers and evaluators
       Situate RES-Research as a flagship tool within the 'Education Resilience Approaches'
       program
       Instill participants with the confidence that they have what it takes to produce high
       quality education resilience research and assure them that they will receive the support
       needed throughout the RES-Research process.




                                                2
Key Messages

       Education outcomes in countries affected by pervasive violence and conflict remain a
       priority despite progress in other areas. Business as usual is not enough: New
       approaches that target the root causes and structural injustices and inequalities that
       fuel violence and conflict are needed.
       Education policy and practice in these contexts has thus far framed responses around
       risks and vulnerabilities. These deficits models are important for recognizing the social
       injustices that people face in and through education. However they may underestimate
       the local capacities and strengths that need to be part of the solution.
       RES-Research is premised on a belief in local and indigenous research capacities and the
       need not only for knowledge sharing but also knowledge generation from countries
       affected by violence and conflict.
       RES-Research is an experiential learning approach that combines theoretical and
       practical teaching. Participant interaction and feedback is welcomed and encouraged at
       all times.


Core content

Prior to starting with the power point presentation, the facilitators should provide a brief
introduction of themselves and their relationship to the ERA program and RES-Research. The
floor should then be handed to the participants for introductions.

                                     While progress has been made towards the MDGs in
                                    education, significant gaps remain, especially in countries
                                    affected by conflict and violence. Further, the World
                                    Development report 2011 stressed the need to find
                                    operational transitions from crisis and towards
                                    sustainable development outcomes, in order to avoid the
                                    trap of repeated cycles of conflict. Development
                                    organizations therefore need to consider how to promote
transformational changes that address the root causes and structures that maintain and
promote collective violence.




                                               3
                                     To date, much education policy and practice in contexts
                                    of violence and conflict has focused on fragility and risks
                                    or 'deficits' models. In 2010, a World Bank team in what
                                    was the Human Development Network (now the
                                    Education Global practice) began to consider how the rich
                                    theories and concepts regarding resilience in social
                                    settings characterized by adversity, could be used to
                                    inform our work. The team found that Resilience was very
                                    applicable and that certain aspects of resilience theory
directed us towards new and transformative ways of working with education sectors in
contexts of violence and conflict.

RES-Research (and the wider ERA program) are premised on a multi level framework that looks
to identify and understand risks and resilience processes. The intentions are threefold. To
recognize and support the strengths, capacities, opportunities and resources that exist even in
                                        the most adverse contexts; to use these to bring about
                                        sustainable positive changes in education systems; and
                                        to stress the role and responsibility of education service
                                        providers in bringing about these transformational
                                        outcomes. Although the World Bank is oriented to
                                        system level change, the ERA framework recognizes the
                                        importance of individual and community level
                                        experiences of risk and resilience. As such it operates at
                                        multiple levels, connecting these more localized
experiences and dynamics to overarching policy goals.

                                        RES-Research works with local researchers and
                                        evaluators precisely because they represent important
                                        capacities in countries affected by violence and conflict.
                                        The valued added that their perspectives and
                                        experience provide should be protected and built upon
                                        for more sustainable evidence generation and
                                        knowledge sharing. Because RES-Research is an
                                        experiential learning program that combines theory and
                                        practice all participants should know that they are
expected to undertake a small pilot study after workshop one. Much of the learning is
structured around this study with modules in workshop one building up to a study design and
modules in workshops 2 and 3 looking at what to do with data once it has been collected.

                                                4
Participants should be encouraged to see their study as a work in progress and should embrace
the challenges it presents as part of their learning process. An additional goal is that their
research constitutes an important contribution to the advancement of effective policy and
practice in countries affected by violence and conflict.



Bibliography and support materials

Baird, M. 2010. Service Delivery in Fragile and Conflict Affected States. Background paper for
the World Development Report 2011.

Brinkerhoff, D.W. 2007. Capacity Development in Fragile States. Discussion Paper No. 58D, May
2007. A theme paper prepared for the project “Capacity, Change and Performance”. European
Center for Development Policy Management.

Education Resilience Approaches Program webpage: www.worldbank.org/education/resilience
EFA. 2008. Guidelines for Capacity Building in the Education Sector. Education for All Fast
Track Initiative (EFA). February 2008.

Global Monitoring Report. 2011. Education for All. The Hidden Crisis, Armed conflict and
education. Paris: UNESCO.

Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies (INEE). 2009. INEE Minimum Standards
forEducation: Preparedness, Response, Recovery. New York: INEE.

Kaufman, R., Watkins, R., and Guerra, I. 2001. Getting Valid and Useful Educational Results and
Payoffs: We are what do, say, and deliver. In, International Journal of Educational Reform. 10
(4).

OECD. 2011. International Engagement in Fragile States: Can’t We Do Better? OECD Publishing.
Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/dac/incaf/48697077.pdf

OECD. 2008. Service Delivery in Fragile Situations: Key Concepts, Findings and Lessons. Off-
print of the Journal on Development 2008, Volume 9, No.3.

OPM/IDL. 2008 Evaluation of the Implementation of the Paris Declaration: Thematic Study –
The applicability of the Paris Declaration in fragile and conflict-affected situations. Retrieved


                                                 5
from http://www.dfid.gov.uk/aboutdfid/evaluation.asp and
http://www.oecd.org/dac/evaluationnetwork
Pigozzi, M. 1999. Education in Emergencies and for Reconstruction: A developmental
approach.

United Nations Children's Fund. Working Paper Series, Education Section, Programme Division.
New York, NY, USA

Reyes, J. 2013. What Matters Most for Students in Contexts of Adversity: A Framework Paper.
The World Bank.

World Bank, The. 2011. World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development.
The World Bank: Washington, DC.

World Bank, The. 2010. Education Strategy 2015. Learning for All. The World Bank:
Washington, DC.



Handouts

       RES-Research Manual
       Print outs of the slides for the workshop (Modules 1-5).




Session Activities

                                       Introductions (slide 3): participants should be briefly
                                       asked to introduce themselves, noting their name and
                                       how their work relates to education research and
                                       evaluation. They may also be asked an additional
                                       question about what interested them and motivated
                                       them to sign up for the training.




                                               6
Feedback (slide 18): Participants should be asked at
their tables to discuss and them briefly report back on
their learning expectations for the workshop. This can
be noted down on flip chart paper and referred back to
by the facilitators over the course of the next 3-4 days
as the agenda progresses. Participants can also be
surveyed for their initial research interests. This is to
establish the diversity of contexts within the room and
provide tangible information for the facilitators to
relate the next sessions to.




       7
 GUIDANCE NOTE TWO

Resilience Theory and Key
         Concepts




            1
Module-at-a-glance

                 Content                    Time                    Instructional Activity
1.   Waves of resilience research          2 hours     Facilitator led presentation
2.    The social ecology perspective       and 30      Facilitators may introduce the resilience
     and resilience as a process           minutes     navigation and negotiation exercise
3.   Capturing complexity in resilience    1 hour      (conducted in pairs) on slide 8
     research                                          Slide 26 prompts the group for personal
4.   Resilience and education settings      2 hours    reflections on resilience in their contexts
     and systems                                       (and optional feedback)
                                                       Open discussion
Total Time                                   1 day

                                              26 SLIDES


Learning Objectives

     Understand that resilience theory as it applies to social settings has a rich history and
     includes important conceptual variations in how we understand - and apply - resilience to
     education sectors
     Develop clarity on the key concepts of social ecology, resilience as a process, hidden
     resilience and maladaptive resilience
     Understand the relevance of resilience to education settings and the role of the education
     sector in promoting resilience
     Personally reflect on the meaning and relevance of resilience


Key Messages

     Resilience is not simply positive psychology. It only occurs in adversity.
     There is over 40 years of resilience research in social settings to draw upon. There have
     been changes and adaptations to resilience theory over time.
     Today resilience is understood as a dynamic and fluid concept, although it also has certain
     foundations and principles
     Resilience is a personal, group and institutional process which results in different post crisis
     patterns of coping, adaptation and transformation.



                                                   2
     Education plays a key role in fostering resilience. Education services, resources and
     opportunities can support positive transformations among vulnerable populations
     transformative and make positive contributions to the lives of at risk populations


Core content

                                     Resilience theory has over forty years of history beginning
                                     with more individual psychological concepts regarding
                                     'special traits'. Waves include the idea of resilience as
                                     'ordinary magic' was obtainable by all and finally a focus on
                                     the importance of services, opportunities and resources to
                                     foster the resilience process. This last level is where we
                                     situate ourselves. Notably, schools and education contexts
                                     have been identified as determinant factors in fostering the
resilience of children and youth living in difficult contexts.

                                     Although early resilience studies looked at positive
                                    outcomes and personality traits, today we have a more
                                    holistic understanding of resilience as a process. Drawing
                                    upon Bronfenbrenner's theories 1 of human development,
                                    Ungar's definition stresses the importance of factors that
                                    exist at individual, community, school and societal /
                                    institutional levels. Resilience is contextually grounded,
                                    multi- level and dynamic. It may not always be obvious
(hidden resilience) and, in the absence of appropriate and relevant services, it may invoke
                                     maladaptive behaviors.

                                                   Understanding risks is a premise of resilience: but it is just
                                                   the beginning. The goal is to identify, protect and use the
                                                   assets of communities at risks. Those assets are identified
                                                   through processes (behaviors, engagement, attitudes) that
                                                   lead to positive outcomes in spite of (or because of)
                                                   adversity. A resilience approach therefore stresses local




1
 When referencing the work of Bronfenbrenner it is important to note that his theory was not static but underwent important changes and
modifications.

                                                                    3
strengths, assets and approaches but supported by national and international structures and
services. International assistance is important, but sustainability rests on fostering local
strengths and assets.

                                       As researchers studying education resilience we need to
                                      be able to capture and make sense of this complexity.
                                      Our studies must include the following components i) a
                                      context of adversity; ii) processes that foster
                                      opportunities, services and assets; iii) desirable
                                      outcomes. Consequently we must ask “who defines” the
                                      resilience outcomes: the individuals at risk, their societies
                                      or universal concepts of what is “desirable”?

Education resilience refers to capacities in education communities (students, parents, teachers,
                                       principals, and other community actors) and in
                                       institutions (policies, programs and resources) that can
                                       support at risk populations. It must be defined in each
                                       context, as risks, assets and relevant programs are
                                       culturally bound. The outcome(s) of interest may be
                                       related to education access, learning or the broader
                                       contributions of education to peace building. The
                                       education resilience process invokes those opportunities,
                                       resources, capacities and strengths that foster this.

                                        The module concludes with examples of education
                                       resilience taken from the Education Resilience
                                       Approaches work program. While resilience has been
                                       studied extensively only some of this work has been
                                       applied to the education sector and a smaller amount to
                                       the international development education field.
                                       Consequently the evidence base is a work in progress (and
                                       something that the participants will be making a valuable
                                       contribution to). The examples provided at the end of this
module show the varied and contextual ways in which resilience processes work. Facilitators
should highlight to participants how the outcomes of interest as well as the ways in which these
outcomes are achieved are contextually situated. More in depth information on these studies is
included in the handouts for this module (the ERA RES-Research studies, Case reports and Field
Notes series). Facilitators should end this part of the module by noting that while we are

                                               4
dealing with a complex and dynamic phenomena of varied manifestations, we may
nevertheless adopt a systematic process to better understand it and ultimately use it in our
work (this provides the transition to module 3).
Bibliography and Support Material

On resilience as an outcome

Benard, B. 2004. Resiliency: what we have learned. WestEnd: San Francisco.

Masten A. and J.D. Coatsworth. 1998. “The development of competence in favorable and
unfavorable environments: Lessons from research on successful children.” American
Psychologist 53:205–220.

Masten, A. S. 2001. Ordinary magic: Resilience processes in development. American
Psychologist, 56, 227-238.

                             2006. Competence and resilience in development. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences 1094:13-27.

Neenan, M. 2009. Developing Resilience: A Cognitive-Behavioural Approach. Routledge:
London and New York.

Rutter, M. 1987. Psychosocial Resilience and Protective Mechanisms. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, July 1987; 57 (3): 316-331.

       1985. "Resilience in the face of adversity: Protective factors and resistance to psychiatric
       disorder." British Journal of Psychiatry 147: 598-611.

       1979. Protective factors in children’s responses to stress and disadvantage. In M. Kent
       & J. Rolf (Eds.), Primary prevention of psychopathology, Vol. 3: Social competence in
       children (pp.49-74). Hanover, NH: University Press of England.

Tugade M. and Frederickson, B. 2004. “Resilient individuals use positive emotions to bounce
back from negative emotional experiences.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86
(2), pp. 320-333.

Werner, E. 1990. Protective Factors and Individual Resilience. In S. J. S. Meisels (ed.) Handbook
of Childhood Intervention. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

                                                5
       - 1989. "High-risk children in young adulthood: A longitudinal study from birth to 32
       years." American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 59(1): 72-81.

Werner, E. & Smith, R. (1988). Vulnerable but invincible: A longitudinal study of resilient
children and youth. New York: Adams Banister, Cox.

Werner, E. & Smith, R. (1992). Overcoming the odds: High risk children from birth to adulthood.
Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press



On resilience within a social ecological framework

Boyden, J. 2003. “Children under fire: Challenging assumptions about children's resilience.”
Children, Youth and Environments 13(1).

Boyden, J. 2011. 'Why Resilience Research Needs to Take Account of Political Economy and
Culture', International Society for the Study of Behavioural Development Bulletin 1(59): 27-31

Brofenbrenner, U. 2005. On the Nature of Bioecological Theory and Research. In

Brofenbrenner, U. (ed.) Making Human Beings Human: Bioecological Perspectives of Human
Development, (Thousand Oaks/London/New Delhi: Sage Publications)

       - 1979. The child in classroom (in ecology): The ecology of human development,
       experiments by nature and design. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Claus-Ehlers, C. 2008. Sociocultural factors, resilience and coping: Support for a culturally
sensitive measure of resilience. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 29 (1), 1997-212.



Fernando, C. and Ferrari, M. (2013), Handbook of Resilience in Children of War, (New York and
London: Springer) 80

Garbarino, J., N. Dubrow, and K. Kostelny. 1991. “What children can tell us about living in
danger”. American Psychologist 46: 376-383.




                                                 6
Liebenberg, L. and Ungar, M. (eds.). 2008. Resilience in Action. Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.

Luthar, S. 2006. Resilience in Development: A Synthesis of Research Across Five Decades, In
Cohen, D. and Ciccheti, D. (eds.), Developmental Psychopathology, Risk, Disorder and
Adaptation, Vol 1. (Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons)

       - 1991. Vulnerability and Resilience: A Study of High Risk Adolescents. Child
       Development, 1991; 62 (3): 600-616.

Noltemeyer, A. and Bush, K. 2013. “Adversity and resilience: A synthesis of international
research.” School Psychology International, 34(5), 474-487.

Powers, A., Ressler, K., Bradley, R. (2009). “The protective role of friendship on the effects of
childhood abuse and depression.” Depression and Anxiety, 26 (1), 46-53

Reich, J; Zaura, A; & Hall, J.S. (2010), Editors. Handbook of Adult Resilience. The Guilford Press:
New York and London.

Stark, L. 2006. "Cleansing the wounds of war, an examination of traditional healing,
psychosocial health and reintegration in Siera Leone." Intervention 4(3): 206-218.

Theron, L. and Donald, D. 2013. “ Education psychology and resilience in developing contexts: A
rejoinder to Tolan and Carrigan”. School psychology international 34 (1), pp.51-66.

Theron L., Theron A., Malindi, M. 2013. “Toward an African Definition of Resilience: A Rural
South African Community’s View of Resilient Basotho Youth”. Journal of Black Psychology.
39(1), pp.63-87.

Ungar, M. (ed.). 2012. The Social Ecology of Resilience: A Handbook of Theory and Practice. New
York: Springer.

       - 2011. “Social Ecology of Resilience: Addressing contextual and cultural ambiguity in a
       nascent construct.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 81(1): 1-17.

       - 2008. Playing at Being Bad: The Hidden Resilience in Troubled Youth. Toronto:
       McClelland & Steward.



                                                 7
       - 2005. Editor. Handbook for Working with Children and Youth: Pathways to Resilience
       Across Cultures and Contexts. Sage Publications: Thousand Oaks, London, New Delhi.

       - 2004. Nurturing Hidden Resilience in Troubled Youth. Toronto: University of Toronto
       Press.

On resilience and education

Abdel-Hamid, H., Kelcey, J., Patrinos, H., and Reyes, J. Forthcoming. Learning in Adversity, The
UNRWA system for Palestine refugees. Washington DC: The World Bank Group.

Borma, G. and I. Overman. 2004. “Academic Resilience in Mathematics among Poor and
Minority Students.” The Elementary School Journal 104(3): 177-195.

Boyden, Jo (2013) ''We're Not Going to Suffer Like This in the Mud': Educational Aspirations,
Social Mobility and Independent Child Migration among Populations Living in Poverty ',
Compare 43 (5): 580-600.

Brown, J.H., D’Emidio-Caston, M., & Benard, B. (2001). Resilience Education. Corwin Press:
Thousand Oaks, California.

Burnham, J.J. 2009. “Contemporary fear of children and adolescents: Coping and resiliency in
the 21st century.” Journal of Counseling and Development 87: 28-35.

Cefai, C. 2008. Promoting resilience in the classroom: a guide to developing pupils’ emotional
and cognitive skills. London and Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

Changezi, S.H., and H. Biseth. 2011. "Education of Hazara Girls in Diaspora: education as
empowerment and an agent of change." Research in Comparative and International Education
6(1): 79-89.

Clemens, E.V. and A. Shipp. 2005. “Short duration, lasting impact: Counseling students affected
by The War in Iraq.” Session presented at the annual conference of the American Counseling
Association, Atlanta, GA.

Diaz Varela, A., J. Kelcey, J. Reyes, M. Gould., S. Sklar. 2013. "Learning and Resilience: The
Crucial
Role of Social and Emotional Well-being in Contexts of Adversity". Education Policy Note Series,

                                                8
The World Bank and International Rescue Committee.

Doll, B., Zucker, S., and Brehm, K. (2004). Resilient Classroom: Creating Healthy Environments
for Learning. The Guildford Practical Interventions in the School Series. The Guilford Press: New
York.

Fundacion para la Reconciliacion and Universidad de Antioquia (2013). Respuestas resilientes de
la comunidad educativa en el municipio de Urrao, Antioquia, ante el riesgo producido por los
conflictos violentos. RES-Research Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) program.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Garmezy, N. (1985). Stress resistant children: the search for protective factors. Recent
Research in Developmental Psychopathology. J. Stevenson (editor). Pergamon Press: Oxford.

Garmezy, N., A.S. Masten and A. Tellegen. 1984. “The study of stress and competence in
children: a building block for developmental psychopathology.” Child development 55(1): 97-
111.

Gizir, C.A. and G. Aydin. 2009. “Protective factors contributing to the academic resilience of
students living in poverty in Turkey.” Professional School Counseling.

Henderson, N. & Milstein, M. (2003). Resiliency in Schools: Making it Happen for Students and
Educators. Corwin Press: Thousand Oaks, California.

Jenson, J.M and Fraser, M.W. 2006. Social Policy for Children & Families: A Risk and Resilience
Perspective. Sage Publications: Thousand Oaks, California, London, New Delhi.

Krovetz, M.L. 2008. Fostering Resilience: Expecting all students to use their minds and hearts
well. Corwin Press: Thousand Oaks, CA.



2008. “School Success in Motion: Protective Factors for Academic Achievement in Homeless
and Highly Mobile Children in Minneapolis.” Cura Reporter: University of Minnesota 38(2): 3-
12.

Reyes, J., A. Diaz Varela, and J. Kelcey. forthcoming. Resilience Guide to Gender, Adversity and
Education. Washington, DC: The World Bank.



                                                9
Reyes, J. et al. 2014. "Critical case insights: The impact of the crisis on the Education Sector in
Mali."
Washington DC: The World Bank.

Reyes, J. 2013." What matters most for students in contexts of adversity: A framework paper."
Washington DC: The World Bank.

Stemberg, R.J. & Subotnik, R.F. (editors). 2006. Optimizing Students Success in School with the
Other Three Rs: Reasoning, Resilience and Responsibility. AIP- Information Age Publishing:
Greenwich Connecticut.

UPNFM (Universidad Pedagogica Nacional Francisco Morazan) (2013). Resiliencia Educativa de
Estudiantes ante los Riesgos Sociales Generados por las Barras Juveniles de Futbol en Honduras.
RES-Research Education Resilience Approaches (ERA) program. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Wachtel, T. & Misky, L. (2008) Editors. Safer Saner Schools: Restorative Practices in Education.
International Institute for Restorative Practices: Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.

Wehlage, G. G., Rutter, R. A., Smith G. A., Lesko, N., and Fernandez, R. (1989). Reducing the
Risk: Schools as Communities of Support. London: Palmer Press.



Handouts

World Bank, The. 2012/13. Education Resilience Case Studies: Honduras, South Sudan, Palestine
Refugees, Rwanda. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

World Bank, The. 2012/13. Education Resilience RES-Research Reports: Colombia, Honduras,
Nicaragua, Rwanda.

World Bank, The. 2013. "Frequently Asked Questions on Resilience." Education Resilience
Approaches Field Notes Series, The World Bank.

World Bank, The. 2012-14. ERA Field Notes Series: Issue No. 1, No. 2, No. 3, No. 4.




                                                 10
Session Activities

1. During the discussion of resilience as a process (slide 8), facilitators may chose to use a
dynamic activity on negotiation and navigation. The activity is adapted from Ungar's definition
of resilience and also serves as an energizer. In pairs participants should be asked to begin by
nominating a 'leader' and a 'follower'. The leader is told to implement actions that their partner
has to follow. The partners should then switch roles so that both have the opportunity to lead
and follow. In the third iteration, the group is told that there is no leader or follower. As they
continue the exercise, participants will engage in a mixture of asserting their movements over
their partner (navigating) as well as compromising over others (negotiating). The exercise
serves to illustrate the complex and relational aspects that are at plan in the resilience process.

2. Personal reflections on resilience (slide 26). Participant discussion and reflection at the end
of the module may be guided by the following questions:

                                                   What may be some of the implications of
                                           resilience to at risk and extremely difficult contexts?
                                                   How can education support resilience
                                           processes?
                                                   How is resilience theory relevant for education
                                           systems?
                                                   Can you think of examples of resilience from
                                           your context?

During the personal reflection activity participants should be directed to think about their own
personal experiences with resilience but should not be required to divulge these unless they
feel comfortable doing so. The feedback and discussion should be prompted by a facilitator's
example.




                                                11
GUIDANCE NOTE THREE

Positioning your study




          1
Module-at-a-glance

                  Content                             Time          Instructional Activities
1. Research paradigms and                          2 hours 30
   ‘transformative’ research ontology and           minutes     Facilitator presentation
   epistemology                                                 First team exercise (slide 27).
2. Mixed Methods in Human and Social
   Research
3. Axiology in the transformative                   1 hour
   paradigm
4. Transformative Resilience Research              1 hour 30
   Purpose                                          minutes
Total Time                                           1 day

                                            27 SLIDES


Learning Objectives

       Recognize the value of mixed methods as an approach to understand the adversity and
       complexity that resilience processes encompass
       Understand what differentiates the transformative paradigm from other research
       paradigms and be able to express how this is relevant for resilience research in
       international education development
       Identify how the transformative paradigm promotes change and accountability to
       vulnerable populations
       Identify the three different types of mixed methods designs as well as the components
       of an education resilience study (context of risk, protective processes, promotive
       processes and outcomes of interest)
       Begin team work and create the overarching structure - intent and focus - for the
       participant research studies


Key Messages
       Different research paradigms exist to address different research and evaluation
       questions.
       When working in contexts of risk and resilience, we need research methods that are
       guided by strong and clear ethical principles

                                               2
       Mixed methods (which involves combining qualitative and quantitative approaches)
       provides a more holistic methodological tool box to explore, describe and explain
       education resilience
       Within Mixed Methods, the transformative paradigm (Mertens 2009) is most
       commensurate with our understanding of education resilience owing to its relentless
       focus on positive social transformation, and its clear framework for accountability
       towards vulnerable populations.
       Education resilience studies should be framed by their transformative purpose (as it
       relates to education or the role of education in societies affected by violence and
       conflict), their population of interest, the level of resilience they seek to understand.


Core content

                                               Research can be carried out in different ways - or
                                               according to different 'paradigms'. Different
                                               research paradigms are premised on different
                                               ways of seeing the world and our objectives for
                                               research. This in turn influences our choice of data
                                               collection and inquiry. Based on what we have just
                                               learnt about resilience theory and concepts, we
                                               therefore need to frame our inquiry and the
                                               purpose of our inquiry in specific ways. Notably we
                                               must find ways to capture complexity, dynamism,
lived experiences and different levels of risks and assets (from individual to institutional), all the
while respecting the risks and vulnerabilities that populations living in contexts of violence and
conflict face.

                                               The demands of resilience theory and concepts
                                               point us towards mixed methods approaches that
                                               focus on collecting and analyzing data for positive
                                               social changes. Mixed methods is a tool that allows
                                               for comprehensive investigation of the inherent
                                               complexities of the fundamental concepts of
                                               resilience as applied to vulnerable populations.
                                               Mixed methods involves collecting and analyzing
                                               both qualitative and quantitative data in order to
                                               answer the research question in hand. There are


                                                  3
different ways of 'mixing' which relate to the different stages at which we collect data and how
we use it.

                                                There are three main types of mixed methods
                                                study designs that we can consider. They involve
                                                different levels of mixing. Concurrent for example
                                                may mix in terms of design and /or bringing
                                                together findings at the end. Sequential designs
                                                are those that have one methods following on
                                                from the other method. Cyclical is a more
                                                involved design and relates to iterative cycles of
                                                inquiry with each study 'layer' building on the
                                                previous. Cyclical designs may also start off as
sequential designs. Our choices will depend upon many factors which will be duly discussed.
Importantly for resilience related studies, mixed methods allows us to look at the resilience
process: not just what is happening but why it may be happening. This reflects the most recent
iterations of resilience theory which see it as a process and not an outcome, and which recall
the importance of resources, opportunities and services to bring about transformation. There
are several paradigms that are commensurate with mixed methods. However the focus on
social justice and sustainable change aligns resilience studies with the transformative paradigm.
Facilitators should take participants through the defining features of the transformative
paradigm as it relates to core research concepts - axiology, ontology, epistemology and
methodology.

                                              It is especially important to spend time discussing
                                             axiology and associated research ethics which is the
                                             first principle of the transformative paradigm. How
                                             will the community feel about the research? What is
                                             the relevance of the research to the priorities of
                                             these populations and what can they ultimately gain
                                             from the study? In addition to traditional university
                                             oriented research approval processes, the
                                             transformative paradigm pushes us to consider the
                                             need to obtain community level approval for our
research. This is to both protect vulnerable communities and better ensure their participation
in research (rather than objectifying them as the subjects of our research) and to support rigor
through local relevance and community level validation.



                                                4
                                              Under the transformative paradigm, community
                                              involvement in research is understood not only in
                                              terms of axiological principles but also as a way to
                                              better ensure the quality of our evidence.
                                              Community validation of our methods and perhaps
                                              more importantly the assumptions that underlie
                                              these helps ensure that the evidence collected is in
                                              fact representative of the needs and experiences of
                                              vulnerable populations. To facilitate this level of
                                              validation and rigor we must consider what are the
most appropriate strategies for community involvement and how can they contribute to
addressing the power inequities that uphold violence and conflict and its impact in education
systems. This is a topic we will be returning to throughout the workshops, and is something that
needs to be considered in the specific context within which each team is working.



                                           The final slides lead participants through the process
                                           of defining their research purpose. Reflecting the
                                           multi level nature of social ecology views of
                                           resilience the slides guide participants to identify
                                           resilience components for their population of
                                           interest at the individual and then social and
                                           institutional levels. Examples of what these may
                                           entail are provided to spur discussion within the
                                           teams, prior to the exercise which closes the
                                           module. In particular, this slide stresses the need for
education policies, programs, resources and capacities to be aligned to their context if they are
to protect learners from the nefarious impacts of violence and conflict in education systems.



Bibliography and Support Material

Bledsoe, K. L., & Hopson, R. H. 2009. Conducting ethical research in underserved communities.
In D. M. Mertens and P. Ginsberg. Eds. Handbook of ethics for research in the social sciences.
Thousand Oakes, CA: Sage Publications.



                                                5
Bledsoe, K.L., & Graham, J.A. 2005. Using multiple evaluation approaches in program
evaluation. American Journal of Evaluation, 26, 302-319.

Greene, J. C. 2006. Toward a methodology of mixed methods social inquiry. Research in the
Schools. Special Issue: New Directions in Mixed Methods Research, 13(1), 93-99.

Greene, Caracelli and Graham. 1989. “Towards a conceptual framework for mixed methods
evaluation designs.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis. Vol. 11. pp.255-274

Greene and Caracelli. 1997. “NDE: Advances in mixed-method evaluation.” NSF. 1997.

Hood, S., Hopson, R. H., & Frierson H. T. 2005. Eds. The role of culture and cultural context: A
mandate for inclusion, the discovery of truth and understanding in evaluative theory and
practice. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.

Kirkhart, K. E. 2005. Through a cultural lens: Reflections on validity and theory in evaluation. In
S. Hood, R. K. Hopson, and H. T. Frierson. Eds. The role of culture and cultural context: A
mandate for inclusion, the discovery of truth and understanding in evaluative theory and
practice. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.

Lincoln, Y. S. 2009. Ethical practices in qualitative research. In D. M. Mertens and P. Ginsberg
Eds. Handbook of ethics for research in the social sciences. Thousand Oakes, CA: Sage
Publications.

Mertens, D. M. 2009. Transformative research and evaluation. New York, NY: Guilford Press

       2014. Research methods in education & psychology: Integrating diversity with
       quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods. Fourth edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Mertens, D. and Ginsberg, P. Eds. 2009. The handbook of social research ethics. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.

Mertens , D. M., and Hesse-Biber, S. 2013. "Mixed methods and credibility of evidence in
evaluation". New Directions for Evaluation, Number 138. John Wiley and Sons.

Mertens, D. M., Sullivan, M., & Stace, H. 2010. Transformative research with the disability
community. In N. Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln. Eds. Handbook of qualitative research. 5th ed.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.


                                                 6
Mertens, D.M. & Wilson, A.T. 2012. Program evaluation theory and practice: A comprehensive
guide. New York: Guilford.

Mertens, D. M., Bledsoe, K. L., Sullivan, M., & Wilson, A. 2010. Utilization of mixed methods for
transformative purposes. In C. Teddlie and A. Tashakkori. Eds. Handbook of mixed methods
research, 2nd Edition. Thousand Oakes, CA: Sage Publications.

Symonette, H. 2009. Cultivating self as responsive instrument: Working the boundaries and
borderlands for ethical border crossings. In D. M. Mertens and P. Ginsberg (Eds), Handbook of
ethics for research in the social sciences. Thousand Oakes, CA: Sage Publications.

Tashakkori and Teddlie. 2010. Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research.
2nd edition. Thousand Oakes, CA: Sage Publications.

       2003. Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research. 1st edition.
       Thousand Oakes, CA: Sage Publications.

Thomas, V. 2009. Critical Race Theory: Ethics and dimensions of diversity in research. In D. M.
Mertens and P. Ginsberg. Eds. Handbook of ethics for research in the social sciences. Thousand
Oakes, CA: Sage Publications.


Handouts

Useful resources for mixed methods


Session Activities
                                          Defining your research purpose (slide 27): This slide
                                          introduces the group exercise. In their teams,
                                          participants should spend time working out their
                                          responses to the following questions which provide
                                          the overall 'positioning' for their studies. In
                                          introducing the exercise, facilitators should recall the
                                          individual and collective levels of contextual analysis
                                          previously discussed. Facilitators should move
                                          between the different groups to provide technical
                                          assistance and feedback. Once the groups have

                                                7
defined their research purpose, one member should present the purpose back in plenary for
discussion with the wider group and additional feedback.




                                             8
GUIDANCE NOTE FOUR



Designing your study




         1
Module-at-a-glance

                Content                      Suggested           Instructional Activity
                                               timing
Determining your research question and        2 hours
sub questions                                               Facilitator presentation
Samples and sampling strategies              1 hour 30      Team exercise (slide 10): Writing
                                              minutes       MMR questions
Data collection tools                         1 hour        Team exercise (slide 17)
Data analysis planning                        1 hour        Developing a sampling strategy

Total Time                                      1 day

                                         29 SLIDES
Learning Objectives

      Understand that resilience studies must be guided by an overarching research question
      as well as sub-questions that address the different components of the study
      Compose the research questions for the team’s resilience study
      Understand the different types of sampling and what can be determined from different
      sampling strategies
      Develop the sampling strategy(ies) that correspond(s) to the team’s research purpose
      and questions
      Be aware of different qualitative and quantitative data collection tools and identify
      which tools will best help the team respond to the various research questions
      Understand how to analyze qualitative and quantitative data in order to plan for the
      post field work stage of the study



Key Messages

      Focusing the study supports the transition from more abstract and conceptual research
      ideas to more tangible implementation plans
      Studies are guided by a set of questions that pertain to the research purpose. These
      include sub-questions on different components of a resilience research as well as an
      overarching mixed methods question.


                                            2
       When considering research participants, it is important to recognize that different types
       of samples can provide different insights related to exploring, describing and explaining
       research questions
       Sample selection will depend upon which phase of the study is under consideration
       (qualitative or quantitative) , the context and who best represents the outcomes of
       interest
       In a transformative research, regular approval processes must be supplemented and
       strengthened by also ensuring community approval and buy in
       Qualitative and quantitative methods and the specific purpose of each research
       question require different data collection tools, to be implemented
       Ethical considerations extend to data collection and must be planned for in research
       design phases.


Core content

                                          The module begins with a discussion on the need to
                                          focus the resilience research studies. After the
                                          theoretical foundations and conceptual and
                                          contextual positioning, the teams will need to define
                                          their purpose to ensure that their research design is
                                          aligned to the objectives of their study. The focusing
                                          of the research is crucial in the transitioning to study
                                          implementation. it requires consideration of the
                                          conceptual and contextual environments as well as
the definition of a central Research Purpose from which research questions, tools and analytical
approaches can be determined. Just as in other phases of the study axiology (validity, credibility
and ethics) are crucial considerations.

                                           Referring back to the research purpose that was
                                           developed at the end of Module 3, there are three
                                           slides to guide the teams through the development
                                           of research questions. Teams may choose to begin
                                           with the definition of one central research question
                                           which they then 'disaggregate' into sub questions.
                                           Equally they may work inductively, beginning with
                                           sub-questions related to the different components of
                                           their education resilience study to be encompassed


                                                3
in one overarching question. Therefore the research questions (like the research purpose) must
reflect upon the population of interest, the context of risk, the outcomes of interest and the
processes that the study intends to explore, explain and or describe.

                                            Evidence to respond to the research questions will be
                                            collected from a sample. Three types of sample are
                                            presented in this slide however the discussion will
                                            focus on two main sampling strategies - probability
                                            and purposeful - which allow you to say different
                                            things about a population. The sampling approach to
                                            taken will be determined by the method being used
                                            to answer the research question(s) (qualitative or
                                            quantitative) as well as the type of questions being
                                            asked of this population (are they being asked to
explore, explain or describe). Several different approaches exist within these two main
sampling types and selection will depend upon the specificity of the research questions as well
as resources and capacities within the team.



                                         Once the sampling strategy has been selected, the
                                         teams will need to develop a sampling criteria to
                                         determine who is a part of their sample. The inclusion
                                         of individuals in a sample needs to reflect their ability
                                         to represent the research questions. This may include
                                         young people who are exposed to high levels of risks
                                         as well as those who are performing well in schools in
                                         spite of living with higher than average risks. The
                                         graphic depiction of points on the x and y axis that
                                         follows this slide provides examples of different
combinations of exposure to adversity and positive outcomes that may be of interest for those
teams considering purposeful samples.

Just as teams will need to meet the ethical requirements of their respective institutions, so
must they plan for obtaining community approval. This requires careful reflection on how the
research question and sub-questions meet the needs of vulnerable communities, and the
activities and actions that will be required to ensure their meaningful participation and
ownership of the study. Obtaining community approval (and validation) is a key aspect of
transformative research rigor. It therefore needs to be planned for (in terms of actions to take,

                                                4
                                            possible challenges that will need to be countered
                                            with innovative and appropriate strategies).
                                            Facilitators may mention here the importance of
                                            establishing a Local Advisory Committee (LAC)
                                            which will be discussed in more detail during
                                            Module 5A.




                                            This slide is the first in a series regarding data
                                            collection tools. Facilitators should first provide an
                                            overview of the types of tools that related to
                                            qualitative and quantitative methods. This again
                                            stresses the importance of aligning the various
                                            components of the study. This is followed by a more
                                            in depth discussion of qualitative research tools
                                            (and the type of information they can provide).
                                            Facilitators should encourage participants to
                                            consider more innovative ways of collecting data
(such as the use of visual methods) (for which useful resources are included in the references
here).

                                            Participants should be reminded that in a mixed
                                            methods study they will be using several of these
                                            tools and therefore in addition to the value that
                                            each tool provides in answering the research
                                            question, it is also relevant to consider the ways in
                                            which the tools complement each other and
                                            support a more holistic understanding of the
                                            context and resilience processes (referring back to
                                            the definition of mixed methods provided in the
previous module).

Once the teams have had a chance to consider the tools that may use to answer their research
question the module concludes by revisiting one of the driving forces of the transformative
paradigm: the question of ethics. Facilitators should point out to participants, with relevant
examples, that there are multiple points and ways in which communities can be involved in our
education resilience research studies. The points presented in this slide can be used to spur

                                                5
discussion and open brainstorming of strategies for community inclusion, consent and
representation during data collection. In particular, it is important to emphasize that the tools
and methods used must be culturally sensitive and contextually appropriate. Finally, the last
slide points to the importance of considering our own well-being as researchers. This requires
consideration of appropriate behavior and actions in a given context as well as assessment of
the physical and mental well-being challenges the research may present. Provisions should be
made for appropriate de-briefing strategies.



Bibliography and Support Material

Cameron, A., Theron, L., Ungar, M., and Liebenberg, L. (2011). Adapting Visual Methodologies
to Identify Youth Protective Processes in Negotiating Resilience across Cultures and Contexts.
Australian Community Psychologist, 23(2), 68-84.

Didkowsky, N., Ungar, M. and Liebenberg, L. (2010). Using Visual Methods to Capture
Embedded Processes of Resilience for Youth across Cultures and Contexts. Journal of the
Canadian Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 19(1), 12-18.

Kordich Hall, D. 2010. “Compendium of Selected Resilience and Related Measures for Children
and Youth”. In Reaching IN… Reaching OUT. Toronto: The Child and Family Partnership.

Liebenberg, L. 2006. The “us” and “them” in research: Can we get around it? Qualitative
research in organizations and management, 1(2), 138-140.

       2009. The Use of Image-Based Methods in Research with Youth (pp. 129-152). In, L.
       Liebenberg and M. Ungar. Eds. Researching Youth Resilience. Toronto: University of
       Toronto Press.

       2009. The visual image as discussion point: Increasing validity in boundary crossing
       research. Qualitative Research, 9(4), 441-467.

Liebenberg, L. and Ungar, M. 2011. Ethical concerns regarding participation of marginalised
youth in research. Bulletin of the International Society for the Study of Behavioural
Development, 1(59), 24-27.

Liebenberg, L., and M. Ungar. 2009, Introduction: The challenges of researching resilience, In L.
Liebenberg and M. Ungar. (eds.) Researching Resilience, (Toronto: University of Toronto Press)

                                                6
Liebenberg, L., Didkowsky, N. and Ungar, M. (2012). Analysing visual data using grounded
theory: An exemplar of the Negotiating Resilience Project. Visual Studies, 27(1), 59-74.

Mertens, D. 2009. Transformative research and evaluation. New York, NY: Guilford Press

       2014. Research methods in education & psychology: Integrating diversity with
       quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods. Fourth Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Mertens, D. and Ginsberg, P. Eds. 2009. The handbook of social research ethics. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.

Mertens , D. M., and Hesse- Biber, S. 2013. Mixed methods and credibility of evidence in
evaluation. New Directions for Evaluation, Number 138. John Wiley and Sons.

Mertens, D.M. & Wilson, A.T. 2012. Program evaluation theory and practice: A comprehensive
guide. New York: Guilford.

Mertens, D. M., Bledsoe, K. L., Sullivan, M., & Wilson, A. 2010. Utilization of mixed methods for
transformative purposes. In C. Teddlie and A. Tashakkori (Eds.) Handbook of mixed methods
research, 2nd Edition. Thousand Oakes, CA: Sage Publications.

Reyes, J., L. Liebenberg, D. Meza. 2013. RES-360°: Resilience Rapid Assessment Manual.
Washington DC: The World Bank.

       2013. RES-360°: Resilience Rapid Assessment Tool Kit. Washington DC: The World Bank.

Reyes, J., D. Mertens, L. Liebenberg. 2013. "RES-Research Research Methods Manual."
Washington DC: The World Bank.

Tashakkori and Teddlie. 2010. “Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research”
2nd edition. Thousand Oakes, CA: Sage Publications.

       2003. “Handbook of mixed methods in social and behavioral research” 1st edition.
       Thousand Oakes, CA: Sage Publications.

Ungar, M. and Liebenberg, L. 2005. Resilience Across Cultures: The mixed methods approach of
the International Resilience Project. In M. Ungar (Ed.), Handbook for Working With Children and


                                                7
Youth Pathways to Resilience across Cultures and Contexts (pp. 211-226). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.

       2011. Assessing Resilience Across Cultures Using Mixed Methods: Construction of the
       Child and Youth Resilience Measure. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 5(2), pp.126-
       149.



Session Activities

                                        Writing MMR questions (slide 10): The first exercise
                                        of this module is a continuation of the team work
                                        begun in the previous module when the groups
                                        defined their research purpose. Here the participants
                                        are required to write their research questions. In
                                        their country teams they should revisit the five main
                                        components of their education resilience study (first
                                        presented in the previous module). From these they
                                        will develop sub-questions that encapsulate their
                                        research purpose, ultimately building up to an
overarching mixed methods question. Facilitators should work with the teams to ensure a
complementarity between the sub-questions and the overall question. Once the teams have
completed the exercise they should report back to the plenary for discussion with the
facilitators and other participants.



                                       Developing a sampling strategy (slide 17): The second
                                       exercise in this module builds on the research
                                       questions through the determination of a sampling
                                       strategy. The teams should work through questions 1 -
                                       5. The slide provides examples to illustrate the
                                       different considerations for sampling strategies.
                                       However the teams will need to focus on their specific
                                       contexts in order to identify the challenges and
                                       opportunities that apply to their sample.




                                              8
    GUIDANCE NOTE FIVE A



Planning and Practice: Feasibility,
    Field Work and Analysis




                 1
Module-at-a-glance

                 Content                             Time             Instructional Activity
Participant Access and Local Advisory               1 hour
Committees                                                       Facilitator presentation
Data analysis                                      2 hours 30    Team activity - data analysis
                                                    minutes      plan slide 13
Logistics: Timeframe, budget, research             1 hour 30
teams and resources                                 minutes
Total Time                                            1 day

                                           19 SLIDES


Learning Objectives

       Understand the importance of community access and participation of vulnerable
       communities in field work
       Know what the role of a Local Advisory Committee (LAC) is and how it can facilitate
       different stages of a resilience study
       Be aware of the analytical approaches required for qualitative and quantitative data
       Identify the analytical approaches that are germane to the team's study
       Plan for community participation and logistical aspects of field work


Key Messages

       Community involvement in field work is essential and goes beyond simple models of
       participation to requiring strategies for effective partnership.
       Local Advisory Committees are an important resource for transformative education
       resilience studies and should be established at the outset of the field work phase
       (though their role will continue through the lifespan of the study). Teams should take
       the time to consider who should be included in their LAC and how they will access these
       community members.
       Data analysis begins before data is collected: it must be planned for to ensure that it is
       consistent, coherent and feasible.




                                               2
       Field work also entails important logistical and administrative considerations. Time
       should be spent planning for these feasibility components in order to avoid delays and
       confusion later on.


Core content

                                           The module begins with an overview of the ethical
                                           considerations that should guide transformative
                                           resilience studies, before dealing more specifically
                                           with community input into field work. This includes a
                                           re-cap of why community input is important, at which
                                           stages in the study it must be considered (all of
                                           them!), as well as a brief overview of the types of
                                           strategies that can promote meaningful participation.
                                           This leads into the next slide which discusses the
importance of establishing a Local Advisory Committee to guide the research and better meet
the ethical principles of the transformative paradigm. Participants should be polled by the
facilitators for their ideas and thoughts on how to involve communities in social action and
research. To support effective planning it is also important to discuss the various challenges
that community involvement may entail, as well as how these may be overcome.



                                         To better support meaningful community involvement
                                         (in essence a partnership with communities) during
                                         the study each research team should establish a Local
                                         Advisory Committee (LAC). The LAC will play a role
                                         throughout the research implementation and
                                         subsequent analysis, interpretation and use of data.
                                         LAC members may include teachers, parents and
                                         students. Participants should be given time in their
                                         groups to discuss who should form part of their LAC
and how they will reach out to these people. It is important to stress that it takes a significant
amount of time to build confidence and trust with community members - especially those in
the most vulnerable communities. The resources cited in this section provide important
guidance on how to establish these relationships. It is especially important to discuss the
question of 'consent' in research and associated concepts of confidentiality, anonymity and
informed consent of those recruited as participants.


                                                3
                                          This slide brings the group back to reflecting upon the
                                          transformative purpose of their studies. It provides a
                                          checklist for each team to consider and plan for prior
                                          to beginning their field work. In addition to revisiting
                                          the role that the LAC can play facilitators should raise
                                          other important capacities and actions - such as the
                                          need for researcher cultural competency (and critical
                                          self reflection) and capacity building. Examples of how
                                          data collection tools may be adapted to be more
locally and culturally relevant may be highlighted.

                                          Although data analysis will be discussed in more depth
                                          during the second workshop, it should be introduced
                                          prior to the field work stage as it forms part of the data
                                          collection strategy for each team. Participants must
                                          plan not only for community participation in their field
                                          work in order to collect evidence, but also during the
                                          subsequent analytical stages, to validate and better
                                          interpret this data. Moreover, data analysis involves
                                          important logistical and administrative considerations
                                          (time, money and capacities for example) that need to
be planned for prior to undertaking field work. Facilitators may begin the discussion on analysis
by revisiting the three different mixed methods designs to highlight at which points of design,
field work and analysis, mixing occurs, before continuing with the specific analytical
frameworks that can be applied for qualitative and quantitative phases. The discussion of data
analysis must also be connected to the selection of data collection tools by each team to ensure
compatibility throughout the research cycle. This is the purpose of the exercise for this module
(slide 13) which requires participants to develop a data analysis plan.

                                          The final three slides in the first part of module 5 are
                                          concerned more precisely with the logistics of field
                                          work and questions of planning for feasibility. Teams
                                          may need to adjust their plans in light of practical
                                          considerations such as timing, finances and capacities.
                                          These last slides also serve as a briefing on the
                                          administrative procedures for the RES- Research seed
                                          funding and the Short term consultancy contract
                                          procedures. The handouts for this module include the

                                                 4
sample terms of reference for the coordinators and a brief on how the seed funding works. To
access the seed funding, the teams will also need to submit a proposal and nominate their
coordinator with whom the contract will be made.



Bibliography and Support Material

Greene, J. 2007. Mixed Methods in Social Inquiry. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Liebenberg, L. 2006. The “us” and “them” in research: Can we get around it? Qualitative
research in organizations and management, 1(2), 138-140.

Liebenberg, L., and M. Ungar. 2009, Introduction: The challenges of researching resilience, In L.
Liebenberg and M. Ungar. Eds. Researching Resilience. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

       2011. "Ethical concerns regarding participation of marginalised youth in
       research". Bulletin of the International Society for the Study of Behavioural
       Development, 1(59), 24-27.

Mertens, D. 2009. Transformative Research and Evaluation. New York and London: The
Guildford Press.

       2014. Research and Evaluation in Education and Psychology: Integrating Diversity With
       Quantitative, Qualitative, and Mixed Methods. SAGE Publications, Inc. Fourth Edition.

Mertens, D., F. Cram and B. Chilisa. Eds. 2013. Indigenous Pathways into Social Research. Voices
of a New Generation. Left Coast Press: California.




Handouts

       Sample terms of reference for the coordinator contract
       How the seed funding works




                                                5
Session Activities

                     Data analysis plan (slide 13): in this exercise the
                     participants continue their team work to develop a
                     data analysis plan based on four questions.
                     Participants will need to refer back to their team
                     discussions on data collection tools to ensure
                     consistency and coherency in their plans. facilitators
                     should provide examples of indigenous knowledge
                     and how this may be incorporated, to facilitate this
                     planning.




                          6
